Burt Franklin: Bibliography and Reference Series # 89
BOOK TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY IN THE UNITED STATES in the Nineteenth Century
By ADOLPH GROWOLL
Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2024
https://archive.org/details/booktradebibliogO000adol_ g9i1-
‘BOOK TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY IN THE UNITED STATES in the Nineteenth Century
By ADOLPH GROWOLL
REPRINTED MCMXXXIX IN AN EDITION OF ONE HUNDRED & FIFTY COPIES
Burt Franklin: Bibliography and Reference Series #89
BURT FRANKLIN NEW YORK
Published by BURT FRANKLIN 235 East 44th Street New York, N.Y. 10017
Printed in U.S.A.
Book-Trade Bibliography in the United States in the XIX Century
BY
Ay GROWOLL
Managing Editor of ‘‘The Publishers’ Weekly,” author of ‘‘ American Book Clubs,” &c.
TO WHICH IS ADDED
A CATALOGUE of att THE BOOKS PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES
WITH THE PRICES, AND PLACES WHERE PUBLISHED, ANNEXED Published by the Booksellers in Boston
January, 1804
Se SSS.
es: ene teri
% sidemigciaidl ybat I - Joottl . td estate bytiald ot Ae pus > SKU st.
| ROW MAD A — “hid ‘pevbalito® 2h" Ss ek gaye
ld ie, tive >.** Ye wpe
sata hk 2 oN BHP wi aren AO ase 0) 22 RTOOMAT A . etraTe, GT | PUetenss cereus oveuy oases Ona Rees ABT one | Hareodl Ai eraliseApodd ott gd omits ; :
ple ermal
7 =
INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
]N presenting this slight volume to those interested
in American bibliography, the author disclaims hav- ing had any intention to consider the subject beyond the limits of the field of American book-trade bibliography ; and even in that direction his efforts must be regarded as being merely tentative. Nevertheless, these field-farings, gathered by the author in his searches in out-of-the-way and almost-forgotten places, for material for other pur- poses, may in time induce some more competent per- son to take up the subject in a more scientific manner, and to treat it as comprehensively as Mr. Henry Harrisse, for instance, has treated the subject of early American bibliography in the Introduction to his invaluable ‘ Bib- liotheca Americana Vetustissima.”
The author acknowledges his indebtedness to Mr. Charles A. Montgomery, of Brooklyn, New York, for permitting his copy of the ‘“ Catalogue of all the Books Printed in the United States ... Published by the Booksellers in Boston ... January, 1804,” to be used in preparing the reprint of that curious and now prac- tically unknown publication, which forms the second part of this volume. Only two other copies of the origi- nal catalogue are known to be in existence, of which one is in the library of the Massachusetts Historical Society, and the other is the property of Mr. James G Barnwell, of the Library Company of Philadelphia. As has been said elsewhere, though almost every canon of bibliographical science was ignored in the compilation of this catalogue, it may still be useful to collectors in determining the existence of early editions. And as
INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
the earliest known attempt at trade bibliography in iic United States it certainly will always have more than passing interest.
Thanks are also due to Mr. Wilberforce Eames, of the Lenox Library, who assisted the author with infor- mation and advice, at all times offered with courtesy and unobtrusive readiness.
A. GROWOLL.
102 East EIGHTY-NINTH STREET, New York, May 19, 1898.
TO
A. Wb. DW.
WHOSE SACRIFICES MADE IN BEHALF OF AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY WILL ALWAYS OUTWEIGH HER LABORS IN THAT FIELD CONSIDERABLE AND USEFUL AS THESE MAY BE THIS VOLUME IS GRATEFULLY
DEDICATED
—— - ae
_— nn
co
| — - eer
7 aor! » ee mn 6 —_r a
- ) one ie =i Spe + — een QP ayaa i.
® '
~~) om © Seaute Taswat ga
: oN Ba, arte ® ole sul alee a a. FS > ae oe Areal} ore testa ra = : ie. : ue
~~ BOoa SS is 5 ante oe
: = A errs. & = ~~ _ = _ a = - - : — : R ; = _ 7 ris ca ee ee en ees or eer | sOaw eortvertes GoM : awe > (—w gua: ae eegweie eepmia care - —— = = = i Ls: RARE ) 26 (60 Geer a (2106904 PR) COM oe WOT
a *
2 e@nt eee
CO NGSE NaI S
JEDUICCIE ff
FRONTISPIECE: Portrait of Frederick Leypoldt.
INTRODUCTORY NorTE.
I. THE BEGINNINGS OF BooK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY. ... . i II, BooxsELiLers’ ASSOCIATIONS, 1801-1892, . . . . ... . Hi The American Company of Booksellers. . . . ... . iil
The New York Association of Booksellers. . . . . ; Vv
The Book Publishers’ Association. . .... . & gee Vii
The American Book-Trade Association. . ..... . Vili
aterm Book Erade-Associations, . 5 % 29) Gis 2.5 5 X
III. Srpe-LigHTs on THE Earty ConpDITIONS OF THE BooK-TRADE. xi RVE Due FURST -bOOK- LRADE CATALOGUE... <= vsance . 6 6 xiv Wee BOOK-GRADE EL ELPS <rS0I-16g70 cy ac) et es ee) XVI
VI. CxHrRonotocicaL List oF CATALOGUES, BOOK-TRADE AND Lit- HRARVAOURNALS Mey jit ore oe eee neue acre a ee XXIV,
VII. SKETCHES OF SOME AMERICAN BOOKSELLER-BIBLIOGRAPHERS. XXXiX
OrvillevAcwR OOLDACH saree ieee wt ne) ls) age XX XIX Charlesso NOnton.g alae len! ne caiceety oy ee es xli Charles: RucolphyROdey simi pray. Bayard cust el cates “Glee be XILY, @badiahiRich wens “6 nulo) Gptule Bec ei ilies ns, 4 xlv encyaSteVvens meat et aie eo Fe ee ee aS INicolaSnEriiDNeh ma Oe MEE ci den ee eer BLL Vamespiell vy aare me oui a. ee Re en er Ix Nosephisabitimematece (omer ict eee eee, ces ee) LEXI bredenickiltey,poldC meme Nein ny Coen mS bs XVII PART // Catalogue of all the Books Printed in the United States . . . Published
by the Booksellers in Boston, January, 1804.
~~ = na »e — = 7 ) ~ ~ es _ << = ~~. ae ~~ , yl Ry : = ae 27 Va 7#oOD ~~ _ e A ) = ® ; a OhierezY tn eet scare ‘ae nw = ~~. eRe rao aeern = . ia . £3 ‘ Weaccatd deT ave ve sonnel awe, T “ss ih ; sul rascdé cee eh ‘nee seemed dt. can ii = ; oti@edees va quer 4 mo cmk aT ia . tind s clmimeah <T nelaae ‘. be ‘7 01S nved, weededete® Sell ety) ae sii% mile eee vec Teen saremaA aT a wu ead ———, a eo 7 Kad Voxel gre 1° @ Oh? dee ere eo ie teem sete) ane tae rect eT
_ ane _eab-aalls poset ake pene
OP Bitar T ccalih | hp. +y/ 0a > Ors Cal womesiadad, wre . . @eonn eae cat
PP: free ill we me Bom em a
CHAPTER: I TNE BEGINNINGS OF BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
1 om the beginning American bibliography was largely
a book-frade matter, and such in good part it has con- tinued to be. From the time when Stephen Day set up the first press in Cambridge, Mass., in 1640, until American book- trade bibliography was finally established in 1849, by the issue of the first volume of Roorbach’s ‘‘ Bibliotheca Ameri- cana,’ which covered the period from 1820 to 1848 inclusive, bookbuyers, as well as those engaged in the sale of books, were always kept more or less well posted upon the issues of the press in this country, and also on the more important books brought out in England, through hand-lists or circulars, and catalogues, issued either separately or appended to the latest books cr the almanacs published in the earlier days by the printers or publishers of books, and later through these media still, as wellas through advertisements in the magazines and newspapers.
Roorbach did not start his catalogue with the beginning of the century, very likely because while the printing press of this country was fairly active from 1640 to 1776—turning out an average of about sixty books a year, if almanacs, ser- mons, and laws are counted—after that period the national enterprise found many other fields beside literature for its energies ; and, though there are most honored names which make the exception, it was not till about the year 1820 that America may be said to have come into possession of a national literature.
The output of books before 1820 being limited, and largely of a local character, when not reprints of standard English literature, it was an easy matter for the bookseller of the cighteenth century to keep himself posted on the new issues of the press by the means referred toabove. As the public in
ii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
those days was composed of deliberate readers rather than skimmers, who possessed themselves thoroughly of one book before they entertained the purchase of another, the demand was naturally less active for new books than now, and the bookseller had.ample leisure both to gather and to distribute his novelties.
With the beginning of the nineteenth century, or contempo- raneously with the revival of literature, the bookseller be- came more enterprising in distributing his own and his col- leagues’ books by means of suitable catalogues. Such firms as Benjamin Franklin and Mathew Carey of Philadelphia, Hugh Gaine and T. & J. Swords of New York, and Samuel Hall and Greenleaf & West of Boston, not to extend the list, issued, even before 1800, full lists not only of the books printed by them, but also of those issued by other American printers and booksellers, as well as of those imported by them from England. So important had the book trade in America become by that time that its members felt the need of closer organization and of a genera! trade catalogue.
CHAPTER II BOOKSELLERS’ ASSOCIATIONS, 1801-1892
The American Company of Booksellers
‘THE organization was accomplished in 1801, when The
American Company of Booksellers was formed. This association was composed principally of booksellers doing business in New York, Philadelphia, and Boston. It sought to regulate sales of books by fairs, similar to the book fairs in Leipzig, and prohibited auction sales by any of its members under risk of expulsion. Mathew Carey, of Philadelphia, was elected first president.
In the transactions of the Company during the first year of its existence the New York booksellers, owing to the yel- low fever epidemic which scourged the city in 1801, could necessarily take but little part. In 1802, however, twenty- four of the New York booksellers, under the presidency of Hugh Gaine, agreed to attend the ‘‘ Literary Fair,” to be held in New York City in June, and recommended booksellers in seaport towns, and in towns accessible by water, to bring fair samples of the articles which they might have for sale or exchange ; and those remotely situated, it was thought, would despatch business by bringing all the articles they wished to dispose of at this fair. They gave notice that they had taken Boardin’s Long Room at the old Coffee House on Beaver Street, which would be open for transaction of busi- ness from 10 A.M. till 2 p.M. during the fair.
At the conclusion of the fair the New York members en- tertained the visitors at a banquet. The fair would seem to have been so successful that a second one was held in Phila- delphia, June 20, 1803. This year, with a view to improve the quality of printing ink, the Company offered a premium of $50, cr a gold medal of that value, for the best specimen of ink of American manufacture, to be tested in printing a
iv AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE. BIBLIOGRAPHY
book of not less than 250 pages, on or before January, 1804. On the 14th of January the medal was awarded to Jacob Johnson, of Philadelphia, the specimen being pronounced superior to London ink.
On the 18th of June, 1804, the fourth annual meeting of the Company was again held in New York. Mathew Carey was elected president, Isaac Collins, of New York, vice-presi- dent, and Thomas S. Arden, of New York, secretary. There was a very general attendance of the members, and the busi- ness transacted greatly exceeded that of any previous year. At this time new articles of association and by-laws were adopted for the government of the Company. A board of directors, treasurer, and corresponding secretary were added to the former officers. Among other powers vested in the board of directors, they had authority to impose rules for the well ordering of the Company’s transactions ; to adjudge all premiums which might from time to time be offered ; to de- termine the price and quality of all books exhibited at the fair; and to examine into all complaints which should be made against any member for contravening any of the regu- lations of the Company. The first board of directors con- sisted of Ebenezer P. Andrews and John West, of Boston, James Swords and John T. Hopkins, of New York, Obadiah Penniman, of Troy, Jacob Johnson, of Philadelphia, and Samuel Butler, of Baltimore. Samuel Whiting, of Albany, was treasurer, and Samuel Stansbury, of New York, corre- sponding secretary. It was appointed that the meetings in future should be held in Newark, N. J.
The Company again undertook, by the award of premiums, to improve the arts used in the production of books. A gold medal of the value of fifty dollars was offered to any person who should, on or before the first day of July, manufacture and lay before the president of the company, the greatest quantity of paper, not less than ten reams, and of the best quality, fit for printing, of other materials than linen, cotton, or woollen rags. And a silver medal of the value of twenty dollars was offered to any one who should, within the same time, manufacture and produce to the president of the com- pany the greatest quantity, not less than ten reams, of good wrapping-paper, of other materials than those usually em- ployed for that purpose.
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY v
In 1805 the annual fair was held in Newark, N. J., ending on the 20th of June. Exchanges to.a large amount were transacted. Premiums were awarded as follows: For the best specimen of American printing ink, a sample of five hundred pounds, a gold medal, to Jacob Johnson, of Phila- delphia. For the best specimen of binding, executed in American leather, a gold medal, to William Swain, of New York. The medals for printing and paper were laid over to the next meeting.
Owing to a general dissatisfaction with the workings of the association the activity of the Booksellers’ Company came to an end with the Newark meeting. A call was issued through a Lexington, Mass., paper, to organize another association of booksellers and printers to facilitate the publication and inter- change of books of merit, but the effort seems to have been in vain.
The New York Association of Booksellers
About 1802 we hear of the first combination of school- book publishers in New York and Philadelphia. In New York the following ten firms:
Thomas & James Swords, Nos. 99 and 160 Pearl Street, George F. Hopkins, No. 118 Pearl Street,
Peter A. Mester, No. 107 Pearl Street,
James Oram, No. 102 Water Street,
Stephen Stephens, No. 165 Pearl Street,
Thomas S. Arden, No. 186 Pearl Street,
William Falconer, No. 112 Pearl Street,
Evert Duyckinck, No. 110 Pearl Street,
Isaac Collins & Son, No. 189 Pearl Street,
T. B. Jansen & Co., No. 248 Pearl Street,
under the collective name of ‘‘ The New York Association of Booksellers,” respectfully informed the public ‘‘that, with a view to lessen the number of imported Books, which are now becoming exceedingly advanced in Price,” they ‘‘ have asso- ciated themselves for the Purpose of giving correct American Editions of such elementary Works as are in general use in our Schools, Academies, and Colleges ; and also for the pub- lication of such other Books as may be interesting to the Community, or conducive to the advancement of general knowledge. While many of our Fellow Citizens are projecting
vi AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE. BIBLIOGRAPHY
the Good of their Country in Matters of greater Importance, it is hoped this Attempt will not be regarded as of no moment. In this small Way thousands of Dollars may be annually saved to our Country.”
The first book published by this association was:
CicERo’s | SELEcT OrRATIONS, | translated into English; | with | The origi- nal Latin, from the Best | Editions, in the opposite page; | and | Notes, Historical, Critical and Explanatory. | Designed for the use of Schools as well as private Gentlemen. | By William Duncan, | Professor of Philosophy in the University of Aberdeen. First American Edition
j Carefully Revised and Corrected, by Malcolm Campbell, A.M. | Teacher of Languages. | New York | Printed by George F. Hopkins, at Washington’s Head. | For The New York Association of Book- sellers | 1802.
The volume, a neat sixteenmo of vi+67I pages, was dedi- cated, ‘‘ by permission,” to Rt. Rev. Benjamin Moore, D.D., Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the State of New York, and President of Columbia College.
On November 17, 1803, William Poyntell & Co., of Phila- delphia, issued from their ‘‘ Office of the Classic Press” a circular addressed to ‘‘men of letters in general and to book- sellers in particular,” similar in import to the New York Association of Booksellers. There is sufficient evidence to warrant the assumption that the ‘‘ Classic Press” was backed by a number of Philadelphia booksellers, and that Poyntell & Co. was selected to act as spokesmen. The circular referred to states that ‘‘ All books published at this press shall be at least equal, if not superior in quality to the London editions —and the most strict attention will be paid to their accuracy. The prices will, in most cases, be fixed lower than those at which the London editions of equal quality are sold in this country.
‘‘The terms for one hundred copies of any work will be twelve months’ credit, with a deduction of 334 per cent. from the retail prices. For fifty copies, and not less than twenty- five, nine months’ credit, and a like deduction.
‘‘ For every increase of fifty copies above a hundred copies, an extension of credit will be allowed beyond twelve months.
‘Tt will be optional with the ¢rade, either to take the works in sheets or bound, under the usual regulations.”
The Classic Press Series included editions of Virgil, Horace,
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Vii
Ovid, Cesar, Sallust, Ainsworth’s Dictionary, Ferguson’s
Astronomy, and Lensden’s Greek and Latin Testaments. The Philadelphia booksellers that are supposed to have
been interested in this movement were:
James Humphries, Walnut and Dock Streets.
Wm. Fry, 30 Chestnut Street.
Benjamin, Jacob, and Robert Johnson, 39 High Street.
Joseph Groff, 75 S. 2d Street.
Hugh Maxwell, 25 N. 2d Street.
Conrad & Co.
In 1824 Henry C. Carey, a son of Mathew Carey, made an attempt to form a publishers’ association, but in vain. His efforts, however, resulted in the beginning of trade sales in the fall of 1824. At first these sales were made exclusively by the firm of Carey & Lea. They were continued semi- annually until, at length, in the year preceding the outbreak of the war between the North and South, the joint sales of Philadelphia and New York amounted to upwards of half a million of dollars.
The Book Publishers’ Association
It was not until 1855 that another booksellers’ association was called into life. This was first named The New York Publishers’ Association, but later assumed the broader title of The Publishers’ Association, and, later still, the more definite title of The Book Publishers’ Association. The or- ganizer and working member (at least in the formative period) of this active and useful association was George Palmer Put- nam. Its permanent president was W. W. Appleton. During its unfortunately brief career it assumed the publication of The American Publishers Circular and Literary Gazette, which was first edited by its founder, Charles B. Norton, who was then also made assistant secretary and librarian of The Pub- lishers’ Association, and later by Charles B. Rode. About June, 1861, The Publishers’ Association seems to have come to an end, and Mr. Rode thenceforth continued the Circular on his own responsibility. In March, 1863, poor Rode gave up the struggle, and in May of the same year George W. Childs continued the Circular as a fortnightly and in a changed form. From that date begins the era of uninter- rupted American book-trade journalism.
vii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE. BIBLIOGRAPHY
The American Book- Trade Association
During the decade after the demise of The Book Publish- ers’ Association the book trade sank steadily into the quick- sands of the abuse of discount. In 1873 the condition of the bookseller became so desperate that a number of the trade of central Ohio, headed by J. W. Gunn, Abel Lowe, Prugh & Bro., and C. Anthony, of Springfield, O., issued a call to their brother booksellers of the West, asking that representa- tives from every city and town meet to ‘‘effect a reform for our mutual protection in trade”’ at the Burnet House, in Cincinnati, October 16. The result of this meeting was the formation of the Booksellers’ Protective Union in Cincinnati, and of the Nashville Booksellers’ Association in Nashville, Tenn.
On February 12, 1874, the Booksellers’ Protective Union met in convention at the Burnet House in Cincinnati. The work of the association was endorsed by the trade generally, and at the close of the convention it was decided by a unani- mous vote to adopt as the official name of the organization that of The American Book-Trade Union. Isaac C. Aston, of Columbus, O., was elected president.
On July 21, 1874, the third convention of The American Book-Trade Union was held at Put-in Bay, Ohio. Over one hundred and twenty representatives of the trade from as far east as Boston, as far north as Minneapolis, as far west as Omaha, and as far south as New Orleans were present. Anson D. F. Randolph, of New York, was elected presi- dent, and the convention was a brilliant success so far as resolutions and promises were concerned.
Not long after the convention, however, 7%e Publishers’ Weekly, both in its editorial columns and in communications addressed to the editor, gave evidence that there was an appreciable difference between the promises made at the con- vention and the practice at home, so far as maintaining the retail price was concerned.
The second annual convention of The American Book- Trade Association—the word Association having taken the place of Union—held at the Pavilion, Prospect Park, Niagara Falls, July 13-16, 1875, was perhaps the largest gathering of the book trade ever known in this country—the principals or representatives of every large publishing and bookselling firm
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY ix
in the United States having been present. The object sought by the convention was to bind the bookseller to ‘‘ maintain the publisher’s advertised retail price in all sales to buyers outside the trade, excepting that a reduction not to exceed ten per cent. on medical books, and twenty per cent. on all other classes of books (including educational) may be allowed to the following classes only: public libraries, including circu- lating and Sunday-school libraries; clergymen and profession- al teachers; professional books to professional buyers; large buyers—said buyers purchasing solely for their own use; and in the case of exceptions made by the Publishers’ Board of Trade, for publishers only.””. Mr. Randolph was re-elected president.
The agitation among the booksellers resulted in the or- ganization of the following local trade organizations : Baltimore [Md.] Booksellers’ Association.
Book-Trade Association of the City of Philadelphia (including printers, paper-makers, etc.).
Book-Trade Association of Philadelphia, Pa.
Booksellers and Stationers’ Association of the State of New
York, Rochester.
Buffalo [N. Y.] Booksellers’ Association.
Central Booksellers’ Association, New York.
Columbus [O.] Booksellers’ Association.
HJudson River [N. Y.] Booksellers’ Association, Troy.
Michigan Booksellers’ Association, Lansing.
Milwaukee [Wis.] Booksellers’ Union.
Nashville |Tenn.] Booksellers’ Association.
New England Booksellers’ Association, Boston.
New Orleans [La.] Booksellers’ Association.
Providence [R. I.] Booksellers’ Association.
Publishers’ Board of Trade (exclusively publishers of educa- tional books).
Rochester [N. Y.] Booksellers’ Association.
St. Louis [Mo.] Booksellers’ Association.
Washington [D. C.] Booksellers’ Association.
Western Booksellers’ Association, Chicago.
The American Book-Trade Association held its third annual convention at Philadelphia during the Centennial Exposition, July 11-13, 1876. This session was not so im- portant a one as either of the two preceding, and, notwith-
x AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
standing the unabated enthusiasm of the few who labored strenuously to uphold the association, it gradually fell asleep. A query in The Publishers Weekly of April 14, 1877, headed ‘Ts it still in Existence ?” was practically its epitaph.
‘The Book Fair” called into existence by the association in 1875, to counteract the demoralizing influence of the trade sales, again gave way, in 1877, to the latter institution, and the book trade once more found itself ina ‘‘slough of de- spond.”
After the extinction of the American Book-Trade Associa- tion there were formed the following local associations : North Carolina Booksellers’ and Stationers’ Board of Trade,
1888.
Booksellers’ Association of Virginia, 1891. Booksellers’ Association of Alabama, 1892. Northwestern Booksellers’ and Newsdealers’ Association, 1892.
Of these the Alabama and the Virginia associations alone seem to be actively engaged in looking after the interests of their members.
CHAPTER III
SIDE LIGHTS ON THE EARLY CONDITIONS OF THE BOOK TRADE
A NGLOMANIA seems to have been even more pronounced
at the beginning of the century than it has again become at its close. Small as the trade was in foreign books,* that in domestic ones was far smaller. There was then, in fact, no domestic literature. It was not until 1807 that Irving, Paulding, and Verplanck made their first modest attempt at
*It may be interesting here to give the statisticsof the output of new English books in 1800, as taken from a London contemporary by the /urt Folic, published in Philadelphia in 1800. The cost of the books is esti- mated in boards:
| ee nb In Agriculture, 18 books, &c. amounting to = Se Antiquities, 15 - : : er. P, z aa te Arts, useful and fine, 21 - - = - = . yay Biography, 13 - - See eas 6tf- = EA Gian Boia Chymistry, 13 - - - - - - - - + Ee oo
Dictionaries, Grammars, and books of Education, 38 7 14
Dramatic, 42. - - - 5 - - és é 5 6 13 Ethics and Metaphysics, 6 3 Z 2 = F, be Hero History, 24 2 = 2 = 2 - - 0 Ebfey nies fo) Bo es t = 2 2 = : = - =e 5LOr 14 0) Trials at Law, 7 Mathematics, 5 - - = ap hese Z Z eat Fro a Medicine, Surgery, &c., 60 - So 6S SS SS RE SS Oe 0) Miscellaneouses¢0 02) f=) eR eee en Pe 1B 3 So Natural History,g - - SEU Ee ABs es Brg. 16 Novels, 40 - - - . - - - about 20 0 o PhilosOOhy,.0,o<snacel tanen 2 4n froth édt ta Bei8ehe Philology, 12 - - - - - - - - Sie ET IO Poetry (including Translations), 68 SA Pacer 9 ati Y ro) Politics and Political Economy, 119 - - - - 10 ° Theology, 43 : + E 10S FORE i NeesG h Sermons, 53
- - 16 10 0o
Voyages and Travels, 20 - : See
Total number, 693. Le230° 5 0
xii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
literature in the little periodical Salmagundt. Ten or fifteen years later, when Bradford & Inskeep rashly offered $100 for the copyright of a novel, the publishers’ liberality was con- sidcred to have passed beyond the bounds of wisdom. American books could then be sold only with difficulty. It was almost sufficient to insure the condemnation of a book to have it known that it was of domestic origin. Henry C. Carey mentions the case of Major Barker, of Philadelphia, who dramatized ‘‘ Marmion.” The manager, Stephen Price, did not venture to produce it as an American work. He went through the farce of having the manuscript carefully packed up as coming from England, plastered over with imitations of English post-marks, and announced it as the work of an English author. As such it succeeded, but the real author- ship soon leaking out, the public very soon ceased to find in it the merits .hat before had been so clearly visible. On the other hand, judging from the following note in the Port Folio of June 4, 1803, the English public seem to have had no such objection to American work: ‘‘ Elegant editions of the ‘ Algerine Captive,’ of ‘Edgar Huntley,’ and ‘ Arthur Mervyn,’ have been re-printed in England. Itis a fact, that more attention is paid to American productions abroad, than at home. These books are candidly criticised in some of the Literary Journals, and a strong disposition is manifested by the British Critics in general to treat American Literature with delicacy and respect. The contrary has been asserted in many of our vulgar papers, but it is a gross misrepresentation.”” In his search for material of a portion of this sketch the author was enabled, through the courtesy of Mr. Charles M. Lea, of Lea Brothers & Co., of Philadelphia, the suc- cessors to the business originally founded by Mathew Carey, to look over the account-books of Mathew Carey from 1799 to 1805. It is, perhaps, needless to say that these documents are extremely interesting and of the highest value as the foundation of the history of a most important epoch in the American book trade. From these he gleaned the following curious facts relating to the prices paid for certain work: Composition in 1801 cost 50 cents per 1000 ems ; ordinary presswork was 60 cents a token. Bioren, in 1805, charged the printing of the Douay Bible by the sheet at $19 a sheet. Proof-reading was paid for at the rate of 25 cents an hour,
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY xiii
and prcof-readers seem generally to have rendered bills for every ten days’ work instead of by the week. Quarto vellum paper cost, in 1802, $3.50a ream; foolscap, $3; medium, $2.40 ; and demy, $1.87). Carey’s traveller to Baltimore re- ceived $10 a week, and charged in his expenses stage hire from Philadelphia to Baltimore, $8. The Baltimore sales averaged $150 a week. Freight to Maryland was charged at the rate of 124 cents a foot. Rent on Market Street was $52.50 a quarter ; board for help was $2.50 and $5 a week. A load of oak wood cost $5, and pure wax candles cost 20 cents apiece. In 1804, A. C. Jordan, of Norfolk, a customer of Carey’s, reported that his stock, which he estimated at $3000, had been destroyed by fire. From an invoice which Jordan sent later, it appears that the stock was worth $3320. Newspaper advertising in the early days of this century seems to have been much neglected by the book trade, greatly to the chagrin of the editor and printer. The Philadelphia bookseller, especially, appears to have presumed too much on the good-nature of the editor of the Philadelphia Port Folio, the ablest literary journal issued at the time in this country, as may be seen in the following note in the issue of that journal for June 4, 1803: ‘‘ The Editor, fatigued with much expensive importunity of this kind, distinctly repeats, that every Bookseller, who transmits a request to notice any book, pamphlet, or literary project of any description, must send the amount of the subscription for this paper. As every article of this nature is essentially an ADVERTISEMENT, it is but equitable that our labor be requited, and our EXPENSE reim- bursed. It is notoriously a source of EMOLUMENT to pub- lishers to have books announced inthe Port Folio, and it is a source of expense and inconvenience to the Editor, which he is resolved to rescind, unless something like Justice and Generosity succeed to selfishness and illiberality.”
CHAPTER IV THE FIRST BOOK-TRADE CATALOGUE
Ape catalogue was realized in the issue, in 1804, of the
‘“‘Catalogue of all the Books printed in the United States. . . . Published by the Booksellers in Boston,” a re- print of which forms the second half of the present volume. Who these ‘‘ Booksellers in Boston” were I have been unable to discover, notwithstanding a careful search through the files of the Zudependent Chronicle, the Boston Gasette, and The Columbian Centinel and Massachusetts Federalist, the leading Boston journals published from 1799 to 1805. The principal booksellers of that day, judging from their regular adver- tisements, would seem to have been:
Ebenezer Larkin, 47 Cornhill.
Thomas & Andrews, who were booksellers at 47 Newbury Strect, and druggists in the next store, at No. 45.
J. White, at the ‘‘ Franklin’s Head,” on Court Street, who besides books kept also stationery and cutlery, and recom- mended his ‘‘ Dutch oil cloths of different widths,” and his ‘‘excellent Hair-seating.”
Munro « Francis, 7 Court Street.
W. Pelham, first at 59 and then at 39 Cornhill, who made a specialty of ‘‘ books from Philadelphia and New York.”
S. Clap, Court Street, who was also auctioneer.
Samucl Bradford, 5 Kilby Street, bookseller and auctioneer
Thomas Clark, who kept a book-store ‘‘ nearly opposit the insurance office on Fish Street,’ and also the Author' Book Store on Union Street.
Samuel Hall, afterwards Hall & Hillers, at 53 Cornhil Hall sold out in 1805 to Manning & Loring, who removed tt business to 2 Cornhill. Hall was quite a character in h way and a leader in his profession. He published in 18 ‘‘The History of Little King Pippin,” a mite book of dogger
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY XV
rhymes for children. Among the rhymes was one inge- niously calling attention to ‘‘ Hall’s Book-Store near the State House in Boston.”
Joseph Nancrede, 24 State Street.
John Milliquet, 7 Cambridge Street.
W. P. & L. Blake, who kept the ‘‘ Boston Book-Store,” at I Cornhill. This firm published the ‘‘Junius Letters,” in 1804, in two volumes, at $4.50 a set.
West & Greenleaf seem to have been so well known that they never thought it necessary to give their street address.
B. & J. Holman, 50 Mariborough Street.
E. Lincoln, Water Street.
Caleb Bingham, 44 Cornhill.
It is more than likely that John West, of the firm of West & Greenleaf, and S. Hall werethe compilers of the catalogue. Both were active in the movement for reform inaugurated by The American Company of Booksellers in 1801, and West was one of the delegates to the fourth annual meeting of that Company, held in New York June 18, 1804. Hall, as has already been noticed, was also deeply interested in everything that concerned the book trade. He advertised extensively and issued hand-lists and circulars at frequent intervals.
The catalogue is a pamphlet of 79 pages, 4!4x 7 inches. The number of books recorded is 1338. These are divided into six divisions, as Law, Physic, Divinity, Bibles, Miscel- lanies, School-Books and Singing-Books. The total number of law-books recorded is 34. As only the place of publication is given, and the publisher cannot be identified, I give the cities from which the books were issued as follows: Albany, N. Y., furnished 2; Baltimore, 1; Boston, 11; Boston and Albany, 1; Harrisburg, Pa., 1; Newbern, S. C., 2; New York 2: Portsmouth, N. H., 1; Philadelphia, 8; Troy, N. Y., I, Walpole, Mass., 3; Worcester, Mass., I.
The department of Physic contains 63 titles issued from the following places: Albany, 1; Boston, 15; Dover, Neerli:, 1; Fairhaven, Conn., 1; New York, 10; Northampton, Mass., 1; Philadelphia, 19; Portsmouth, N. H., 2; Providence, R. I., 1; Salem, Mass., 1; Springfield, Mass., 1; Troy, 4; Walpole, Mass., 2; Worcester, Mass., 4. One was published anony- mously, no town being given.
Divinity naturally takes the lead, with 259 works, issued
xvi AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
from the following cities: Albany, 7; Alexandria, Va., 1; Loston, 64; Carlisle, Pa., 4; Charlestown, Mass., 2; Eliza- bethtown, N. J., 4; Greenfield, Mass., 2; Exeter, N. H., 17; Hartford, Conn., 9; Leominster, Mass., 1; Newark, N. J., 2; New Bedford, Mass., 1; Newburg, N. Y., 1; New Haven, Conn., 7; New London, Conn., 3; New York, 34; Northamp- ton, Mass., 3; Philadelphia, 52; Portsmouth, N. H., 1; Provi- dence, R. I., 1; Salem, Massi, 7> Schenectady, N.cY.,4; Troy, N. Y., 1; Walpole, Mass., 4; Wilmington, Del., 2; Worcester, Mass., 18; Wrentham, Mass., I, and anonymous 2.
Under the heading of Bibles there are 32 entries, including folio, quarto, and school Bibles, Testaments and prayer- books. A large-type Book of Common Prayer was published in Brooklyn, N. Y., at $4. Four editions of the Prayer-Book were published in Boston, and five others in New York City.
Besides these there are 796 titles in the section of Miscel- lanies, 110 school-books, 25 singing-books, and 19 omissions.
The Boston booksellers, sofar as can be determined, never issued a second edition of this catalogue. The first edition is so scarce that even the first authority who mentioned its ex- istence—Dr. Hermann Ludewig—thirty years after its issue saw but one copy of it.
Though almost every canon of bibliographical science was ignored in the compilation of this catalogue, it is still useful to collectors in determining the existence of early editions. As the earliest known attempt at trade bibliography it cer- tainly has more than a passing interest.
CHAPTER V BOOK-TRADE HELPS, 1801-1897
AV PES the issue of this ‘‘ 1804 Catalogue” the foundation was laid for American book-trade bibliography in the nineteenth century. Unfortunately the catalogue could not be kept alive and was discontinued after its first issue. The American Booksellers’ Company soon after met with the same fate, and the bookseller was again obliged to rely upon the individual catalogues of the publishers, at that time beginning to form a distinct branch of the trade, though they still re- mained booksellers in the narrower sense, and upon the advertisements in the newspapers,* which by that time had become numerous and had also considerably improved. Foremost among the latter helps for the bookseller was 7‘he Port Folio't begun by Joseph Dennie (‘‘Qliver Oldschool, Esq.”) in 1801. The most eminent literary men in the coun- try were contributors to its columns, and, from the beginning
*In 1801 there were published in the United States about 200 news- papers. Ten of these were published in New Hampshire; twenty-six in Massachusetts ; four in Rhode Island ; seventeen in Connecticut; eight in Vermont; thirty-eight in New York; eight in New Jersey; twenty-eight in Pennsylvania; three in Delaware ; fourteen in Maryland ; seventeen in Virginia; eight in North Carolina; six or eight in South Carolina; six in Georgia; four in Kentucky; two in Tennessee; probably three in Ohio; and one in the Mississippi Territory. Of these at least seventeen were printed daily, seven three times a week, thirty twice a week, and one hundred and forty-six weekly. Samuel Miller in his ‘‘A Brief Retrospect of the Eighteenth Century,’’ published by T. & J. Swords, of New York, in 1803, estimates that the daily papers distributed annually about 4,590,000 copies ; those that printed three times a week, about 1,080,000 copies ; those that printed twice a week, about 2,000,000 copies ; and those that printed weekly, about 5,408,000 copies. So that the whole number of newspapers annually circulated in the United States at the beginning of the century may be estimated at 13,078,000; or, for the sake of being rather below than above the mark, say 12,000,000 copies.
+ The superior figures in this chapter refer to the numbers of the titles given in full in the Chronological List in Chapter VI.
xviii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
until it was discontinued, its records of new and forthcoming books were full and complete enough to answer the im- mediate needs of the bookseller.
From 1819 to 1827 the records of new books in Zhe Port Folio were supplemented by the quarterly lists of new books inthe Morth American Review, and continued by it until A. P. Peabody assumed the editorial management in 1844.4 In 1828 K. v. Behr, a German bookseller in New York, issued a pros- pectus of an American Book Circular, but he was far ahead of his time, and nothing seems to have come of the under- taking. Early in the century Evert Duyckinck,* the father of Evert A. and George L. Duyckinck, the authors of ‘‘ The Cyclopedia of American Literature,” the forerunner of Alli- bone’s so-called ‘‘ Critical Dictionary of English Literature,” inaugurated the system of furnishing his customers, book- sellers as well as private buyers, with printed lists of the latest books. These, after his death, were continued by his former clerk, Orville A. Roorbach, and in a rather uncertain way filled the gap left by the discontinuance of the lists by the North American Review until Simeon Ide published Blake’s ‘¢ Reference Trade List,” 4819 the forerunner of Howard Chal- len’s ‘‘ Uniform Trade List Circular,” ® published in April, 1867, of ‘‘ The Trade Circular Annual,” 7 published by Fred- erick Leypoldt in 1871, and of the ‘‘ Uniform Trade List Annual” in 1873,‘ which became and continues ‘* The Pub- lishers’ Trade List Annual.”
Roorbach's and Norton’s Catalogues
Inspired by his employer, young Orville A. Roorbach, (who had apprenticed himself to Evert Duyckinck in 1817,) soon after he began his career as a bookseller devoted him- self to making a catalogue of all books in the American market of which he could obtain the titles. At first his bib- liographical memoranda were printed as manuscript for the use of his customers in New York, Boston, Philadelphia, and the southern cities. After he removed to Charleston, S. C., where his store, ‘‘ At the Sign of the Red Bible,” became a
* Evert Duyckinck, who at his death, in 1833, was the oldest book- seller in New York City, gave to J. & J. Harper the first order they ever received for book printing. It was for 2000 copies of ‘‘ Seneca’s Morals ’— a large edition for the time.
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY xix
famous resort for the literary people of that time, Roorbach, realizing the need of a comprehensive trade catalogue, began systematically to complete his record of American books, be- ginning with 1820. As the compiling and arranging was done exclusively by himself, and as his business demanded much of his time, Roorbach naturally did not make rapid progress.
Roorbach had given up his store in Charleston and had taken charge of the wholesale department of Wiley & Put- nam, and then of that of George P. Putnam, before the first volume of his ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana—Catalogue of Ameri- can Publications, including reprints and original works, from 1820 to 1848 inclusive,’’ was published in 1849 with the imprint, ‘‘New York: Orville A. Roorbach. For sale by G. P. Putnam.”* In 1850 Mr. Putnam published the first Supplement, which contained 2000 more titles than the origi- nal work, and a list of periodicals.4 In October, 1852, Roor- bach, who was then a jobber of books, at 12 Vesey Street, New York, published in one volume the original work of 1849 and the supplement of 1850, to which he added the iitles of books issued during the intervening two years, making in all a record of 24,000 books.” In May, 1855, his son, O. A. Roorbach, Jr., who had been xolens volens pressed into the service for his father’s hobby, published a Supplement includ- ing works published from October, 1852, to May, 1855, and also ‘‘a repetition of such books as have either changed prices or publishers during that period.” *6 In March, 1858, Wiley & Halstead, who were then Roorbach’s backers, pub- lished an Addenda to the ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana,” covering the period from May, 1855, to March, 1858.77 In 1861, the year in which Roorbach died, his son published ‘‘ Volume IV. of the Bibliotheca Americana .. . from March, 1858, to January, 1861.”%8 This last part has become exceedingly scarce, owing to the fact that most of the sheets were sent by mistake to the paper-mill and were there destroyed before the error was discovered. Roorbach’s work bristles with surpris- ing errors and no less surprising omissions, besides following, save in a few cases, the bad precedent of the ‘‘ London Cata- logue” in omitting the dates of publication. But it would, perhaps, have been too much to expect a first attempt to be more complete or perfect than Roorbach’s. On almost every page the lack of knowledge of the subject is painfully ap-
xx AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
parent, and that accounts for many of the shortcomings of the work.
Roorbach’s labors were supplemented by Charles B. Nor- ton, who published the first number of Morton's Literary Advertiser, in May, 1851. This was continued as WVorton’s Literary Gazette, then, as Morton’s Literary Gazette and Pub- lishers’ Circular (when it appealed directly to the book trade for its support), and, finally, as the American Publishers’ Cir- cular, which was later taken up by the American Book Trade Association, then by G. W. Childs, and, in January, 1872, was merged by Mr. Leypoldt in The Weekly Trade Circular, which a year later became The Publishers’ Weekly,31t
In 1853 Norton began the issue of ‘‘ Norton’s Literary Register and Bookbuyer’s Almanac,” which was continued as ‘* Norton’s Literary Register, or, Annual Book-List,” compiled by Reuben A. Guild.#5! In the same year, 1853, he also published ‘‘ Norton’s Literary Almanac for 1852,” of which he issued the second and last volume in 1854.44.45 In 1856 he pub- lished ‘‘ A Catalogue of Valuable Works relating to America”; in 1857 a ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana”; in 1857-62 six numbers of a ‘‘Literary Letter,” containing bibliographies of Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont; and, in 1862, another ‘‘ Cata- logue. . . of Books relating chiefly to America.” 52-54, 61
Kelly's and Sabin's Catalogues
From the date of the last issue of Roorbach’s “ Bibliotheca Americana” until 1863 the publishing business of the coun- try was almost at a stand-still, owing to the war. Towards the close of the war and after, however, business revived and the publishing trade with it. About that time James Kelly, a young Irishman, then with John Wiley & Son, enthusiastically conceived the idea of continuing the work begun by Orville A. Roorbach. As most of the work of compiling was done by Mr. Kelly in his spare hours, the work progressed slowly, and it was not until three years after he began work that he was able to publish the first volume of ‘‘ The American Cata- logue of Books (original and reprints) from January, 1861, to January, 1866 . . . with a supplement containing pamphlets, sermons, and addresses on the civil war in the United States
. and an Appendix containing names of Learned Jocieties and other Literary Associations, with a list of their Publica-
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY xxi
tions.” 6 The second volume was published in 1871, and car- ried the record of books down to September of that year. The first volume gave 11,307 titles, the Appendix excepted, the second volume upwards of 18,000 titles.
Mr. Kelly entertained the compilation of a complete record of books published in America from the earliest date, but he was obliged to relinquish so burdensome a task for want of the necessary support.
In 1863 Joseph Sabin, who bégan his career as a book- seller in this country in 1848 as salesman and cataloguer in the employ of George S. Appleton, of Philadelphia, with whom he remained until 1850, when Mr. Appleton joined the parent house in New York, began work on his ‘‘ Dictionary of Books relating to America from its discovery to the present time.’ 6 Though the work appealed directly to the collector of Americana and to libraries, and promised to supply the deficiencies of Kennett, Rede, Dalrymple, Warden, Rich, and others, Sabin’s work, so far at least as the earlier volumes are concerned, can lay claim only to serve as a “‘ finding list” for booksellers. Later, when Mr. Sabin enlarged the scope and improved the method of his work, it attained somewhat to the dignity of a bibliography. Notwithstanding its short- comings, Sabin’s work will often be found a bridge to carry the bookseller over uncertain places. The first part of the ‘*Dictionary”’ was published in January, 1867. It has thus far reached Smith, under the successive editorship of C. A. Cutter and Wilberforce Eames. When Mr. Eames reached ‘‘Captain John Smith” his work on the ‘‘ Dictionary” was interrupted. It is to be hoped, however, that the work be completed, no matter in how imperfect a condition.
Leypoldt’s Catalogues and their Successors
In January, 1869, Frederick Leypoldt, then of the firm of Leypoldt & Holt, at 451 Broome Street, New York, issued in the ‘‘ Annual Number” of Zhe Literary Bulletin, a Monthly Record of Current Literature, started in December, 1868, what proved to be the first step towards his ‘‘ American Cata- logue.” The list was arranged by subjects and included only the principal books of 1868. To this was added a list of the principal magazines and periodicals, also arranged by subjects,
xxii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
In 1870 Leypoldt & Holt issued ‘‘ The American Catalogue of Books for 1869, containing complete monthly lists of all the books published in the United States during the year 1869, with statement-of size, price, place of publication and pub- lisher’s name, to which is prefixed an alphabetical and a classified Index.” 7! The matter was made up of the lists that appeared monthly in the 7rade Circular and Literary Bulletin, and was the first annual catalogue that had been published in this country since Norton’s ‘‘ Literary Register for 1856.”
In 1871 Mr. Leypoldt withdrew from the firm of Leypoldt & Holt, and on his own account published Zhe Trade Circu- far. In the fall of that year he published ‘‘ The Trade Circu- lar Annual for 1871, including the American Catalogue of books published in the United States during the year 1870... also, a list of the principal books published in England; a publishers’, manufacturers’, and importers’ directory,” etc.” ““The American Catalogue” in this volume was arranged in one alphabet by authors. To this was added a minutely- classified index. Appended to ‘‘The American Catalogue” and the general information prepared for the volume, were the Lists of publishers and manufacturers. This innovation did not meet with sufficient encouragement, and in 1872 ‘‘ The American Catalogue” alone was published, uniform in style with that issued in 1870.73 In 1873 ‘‘The Uniform Trade List Annual” took the place of ‘‘The American Catalogue.” In this year there was published separately as a Supplement to The Publishers’ Weekly an ‘‘ Alphabetical Reference List of Books recorded in The Publishers’ Weekly [Trade Circular] from January 18, 1872 to January 16, 1873, supplementary to the Annual Catalogue for 1871.” The list for 1873-74 was the last one issued separately. These annual Reference Lists were continued in the ‘‘ Trade List Annual” from 1874 until 1888, after which year only semi-annual lists were printed. The reason for this change was that in 1886 had been begun the regular issue of the ‘‘ Annual American Catalogue,” cov- ering from January to December, and the list included in the ‘‘ Trade List Annual” published in July was only intended to cover the six months intervening since the last issue of the ‘“‘ Annual American Catalogue.” In 1895 the semi-annual list was dropped.
In 1876 Frederick Leypoldt began work on ‘‘The Ameri-
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY xxiil
can Catalogue . . . of books in print and for sale (including reprints and importations,) July 1, 1876,” the first volume of which was completed in the fall of 1879, and the second, com- pleting the work, in the summer of 1881.84 This has been followed by the five-yearly volumes for 1876-1884, 1884-1890, and 1890-1895, the later ones with appendixes giving the publications of the United States, of the several states, and of publishing societies of America—the last-named containing, in the volume for 1890-95, entries of the issues from nearly 500 such societies, some of them of the first literary or biblio- graphical importance. This work is the culmination of the trade bibliographical work carried through the office of The Publishers’ Weekly, beginning with the weekly full-title an- notated record, proceeding with the monthly index in the first issue of each month, carried forward in the ‘‘ Annual American Catalogue,” ® begun in 1886, which gives full titles, with descriptive notice, of the more important books recorded in The Publishers’ Weekly, to which is added an author- title-subject index, publishers’ lists, and a directory of pub- lishers, and so on to the five-yearly volumes. This is, per- haps, the most comprehensive national bibliography which has been attempted in the book trade.
This, in brief, is the record of American book-trade bibli- ography from its beginnings to the present day. It is not intended to include any but those works published specially for the use of the trade. Exceptions have been made in favor of a few of those which, though they appeal to a wider class, may nevertheless find a place in a list such as this.
CHAPTER VI
CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF CATALOGUES, BOOK-TRADE AND LITERARY JOURNALS
Where tt has been considered practical to group certain works and thetr continuations, such as the catalogues of Rich, Roorbach, Kelly, Leypoldt, Norton's Literary Gazette and its successors, etc., the chrono- logical order has been disregarded. The reader will probably recognize the exceptions and the reasons for them without a guide to them.
3 7he Port Folio. By Oliver Oldschool, Esq. [Joseph Dennie.] Vol. 1. For 1801. Philadelphia, Printed by H. Maxwell and Sold by Will- iam Fry. 4°.
The Port Folio was conducted by Joseph Dennie till his death in
1812. After that it was edited by J. E. Hall and others. From Jan., 1801,
to Dec., 1805 (weekly), 5 vols., 4°, printed by H. Maxwell and sold by
William Fry. The numbers in Vols. II. and III. have the caption 7he
Port Folio Enlarged. Second Series, 1806 to 1808, 6 vols., 8°, monthly,
published by John Watts. Third Series, 1809 to 1812, 8 vols., 8°, monthly,
with engraved titles, portraits, and plates, published by Bradford and
Inskeep. Fourth Series, 1813 to 1815, 6 vols., 8°, monthly, with engraved
titles, portraits, and plates, published by Bradford and Inskeep. Fifth
Series, 1816 to 1819, 8 vols., 8°, monthly, with plates, published b arrison
Hall. Sixth Series, 1820 to 1827, ipubtshes by Harrison Hall,) Vols. IX. to
XII., 1820-21, quarterly; Vols. XIII. to XXII., 1822-27, monthly. The
numbers in Vols. XIII. and XIV. have the caption The Port Folio and
New York Monthly Magazine, conducted Dy plizes Oldschool, Esq., and
are also called Vols. I. and II.; and Vols. XXI. and XXII. are also called
Vols. I. and II. of ‘‘ Hall’s Second Series.’? Vol. XX. contains a general
index of 64 pages to the 20 vols., 1816-25. No numbers were issued from
January to June, 1826, nor from January to June, 1827. Discontinued after December, 1827.
2An American Bibliographical and Historical Dictionary, containing an Account of the Lives, Characters and Writings of the most Eminent Persons in North America from its first Discovery to the present time . .. By William Allen. Cambridge, 1809. 632 p. Portrait of Wash- ington. 8°,
Of slight bibliographical value. A second edition was published by Hyde & Co., Boston, 1832. (viii+-800 p. 8°); and a third edition in 1857. (x-++g00 p. 8°.)
3 Select Reviews, and Spirit of the Foreign Magazines. By E. Bronson and others. ‘‘The wheat from all these publications should, from time to time be winnowed, and the chaff thrown away”’... Ex- terna rorore crescit ... Claud. Philadelphia: From the Lorenzo Press of E. Bronson, Published by Hopkins and Earle, No. 170 Market Street. Sold by Mathew Carey, Philadelphia; Inskeep and
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY XXV
Bradford, New York; and Farrand, Mallory and Company, Boston. Monthly. January, 1809-. 8°.
4 The North American Review and Miscellaneous Journal. Volume First. Boston, Wells and Lilly. 1815. 8°.
f After vol. XIII. the words ‘‘and Miscellaneous Journal,’’ on the title are omitted. Vols. I.-IV. were edited by W. Tudor; vols. V., VI., XVIII., XIX., XXII.-XXX., by J. Sparks; vols. VII.-IX., by E. T. Chan- ning ; vols., X.-XVII., by E. Everett; vols. XX.-XXI., by E. Everett and J. G. Palfrey; vols. XXXI.-XLI., by A. H. Everett ; vols. XLII.-LV., by: J. G. Palfrey; vols. LVI.-LXXVII., by F. Bowen. With volume LXXVIII. the quarterly lists were discontinued.
5 The Critic. A Weekly Review of Literature, Fine Arts and the Drama. Edited by W. Leggatt. New York, 1828-1829. 2vols. 8°.
6 The United States Literary Advertiser and Publishers’ Circular. A
Monthly Register of Literature. New York, J. & H. Langley, 1831- 1842, 311 mumbers. 4°.
7 The Booksellers’ Advertiser and Monthly Register of New Publications. American and Foreign. [Edited by George Palmer Putnam.] New York: West & Trow. 1834. 12 numbers. 4°.
Published anonymously by Mr. Putnam while he was a clerk in Jona- than Leavitt’s book-store.
8 Bibliotheca Americana Nova; or, a Catalogue of Books in various lan- guages relating to America, printed since the year 1700, Compiled principally from the works themselves, by Obadiah Rich . . . Lon- don, O. Rich, r2 Red Lion Square. New York, Harper & Brothers, 82 Cliff Street. 1835. 4-+ 424p. 8°.
This was followed in 1841, by a ‘‘Supplement to the Bibliotheca Americana Nova. Pt.I. Additionsand Corrections 1701 to 1800.’’ (title + 425-517 p. 8°.) An extra number of copies was printed of this “ Supple- ment’’ so that it is sometimes found alone or bound at the end of the second volume.
In 1844, George Rich, a son of Obadiah Rich, published Vol. II. of ‘* Bibliotheca Americana,”’ 1801-1830, (half-title, title and 228 p. 8°.)
In 1846 the work was completed and issued in two volumes as follows:
9 Bibliotheca Americana Nova. A Catalogue of Books relating to America, in various languages, including Voyages to the Pacific and Round the World, and Collections of Voyagesand Travels Printed since the Year 1700. Compiled principally from the works themselves, by O. Rich . . . London, Rich & Sons, 12 Red Lion Square, 1846. Vol. I. 1701-1800; Vol II. 1801-1844. 84-424-+-2-+ 425-517 p.; 4+ 412 p. 8°.
The two volumes contain 5115 separate titles.
Obadiah Rich issued in 1846 a prospectus of a ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana Vetus. Books relating to America, 1493-1700.’’ (161-8 p. 8°.) According to Triibner’s “ Bipliographica! Guide to American Literature,’’ ‘this work was completed by Mr. Rich, ae a for publication; but the manuscript having been accidentally left in a hackney conveyance, was never recovered, and was sold as waste paper to a butcher at Gravesend, in the vicinity of Mr. Rich’s residence, from whom only a few sheets were ultimately rescued.”’ The two lists which accompanied the pros- ve had already been issued separately. For a full list of Rich's cata- ogues, prepared by Wilberforce Eames, see Sabin’s ‘ Dictionary of Books Relating to America,’’ Vol. ea 206-211.
E. G. Allen, who succeeded Rich’s Sons, published from 1858-’59 a catalogue of Old Books relating to America printed Prior to 1800. (32 p. 8”.)
xxvi AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
10 The Literary Intelligence, prepared for the Mew York Review by George Palmer Putnam, 4°.
Commenced April 8, 1838, and was continued till the Mew York Re-
view was discontinued in 1842.
11 Literary News Letters, and Monthly Register of New Books, Foreign and American, published on the first of every month. New York: Wiley & Putnam, 1838-1847. 8°.
Compiled for the use of their customers.
12 The Home Book Circular. Begun by D. Appleton & Co. in 1840, and after June, 1843, continued under the title of Apsleton’s Literary Bulletin on the plan of Wiley & Putnam’s ‘‘ Literary News Letters,” as below :
13 Appleton’s Ltterary Bulletin: a Monthlv Record of New Books, Eng- lish, French, German and American. Published on the first of every month, at 200 Broadway, New York, and at 148 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia. Vol. I., No. 1, June, 1843, to Vol. IV., No. 44, January, 1847.
With the third number the French and German lists were discontinued and the line on the title-page changed to ‘‘ Monthly Record of New Books, English and American,’
14 Catalogue of Books, Ancient and Modern, in every department of Litera- ture and Science. (pp. 128-154 books relating to America.) New York, Bartlett & Welford, 1841. 154 p. 8°.
15 —— —— Pt. 2: American history. New York, Bartlett & Welford, 1844. 8°.
16 Gowan’s Catalogue of rare Old English and American Books. New York, William Gowan, 1842-’44. 3 numbers, each 32 p. 8°.
‘*Gowan published many Catalogues of Books on American History, which are enlivened by his own notes, written under the pseudonym of ‘Western Memorabilia.’ The notes are distinguished by much originality, some personality, and not a little bad grammar.’’—Sabin’s “ Dictionary of Books relating to America,’’ Vol. V1I., p. 369. 17The American Book Circular, with notes and statistics. [By George
Palmer Putnam.] New York: Wiley & Putnam, 1843. 64 p. 8°.
Written to correct misstatements made in Allison’s ‘‘ History of Eu- rope’’ regarding the progress of literature in America. 18The American Bookseller’s Complete Reference Trade List, and Alpha-
betical Catalogue of Books Published in this Country, with the Pub- lishers’ and Authors’ Names and Prices arranged in classes for quick and convenient reference. Compiled by Alexander V. Blake. To which is added an article on The Law of Copyright. Claremont, N.H. Published by Simeon Ide. 1847. 232 p. 4°.
19 Supplement to The American Bookseller’s Complete Reference Trade List ; containing such additional lists as have been furnished by the publishers, as well as additions to the lists published in the original book, and an Alphabetical Catalogue of the same. Claremont, N. H., Published by Simeon Ide. 1848. 4-+-235-351 p. 4°.
The Reference Trade List, as its name implies, was printed for the convenience of the book trade. The titles which were kept very short were arranged under the names of the respective publishers of the books, with an alphabetical index of authors and anonymous publications. The list made no pretensions to bibliographical accuracy. .
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY XXvii
2 The Literary World. A Gazette for Authors, Readers, and Publish- ers. Edited by Charles Fenno Hoffman and Evert Augustus and George Long Duyckinck. New York, 13 vols. 1847-1853. 4°.
Mr. Hoffman’s connection with The Literary World did not extend beyond 1848.
2l Appleton’s Library Manual; comprising a Catalogue Raisonné of up- wards of 12,000 of the most important works in every department of knowledge, in all modern languages. New York, D. Appleton & Co., 1849. xvi+434 p. 8°.
Includes but a few books printed in America. The reason for this is explained in the Preface, signed Oct. 1, 1847: ‘‘It has not been thought to enter very fully into the details of American literature ; there was no object to be gained by occupying the very limited space at command with chroni- cling books that are in everybody’s hands, or which it is the publisher’s special interest to make known through the usual channels; besides, there is reason to expect a special American bibliography ere long, in which the genius and the industry of the New World may be fuvoranly exhibited in contrast with that of the Old.’
22 Bibliotheca Americana. A Catalogue of Books relating to America, On sale by John Russell Smith, [Subsequently by Alfred Russell Smith],
36 Soho Sq., London, 1849, 1853, 1865, 1871, and 1874. 8°.
2 Bibliotheca Americana. Catalogue of American Publications, including reprints and original works, from 1820 to 1848, inclusive. Compiled and arranged by O. A. Roorbach. New York: Orville A. Roorbach. For sale by G. P. Putnam. 1849. ix+2+357-+3 p. 8°.
24 Supplement to the Bibliotheca Americana: comprising a List of Books, (reprints and original works,) which have been published in the United States within the past year. Also, omissions and corrections of errors, as far as ascertained, which occurred in the former work. Together with a list of periodicals. Compiled and arranged by O. A. Roorbach. New York: G. P. Putnam. 1850. vii+-r124 p. 8°.
25 Bibliotheca Americana. Catalogue of American Publications, including reprints and original works, from 1820 to 1852, inclusive. Together with a List of Periodicals published in the United States. Compiled and arranged by O. A. Roorbach. New York: Orville A. Roorbach, 12 Vesey Street. October, 1852. xi+6s2 p. 8°.
This edition includes the contents of the edition of 1849, and the supplement published in 1850.
26 Supplement to the Bibliotheca Americana. A Catalogue of American Publications, (Reprints and Original Works,) from October, 1852, to May, 1855, including also a repetition of such books as have either changed prices or publishers during that period. Compiled and ar- ranged by Orville A. Roorbach. New York: O. A. Roorbach, Jr. May, 1855. vii--220 p. 8°.
27 Addenda to The Bibliotheca Americana. A Catalogue of American Publications, (Reprints and Original Works,) from May, 1855, to March, 1858. Compiled and arranged by Orville A. Roorbach. New York: Wiley & Halstead. London: Triibner & Co. 1858. vii+ 256 p. 8°.
28 Volume IV. of The Bibliotheca Americana. A Catalogue of American Publications, (Reprints and Original Works,) from March, 1858, to
xxviii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
January, 1861. Compiled and arranged by Orville A. Roorbach. New York: Orville A. Roorbach. London: Triibner & Co. 1861. vii+162 p. 8°.
29 Catalogue of Books relating to America. . . . Amsterdam, On sale by Frederick Miiller, 1850. 104 p. 12°.
Mr. Miiller issued in 1854-1858 a ‘‘ Catalogus van Boeken, [etc.,] over de Nederlandsche Bezittingen,”’ in 2 parts, (103 ; 28 p. 8°); and, 1872-1875, a ‘‘ Catalogue of Books, Maps, [etc.,] on America,’’ in 3 parts, (8-+288; 132;
173 Pp. 8°.) 30 The Book Trade. A Monthly Literary Journal, Record of New Pub- lications and Advertiser. New York. (?) 1850-(?). 4°,
31 Norton's Literary Advertiser. Published Monthly by Charles B. Nor- ton, Book Agent, 71 Chambers-st., (Irving House,) New York. Vol. I. 8 numbers, May to December, 1851. 108 p. fol. Continued as:
32 Norton's Literary Gazette and Publishers’ Circular ; A monthly rec- ord of works published in America, England, Germany and France; with a review of the current literature of the day; contents of leading American and English periodicals; advertisements of the trade, etc., etc. Volume II., January-December, 1852. Volume III., January- December, 1853. New York: Published by Charles B. Norton, 7: Chambers Street. 24 nos. 256; 232 p. fol.
Continued as;
® Norton's Literary Gazette and Publishers’ Circular. New series [Published on the rst and 15th of each month, by Charles B. Norton, 17 Chambers Street; beginning with May 1, 1855, at Clinton Hall, Astor Place, New York.] January, 1854 to September 1, 1855. 1 vol- ume and 16 numbers. 640; 324 p. 4°. Continued as:
American Publishers’ Circular and Literary Gazette. Issued weekly by The Book Publishers’ Association. Temporary Committee Will- iam H. Appleton, George P. Putnam. Communications should be addressed to C. B. Norton, Assistant Librarian, No. 3 Appleton’s Building, 346 & 348 Broadway, New York. Vol. I., September to December, 1855. Vol. II.-VIII., 323 numbers, January 5, 1856, to December 1, 1862, 4°.
In July, 1856, Mr. Norton resigned his position as editor of the Publishers Circular and was succeeded by Charles Rudolph Rode, who since November, 1855, had published and edited the weekly Cri- terzon, one of the ablest critical journals of. that time. With the issue for July 10, 1858, the names of the Temporary Committee were dropped from the heading, and the following notice was substituted : Fee ducted under the direction of the Association by Charles R. Rode.” As a matter of fact, Mr, Rode from the start relieved the Book Trade Association of all financial responsibility in conducting the Pud/ish- ers’ Circular, assuming all risks himself in exchange for the patronage of the Association. In the issue for June 22, 1861, Mr. Rode made the following announcement: “ After the next number of this Journal, and until the revival of the Book Trade, we shall issue but one edition per month. The entire absorption of public interest by current events has caused a nearly complete cessation in the demand for new books, and publishers have in consequence discontinued their usual issue. As our principal purpose is to inform the general trade of the operations of the publishing and literary world, it has seemed advisable to adopt
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY XXIX
this course, both from apparent and economical reasons. The next number, after that of the 29th June, will be published on the rsth of
July.’ Continued as: “4 American Publishers’ Circular and Literary Gazette. Conducted by Charles R. Rode, 39 Walker Street, New York. New series. Vol.
I. 6 numbers, January 15, 1863 to April 1, 1863. 4°.
In the issue of April 1, 1863, Mr. Rode announced that he had transferred The Publishers’ Circular to G. W. Childs, of Philadelphia, who continued it as:
35 The Publishers’ Circular and Literary Gazette. Octavo series. Issued on the rst and rsth of each Month, at $2.00 per Annum in Advance. Vol. I., May 1, 1863 to Vol. XVIII., no. 6, January 15, 1872.. 8°.
On January 24, 1872, Frederick Leypoldt purchased from Mr. Childs the rights in 7ke Publishers’ Circular and merged it into his Weekly Trade Circular under the following title:
36 The Publishers’ and Stationers’ Weekly Trade Circular. A Journal devoted to the interests of the Publishing, Printing, Book, Stationery, News, Music, Art, and Fancy Trades, and Associated Branches. With which is incorporated the American Literary Gazette and Publishers’ Circular, Established in the year 1852. Official Organ of the Publishers’ Board of Trade. F. Leypoldt, Editor and Publish- er, 712 Broadway, New York. Newseries. Vol. I. beginning with No. 2, dated Thursday, January 25, 1872. 8°.
Beginning with the issue for January 2, 1873, which also initiated Vol. III., the title of the 7rade Circular was changed as follows:
37 The Publishers’ Weekly, [Formerly the Trade Circular,| with which is incorporated the American Literary Gazette and Publishers’ Cir- cular. Established in the year 1852. Official Organ of the Publish- ers’ Board of Trade. F. Leypoldt, Editor and Publisher, 712 Broad- way, New York. 8°.
Beginning with the issue for February 22, 1873, The Publishers? Weekly was published on Saturdays instead of on Thursdays as before. With the issue of February 21, 1874, The Publishers’ Weekly changed the line in its heading to read ‘‘ Official Organ of the Publishers’ Board of Trade and the American Book Trade Union.,”’
Beginning with vol. VI., July 4, 1874, the title of the Week/y was changed to read:
37a The Publishers’ Weekly. A Journal specially devoted to the interests of the Book and Stationery Trade. With which is incorporated the American Literary Gazette, etc. F. Leypoldt, Editor and Publisher, 37 Park Row, New York. 8°.
With the issue of July 22, 1876, the line ‘‘ Official Organ of the. Publishers’ Board of Trade and the Am. Book Trade Association”’ was omitted from the heading of The Pudblishers’ Weekly. And, finally, beginning with the issue for January 6, 1877, vol. XI., No. 1, the title of the Weekly became:
3ib The Publishers’ Weekly. The American Book Trade Journal. With which is incorporated the American Literary Gazette and Publish- ers’ Circular. [Established 1852.] F. Leypoldt, Editor and Pub- lisher, 37 Park Row, New York. 8°.
With the issue for January s, 1879, beginning Vol. XV., R. R. Bow- ker became the proprietor of The Publishers’ Weekly, and the im-
xxx AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
print became “‘ Publication Office, 37 Park Row, New York.” On the editorial page appeared the names: F. Lrypoipt, Bibliographical Lditor. R. R. Bowser, General Editor. With the issue of July 5) 1880, and continuing until the issue of March 29, 1884, Mr. Leypoldt s name again appeared on the title-page as ‘‘ Editor and Publisher,’”’ Mr. Leypoldt having leased the Week/y from Mr. Bowker when the latter went abroad to represent Harper & Brothers in England, Upon Mr. Leypoldt’s death on March 2g, 1884, Mr. Bowker resumed control of The Publishers’ Weekly, and the imprint again became ‘‘ Publica- tion Office’’ and the street address. : ‘
The Weekly Trade Circular was established at the suggestion of Mr. Leypoldt, by Leypoldt & Holt, 451 Broome Street, New York, in December, 1868, as
38 Literary Bulletin, A Monthly Record of Current Literature. 8 nos. 8°.
In September, 1869, the title was changed to
39 The Trade Circular and Literary Bulletin. A Special Medium of Inter-Communication for Publishers, Booksellers, and Stationers. Sent to the 7rade only. Beginning with Vol. III., No. 1, September, 1870, the title of The Trade Circular was changed to 49 The Trade Circular and Publishers’ Bulletin. A Special Medium of Inter-Communication for Publishers, Manufacturers, Importers, and Dealers in Books, Stationery, Music, Prints, and Miscellaneous Goods sold at the Book, Stationery, Music, and Print Stores. Sent to the Trade only. In April, 1871, beginning with Vol. IV., No. 1, Mr. Leypoldt as- sumed sole charge of The Trade Circular, and removed his office to 25 Bond Street. Of Vol. V. only three numbers were issued. It was succeeded in January, 1872, by 41 The Publishers’ and Stationers’ Weekly Trade Circular. A Journal devoted to the interests of the Publishing, Printing, Book, Stationery, News, Music, Art, and Fancy Trades, and Associated Branches. Official Organ of the Publishers’ Board of Trade. F. Leypoldt, Editor and Publisher, 712 Broadway, New York. New series. Vol. I., No. 1, January 18, 1872. For continuation see title No. 36.
#2 The Bookbuyer’s Manual, a Catalogue of Foreign and American Books in every branch of literature, with a classified index. Compiled by G. P. Putnam. New York, George P. Putnam & Co., 1852. 236+ 8-++48 p. 8°. Resumed in 1872, and continued as Best Reading.
43 Norton’s Literary Register and Bookbuyers’ Almanac for 1853. New York: Charles B, Norton. 1853. 132 p. 12°.
44 Norton’s Literary Almanac for 1852; containing important literary information ; Accounts of American Libraries, Literary Necrology of the Past Year, including Short Biographical Sketches, Miscella- neous Notices, etc. An Annual of Interesting Facts, and a Statistical Companion, valuable to the Bookseller, the Librarian and the Read- ing Man. New York: Charles B. Norton. 1853. 52 p. 12°,
45 Norton’s Literary and Educational Register for 1854. New York: Charles B. Norton. 1854. 4°.
Contained a review of the year 1853.
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY XXX
46 Booksellers’ Trade List and Publishers’ Register. No. 1, April, 1854. Continued to July, 1854, or longer.—Sadzx.'
47 Appleton’s New Catalogue of American and English Books, comprising a most extensive assortment of the best books in every department of Literature and Science. With a Complete Index. New York, D. Appleton & Co., 1855. 242 p. 8°.
48 Triibner’s Bibliographical Guide to American Literature; being a classi- fied list of books, in all departments of literature and science, pub- lished in the United States of America during the last forty years. With an introduction, notes, three appendices, and an index. Lon- don: Triibner & Co., r2 Paternoster Row, 1855. xxxii, 108 p. 16°.
49 The Criterion. Literary and Critical Journal. November 3, 1855 to July 12, 1856. New York, Charles Rudolph Rode, 113 Nassau Street. 1855-1856. 2vols. 37 numbers. iv+416;176p. 4°.
Charles R. Rode afterwards became the editor of the American Pub- lishers’ Circular.
50 The American Catalogue of Books; or, English Guide to American Lit- erature, giving the full title of original works published in the United States since the year 1800. With especial reference to works of In- terest to Great Britain. With the prices at which they may be ob- tained. [Compiled by Sampson Low.] London, 1856. vii+3190p. 8°.
F Asa matter of fact the catalogue contains no books published before
1840.
51 Norton’s Literary Register; or, Annual Book List, for 1856. A Cata- logue of Books, including New Editions and Reprints published in the United States during the Year 1855; containing titles, number of pages, prices and names of publishers, with ¢n index of subjects. [Compiled by Reuben A. Guild.] New York: Charles B. Norton. 1856. 138 p. 8°.
52 A Catalogue of Valuable Works relating to America.... [New York: Charles B. Norton. 1856.] 10p. 8°.
53 Norton’s Literary Letter. New York: Charles B. Norton. 1857-1862. 6 numbers, 41-++7 p. 4°.
No. 4 contains ‘* The Bibliography of the State of Maine.’’ This was illowed by a ‘‘ New Series,’’ of which No. 1 contains ‘‘ The Bibliography of the State of New Hampshire,” and No. 2 ‘‘ The Bib- liography ot the State of Vermont.’’ Vermont excepted, the bibli- graphics are crude, imperfect and badly arranged.
54 Bibliotheca Americana. New York: Charles B. Norton. 1857. 24 p. 8°.
55 The Bookseller’s Medium and Publisher's Advertiser. [Issued on the 1st and 15th of each month.] Conducted by Orville A. Roorbach, Room 36, Appleton’s Building, 20o Broadway. New York, 3 vols., July 15, 1858, to April 15, 1861.
56 Bibliographical Guide to American Literature, Classed list of books Babe lished in the United States during the last 40 years. With biblio- graphical Introduction, Notes, and Alphabetical Index. Compiled and edited by Nicholas Triibner. London, N. Tribner & Co., 1859. cxlix-+554 p. 8°.
Triibner & Co. published, in 1855, a ‘‘ Catalogue of books relating to America,’’ and another in 1873.
xxxii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
57 Fortnightly Book List and Literary Miscellany, Devoted to the inter- ests of Publishers, Booksellers, Stationers and Book Buyers. Phila- delphia. (?) 1859-(?). 4°.
98 The Bookseller. A Monthly Journal Devoted to Literature and Educa- tion. San Francisco, Cal., H. H. Bancroft & Co. 1860. 4°.
9 Milwaukee Monthly Bookseller. Milwaukee, Wis. Strickland & Co.
186078 So
60, . . Catalogue of ... Works relating to... America. New York: Charles B. Norton. 1860. 48 p. 8°.
61 Catalogue . . . of Books, relating chiefly to America. Compiled by Charles B. Norton. New York: John A. Gray, Printer. 1862. 138 p. 8°.
62 The Booksellers’ and Stationers’ Trade List: containing the Names of the Booksellers in the United States and Canada. Published, under the Auspices of the New York Trade Sale Association, by Miller & Hopkinson, New York, May, 1863. 64 p. 8°.
63 Rickey & Carrotl’s Catalogue Raisonné, a general and classified List of most important Works in nearly Every Department of Literature and Science, published in the United States and England. Witha Bibliographical Introduction. Cincinnati, O., Rickey & Carroll, 1863. 259 p. 8°.
64 Catalogue of the American books in the Library of the British Museum at Christmas, 1856. By Henry Stevens. [including] Catalogue of the Canadian and other British North American books in the Brit- ish Museum. London, Henry Stevens, 1866. xxxii+628-+17 p. 8°.
__ (Also, ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana,” 1861; ‘‘ Historical Nuggets,”’ 1862;
Bibliotheca Historica, Boston, 1870. ]
65 Bibliotheca Americana Vetustissima. A description of works relating to America published between the years 1492 and 155. New York, George P. Philes. 1866, liv-+s19 p.; Supp., Paris, Librarie Tross, 1872. iv-+40+199 p. 8°.
66 The American Catalogue of Books, (original and reprints,) Published in the United States from Jan., 1861, to Jan., 1866, with date of pub- lication, size, price, and, publisher’s name. With Supplement, Con- taining Pamphlets, Sermons and Addresses on the Civil War in the United States, 1861-1866; and Appendix, Containing Names of Learned Societies and other Literary Associations, with a List of their Publications, 1861-1866. Compiled and arranged by James Kelly. New York: John Wiley & Son, 535 Broadway. London: N. Triibner & Co. 1866. 44-303 DS.
66a The American Catalogue of Books, (original and reprints,) Published in the United States from Jan., 1866, to Jan., 1871, with date of pub- lication, size, price, and publishers’ names; with Supplement, con- taining Names of Learned Societies and other Literary Associations, with a List of their Publications, 1866-1871. Vol. II. Compiled and arranged by James Kelly. New York: John Wiley & Son, 15 Astor Place. London: N, Triibner & Co., 1871. 4+488 p. 8°.
si The Uniform Trade List Circular, For the benefit of Publishers, Book-
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Xxxiii
sellers, News Dealers, and Stationers, and Every Branch of Trade Connected with these Interests. Philadelphia: Howard Challen, 1308 Chestnut Street. [1867.] 325 p. 8°.
88 The Book Buyer, a Summary of American and Foreign Literature. New York, Scribner, Welford & Co., October 15, 1867-. 8°. Continued to the present time by Charles Scribner’s Sons.
69A Dictionary of Books relating to America, from its discovery to the present time. By Joseph Sabin. ‘A painfull work it is I’ll assure’ you, and more difficult, wherein what toyle hath been taken, as no man thinketh so no man believeth, but he hath made the triall.’’ Ant. a Wood, Preface to the History of Oxford. New York: Joseph Sabin, 84 Nassau Street. 1868-1892. Vol. I-XIX, A to Simms, and Parts. CXV-CXVI, Simms to Smith (Henry Hollingsworth.)
The half-title, prefixed to each volume, bears the title ‘* Bibliotheca
Americana,’’ which has become the popular title of the work.
70 Publishers and Stationers’ Trade List Directory for 1869. Philadelphia: Howard Challen. 1869. 6+xvi+831-+901-996-+10 p. 8°.
This volume has two sub-titles: (1) ‘‘ Publishers’ and Manufacturin Stationers’ Uniform Trade List Directory for 1869” ; (2) ‘‘ Publishers’ an Stationers’ Uniform Trade List Directory, comprising all the Books, Old and New, of upwards of Two Hundred Publishers. Also, Trade Lists, Cards, &c., of Leading Wholesale Stationers. Published and Arranged for Reference for Librarians, Book-buyers, Booksellers, News Dealers and Stationers.”’
71 The American Catalogue of Books for 1869. Containing complete month- ly lists of all the books published in the United States during the year 1869, with statement of size, price, place of publication, and publisher’s name. Jo which are prefixed An Alphabeticaland a Classified Index. New York: Leypoldt & Holt, Office of the Trade Circular and Literary Bulletin, 451 Broome Street, 1870. xxi-+6- 103 p. 8°.
Continued as:
72 The Trade Circular Annual for 1871, including the American Catalogue of books published in the Unjted States during the year 1870, with their sizes, prices and publishers’ names; also, a list of the principal books published in England; a publishers’, manufacturers’, and im- porters’ directory, and alphabetical list of nearly eight hundred articles suitable for sale at the book, stationery, music and fancy goods stores; a summary of American and English novelties, and miscellaneous literary and trade information. New York: Office of The Trade Circular and Literary Bulletin, No. 25 Bond Street. 1871. 8+772 p. 8°.
Continued as:
73 The Annual Catalogue. [Third Year.] Containing an alphabetical list of books published in the United States, and imported, during the year 1871. With a classified index. New York: Office of the Pub- lishers’ and Stationers’ Weekly Trade Circular. 712 Broadway. 1872. xii+g1 p. 8°.
The list of books is preceded by an article entitled ‘‘ Literature in
America in 1871.”
74The Uniform Trade List Annual, embracing the full trade lists of
xxxiv AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Publishers, together with advertisements and business cards of prominent firms connected with the Book and Stationery Trades. With Alphabetical Indexes af Firms and Trade Special- ties. New York: Office of The Publishers’ Weekly, 37 Park Row. October, 1873. 8°.
75 The Publishers’ Trade List Annual, [date of year.] [Number of year published.] New York: Office of The Publishers’ Weekly. [Date of publication.] 8°.
The last volume issued thus far was that for 1897, ‘“‘ Twenty-fifth
Year,” published August, 1897.
18 American Publisher and Bookseller, a Record of American and For- eign Literature. Monthly. New York, George R. Cathcart & Co., 1868 to 1870.
This journal was edited by George R. Cathcart, who in 1870 joined the editorial staff of Ivison, Blakeman, Taylor & Co. He was first in partner- ship with H. C. Moses as Cathcart & Co., at 39 Park Row. When Mr. Moses retired Mr. Cathcart continued the journal alone at 4 Bond Street.
17 The American Booksellers’ Guide. [Published Monthly] by The American News Company, 117, rr9, and raz Nassau Street, New York. 1869-1875. 6 vols. and 8 numbers. re2°.
In September, 1875, the title of the above was changed to Tke Amer: can Bookseller, and continued semi-monthly, as an octavo, by The Ameri- can News Company, until September, 188, when the size was enlarged to quarto. On January 1, 1883, N. R. Monachesi became the ietor of the American Bookseller, and continued it as a semi-monthly until the end of ats when the journal for a short time appeared with the imprint of W. P. pee Se and then passed out of existence.
In September, 1894, The American News Company started Tke Book seller, Newsdealer, and Stationer, Published Semi-monthly, at 156 Fifth Avenue, New York, 8°, which is continued to the present time.
18 The American Bibliopolist. J. Sabin & Sons, Publishers, 84 Nassau Street, New York, 1869-1877. 8 vols. 8°,
79 Bibliotheca Americana. Catalogue of a Valuable Collection of Books and Pamphlets relating to America. For sale by Robert Clarke & Co., Cincinnati, 1869, 1871, 1873, 1875-1879, 1883, 1886, 1887, 1893. 8°. & Bibliotheca Munselliana. A Catalogue of the Books and Pamphlets
issued from the Press of-Joel Munsell from the year 1828 to 1870. Albany, N. Y., Joel Munsell, 872. 191 p. 8°,
81 Bibliographica Catholica Americana. A List of Works by Catholic Authors, and Published in the United States. By Rey. Joseph M._ Finotti. Pt. 1I., from 1784 to 1820, inclusive. New York, Catholic Publication House, 1872. 319 p. 8°.
The work was never completed.
8° Western Bookseller, Published monthly by J. Fred. Waggoner, rs5 Washington Street, Chicago, Il. 1879-1886. (?) 8°,
83 Books of 1879. New York: Office of The Publishers’ Weekly. 188. 127 p. 8°.
A reprint of ‘* The Title-Slip Regis Monthly] Supplem Library Journal.” It contained t nytt of Li eaiaa eae fifty issues of The Puddishers’ Weekly, from January 4 to December 27. 1879, with descriptive notes and library headings for those chiefly impor- tant. The lists were printed on one side of the sheet only.
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY XXXV
*4 The American Catalogue under the direction of F. Leypoldt {Vol. I.] Author and Title Entries of books in print and for sale (including reprints and importations) July 1, 1876 Compiled by Lynds E. Jones New York A. C. Armstrong & Son 714 Broadway 1880. 28 +834+[Appendix Contributed lists of books published since 1876, with author and title index] 112 p.4°. Vol. II,... Subject En- tries .. . xx+492 p. 4°.
84a The American Catalogue founded by F. Leypoldt 1876-1884 Books re- corded (including reprints and importations) July 1, 1876-June 30, 1884 Compiled under the editorial direction of R: R. Bowker by Miss A. I. Appleton I. Author-and-title alphabet II. Subject al- phabet, etc. New York Office of The Publishers’ Weekly 188s. xxix-+2+446+260 p. 4°.
Contains, also, list of United States Government Publications, Jan.
1, 1881 to June 30, 1884; record of the publications of Literary and Sci-
entific Societies, ‘‘as far as reported’’; books published in series; and
‘“omissions from cheap libraries.”’ 84b The American Catalogue founded by F: Leypoldt 1884-1890 Books
recorded (including reprints and importations) July 1, 1884-June 30, 1890 Compiled under the editorial direction of R: R. Bowker by A. I. Appleton and others I. Author-and-title alphabet II. Subject alphabet, etc. New York Office of The Publishers’ Weekly 1891. XXXii+2+ 584444318 p. 4°.
Contains, also, list of United States Government Publications, July
1, 1884 to June 30, 1890; State Publications for the period July 1, 1884
to June 30, 1890; Publications of Societies, including Transactions,
etc., July 1, 1884 to June 30, 1890; Books in Series.
&e The American Catalogue founded by F: Leypoldt 1890-1895 Books re- corded (including reprints and importations) July 1, 1890-June 30, 1895 Compiled under the editorial direction of R: R. Bowker I. Author-and-title alphabet II. Subject alphabet, etc. New York Office of The Publishers’ Weekly 1896. xxxiiit2+503+4+251+44 142 Pp. 4°.
Contains, also, list of United States Government Publications, July
1, 1890 to June 30, 1895; State Publications for the period July 1, 1890
to June 30, 1895; Publications of Societies, inclu ing Transactions,
etc., July 1, 1890 to June 30, 1895; Books in Series, including series of lectures and prize essays.
8 The Annual American Catalogue [1886 to 1896] Being the full titles, with descriptive notes, of all books recorded in the Publishers’ Weekly,* [1886 to 1896] with author, title and subject index, puob- lishers’ annual lists and directory of publishers. New York Office of The Publishers’ Weekly 1886 to 1896. 8°.
*In the volume for 1890 the following line appeared on the title-page aie Supplement to The American Catalogue, 1884-90.) The volumes or 1891, 1892, 1893 and 1894 were respectively the second, third and fourth supplements to ‘“‘The American Catalogue 1884-9o.”’ The volume for I became the first supplement to ‘‘ The American Catalogue, 1890-95, aid the volume for 1896 is the second supplement.
86 The Bookmart. A Magazine of Literary and Library Intelligence, De- voted to the Individual Interests of the Public in the Purchase, Ex- change or Sale, of Books, old, fine, rare, scarce, and out-of-the-way, both American and Foreign. Published monthly. Pittsburgh, Pa.,
xxxvi AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bookmart Publishing Co. June 13, 1883 to November, 1890. (?) 8 vols. 90 numbers. 8°.
87 The Newsman. Journal for Newsdealers and Publishers. New York, John J. Daly, 42 W. 23d Street. 1884-. 4°. Now The Bookseller and Newsman, A Journal for all engaged in the Book, Periodical and Newsdealing Industries, at 49 W. 24th Street, New York.
88 Book Fiend. Devoted to Antiquarian and Second-hand Books, Fort- nightly. Minneapolis, Minn., C. D. Raymer & Co., 243 S. Fourth Avenue. 1885-1895. (?) 8°.
89 Bibliographer and Reference List. [Published Monthly by] Moulton, Wenborne & Co., 37 Court Street, Buffalo, N. Y. 1888-1890 (?). 8°.
% The Publishing World. Issued monthly. Hugh Craig, editor. New York, Richard Brinckerhoff, publisher, 771 Broadway. February to November-December, 1889. 10 numbers. With illustrations. Fol.
91 Caspar’s Directory of the Americah Book, News and Stationery Trade,
Wholesale and Retail . . . in the United Statesand Canada... .
By C. N. Caspar . . . Milwaukee, Wis., C. N. Caspar’s Book Em- porium. 1889. xviiitr434 p. 8°.
Section II. contains a Digest of the Trade Lists of the various Book,
Subscription and Music Publishers. Section ITI. contains a Digest of the
Trade Lists of the Manufacturing and Jobbing Stationers, and the Blank Book and Paper Makers, and Section VI. contains Trade Bibliographies,
Trade Journals, etc.
% The Bookbuyer and Seller. A Monthly devoted to the interests of book buyers and sellers. Cincinnati, O., 134 Main Street. 1891-(?) Sen
93 The Bookseller and Stationer. A Weekly Book-trade Journal. New York, N. R. Monachesi, Clinton Hall. November 2, 1891-(?) 4°.
94 The Publisher. A Fortnightly Journal Devoted to the Interests of Pub- lishers, Booksellers, Newsdealers, and Librarians, and to Periodical Literature. New York, C. K. Dabney, 57 Rose Street, November 2, 1891, to February, 1892. Small 4°.
95 The Western Bookseller. Published every other Saturday by F. J. Schulte & Co., and Charles Sergel & Co., Chicago, Ill. May, 1891-(?) 16°.
_, With the issue of July 4, 1891, Charles Sergel & Co. became sole pub- lishers. In November of the same ear the journal was transferred to Johnston & Woodworth, 184 Monroe Street, Chicago, who published it for
a few months only,
% The International Bookseller. New York, N. R. Monachesi, 328 Pearl Street. 4 vols. February, 1892, to 1893-(?) 8°,
97 The Book and Newsdealer. San Francisco, Cal., W. E. Price. 1893- (?) Sr
98 Paper-covered Books: a catalogue; by [W. E. Price] the editor and pub-
lisher of The Book and News Dealer, San Francisco, Cal., W. E. Price, 1203% Market Street. 1894. 4+205 p. 8°.
9 The Bookseller. Devoted to the interests of the book trade. Succeeding to the Book Department of The Western Stationer. Publication Office, 53 Dearborn Street, Chicago, Ill. February, 1897-. 8°,
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY XXxvii
1” Western Newsman. A Monthly Devoted to the Interests of Newsdeal- ers, Booksellers, Stationers and Publishers. W. C. Stone, Editor and Publisher. J. L. Regan, Manager, 87-91 Third Avenue, Chicago, Ti (2) 8%
To the foregoing may be added the useful trade cata- logues, on special subjects, issued by C. N. Caspar, educa- tional and law ; Dyrsen & Pfeiffer, French literature ; Lemcke & Buechner, and their predecessors, B. Westermann & Co., foreign literature in general; E. Steiger & Co., educational and foreign literature; Charles Scribner’s Sons, music; and D. Van Nostrand Co., scientific literature. These, and the numerous other booksellers’ and publishers’ catalogues of the present day we cannot mention in detail, because it would be difficult to bring the matter within reasonable space limit.
Work is now going forward, in the office of The Publishers’ Weekly, upon a volume, scheduling the books of the early part of the century not in print in 1876, which, with the volume of ‘““The American Catalogue” for 1895-1900, will complete a record of American books of the nineteenth century.
xxxvili AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
ADDENDA AND CORRECTIONS
After the Chronological List, which forms Chapter VI., had been printed the author had an opportunity to see some of the publications the titles of which he had been obliged to take at second hand, and found that the data which he printed varied considerably from the originals. This was partic- ularly the case in the following title, as will be seen by com- paring it with that on page xxv, which was accepted on the authority of Petzholdt’s ‘‘ Bibliotheca Bibliographica” :
The Untted States Literary Advertiser and Publishers’ Circular. A Monthly Register of Literature, Fine Arts, &c. New York, J. H. & H. G. Langley, 57 Chatham Street. 1841-1843 (?).
Vol. x, no. 1, is dated July, 1841. It was a quarto and published at $x ayear. With the June issue, 1841, the Advertiser was published “ for free circulation.’ In July, 1842,a new series was begun in octavo size. No. 20, dated July, 1843, seems to have been the last issue so far as can be ascertained.
The following are titles of other book-trade journals which have come under the notice of the author:
Monthly Trade Gazette. New York, G. S. Wells, 140 Nassau Street. 1855-1856 (?). 4°. Vol. 1, nos, x and 2, dated April and May, 1855, were published gg S. Wells. Nos. 3 and 4, June and July, 185s, were published by O. F. Par- sons, also at 140 Nassau Street. In August, 1855, J. G. Wells, first at 140 Nassau Street, then at 11 Beekman Street, became the publisher and seems to have carried it on until October, 1856 (vol 2, no. 6).
The American Index. A Descriptive Record of New Publications, and Repository of Literary Intelligence, for the use of Authors, Pub- lishers, etc. Boston, A. A. Cowdry, 14 Franklin Avenue. £855:0 (8% The author has seen only v. 1, no. 1, dated July, 1855.
Monthly Atheneum, Elbridge Harding Bullard, [and] Grove Hinman Loomis, Editors. Boston, Robinson & Richardson, Publishers, 119 Washington Street. 1856. Octavo Series.
This journal succeeded The Literary Bulletin and Gentleman’s Atheneum of neither of which the author has been able to find any trace; nor can it be ascertained how long the Monthly Atheneum lived beyond vol, 1, no. 1, August, 1856.
The Western Bookseller. (Monthly.] Chicago, Ill., The Western News
Company. 1868-(?). 16°.
Vol. 1, no. 1, is dated January, 1868. With no. 7 the title was enlarged to: The Western Bookseller: A Monthly Record of Current Literature. The author cannot find trace of this journal beyond no. 7.
The American Publisher and Bookseller, (see title, page XXxiv,) it seems, was sold by its founder, George R. Cathcart, in 1869, to Frederick B. Perkins, the well-known librarian, who kept the publication afloat until December, 1869.
CHAPTER VI SKETCHES OF SOME AMERICAN BOOKSELLER-BIBLIOGRAPHERS
N conclusion, a few words may not be out of place con- cerning the personality and the endeavors of some of the booksellers who devoted their lives to the service of American bibliography. The facts relating to Mr. Roorbach’s life and career are now published for the first time. In preparing the sketch of Obadiah Rich the author has drawn upon the data found in Triibner’s ‘‘ Guide to American Literature,” and in Henry Harrisse’s ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana Vetustissima ;”’ in preparing the sketch of Henry Stevens the author has quoted from a ‘‘ Tribute to Henry Stevens,” written by George W. Smalley for the New York 7ribune, April 2, 1886, and con- sulted Allibone’s ‘‘ Critical Dictionary of English Literature” (1863-1871.) ORVILLE A, ROORBACH The pioneer among American bibliographers was Orville A. Roorbach, born at Red Hook Landing, now Tivoli, on the Hudson, in the State of New York, January 20, 1803. His forefathers were Dutch farmers, who settled in this country in the eighteenth century, and were remarkable especially for their indomitable perseverance and intellectual ability. His boyhood was spent on his father’s farm; he was sent to Albany to be educated, and in 1817 he came to New York. He was employed by Evert Duyckinck, then one of the lead- ing booksellers of New York, whose bookstore was at No. 68 Water Street, in the rear of his dwelling at No. 9 Old Slip. He served his apprenticeship with Mr. Duyckinck, and when the latter retired in 1825, Roorbach became, in a measure, his successor by the purchase of a large portion of his stock. He was one of the first to encourage stereotyping in this country, his initial attempt in this direction being ‘‘ Evenings at Home,” and several of the works of Mrs. Hofland.
xl AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
Attracted by the rich field which the South then offered to the bookseller, Roorbach removed to Charleston, S.C., in 1830. There his genial disposition and courtly manners, com- bined with his knowledge of books, soon won him many friends and well-wishers, and for nearly twenty years his store, ‘‘At the Sign of the Red Bible,’ was a favorite resort for the literary people of what was in those days the richest commercial city in the South.
As has already been noted, Roorbach, soon after he began his career as a bookseller, devoted himself to making a cata- logue of all books in the American market of which he could obtain the titles. This material he began to digest and com- plete while in Charleston, though it was not until 1849, and after he had returned to New York, that he succeeded in publishing the first volume of his ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana.”’ To form an idea of the industry of Roorbach, it need only be pointed out that this volume contains nearly 25,000 titles. When it is further borne in mind that the compiler was obliged to collect his data chiefly from the most uncertain sources—as he was for many years at considerable distance from the publishing centres—one can easily imagine how laborious the task must have been, and condone the more readily all the shortcomings of the work. Many as they may be, his untiring industry supplied a work of lasting use- fulness.
After Roorbach’s return to New York, circa 1848-1849, he took charge of the wholesale department of Wiley & Putnam ; when they dissolved partnership he joined fortunes with his old friend, George Palmer Putnam. In 1852 he went into business on his own account as a book jobber and publisher. His first stand was at 12 Vesey Street, but he shortly re- moved to 18 Ann Street. After his failure in 1857, the busi- ness was transferred to Edward P. Rudd, who, with his father, Rev. George R. Rudd, had been the ‘‘Company” of the firm of J. C. Derby & Company, at Auburn, New York. Rudd shortly after took into partnership George W. Carleton, who, up to that time, had been in the employ of Burnham, Plumb & Co., then the largest and most important book im- porting and commission house in New York City. The firm became Rudd & Carleton; after Mr. Rudd’s death, in 1861, George W. Carleton; and since Mr. Carleton’s retirement,
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY xli
George W. Dillingham, or, more recently still, G. W. Dilling- ham Co,
After his failure in business Roorbach began the publica- tion of the Booksellers’ Medium and Publishers’ Advertiser, of which he issued three volumes from July, 1858 to April 15, 1861.
Roorbach, after 1857, was also employed at various times by Dix & Edwards, (with whom George William Curtis was associated,) publishers of the ill-fated Putnam's New Monthly Magazine; then by Wiley & Halstead, D. Appleton & Co., and Harper & Brothers.
While travelling for one of these firms he was stricken with paralysis on June 19, 1861, in Schenectady, N. Y. He was found unconscious on a doorstep; when taken to a police- Station it was found that he was dying, and on searching his clothing his identity was revealed. His family, living at that time in Yonkers, N. Y., was notified at once by telegraph, but he was dead before his wife and daughter could reach him. On the 25th of June, 1861, his body was buried in Greenwood Cemetery, in Brooklyn, N. Y.
His was the fate of all pioneers—scant recognition dur- ing his lifetime. and a perfunctory obituary nétice (of nine- teen lines) in the American Publishers’ Circular and Literary Gazette on the 29th of June, 1861. With the fatuity of all in- ventors and reformers, Roorbach spared neither himself nor his family in bringing his work to conclusion. Everything was sacrificed, even his health ; and in the end his pecuniary reward was a pittance. Yet, evenso, he was satisfied ; for he lived in the consciousness of having done a necessary work for his fellowmen to the best of his ability, and he died in the hope of the greater glory—the gratitude of the generations which followed after.
CHARLES B. NORTON
Before 1834 the book trade of the United States was with- out a journal devoted exclusively to its interests. Zhe Port Folio, though it gave considerable space to reviews of books and notes on authors, under the able editorship of ‘‘ Oliver Oldschool,” (Joseph Dennie,) was always a journal of mis- cellaneous information. The same might be said of Zhe North American Review, and of The Critic, the latter edited
xli AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
and published in New York for six months, 1828-1829, under great difficulties, by William Leggett. I say ‘‘ under great difficulties,” because the editor was obliged not only to write most of the matter for the later issues, but also to set up the type, and to distribute the papers to his subscribers.
In 1834, George Palmer Putnam, then but twenty years of age, and an under-clerk in Jonathan Leavitt’s bookstore in New York, published anonymously, through the printing- house of West & Trow, Zhe Booksellers’ Advertiser and Month- ly Register of New Publications, American and Foreign. Twelve numbers were published from January to December, 1834, after which Mr. Putnam abandoned the undertaking, because, as he said in his valedictory, (when for the first time his name also became known as editor,) ‘‘it cannot be prop- erly attended to without interfering with more legitimate duties, or infringing on midnight hours.” This was the first attempt in this country to furnish a bookseller’s journal with a statistical record of American publications. The editor also provided lists of foreign publications, and occasional ‘*notes”’ or short reviews of the leading books.
In July, 1841, not 1831, as the author was misled into stating on page xxv, J.& H. Langley, at 57 Chatham Street, New York, began the publication of a monthly, entitled Zhe United States Literary Advertiser and Publishers’ Circular, ‘‘A Monthly Register of Literature, Fine Arts, &c.” The periodical was at first intended specially for literary people, and only inci- dentally for the book trade ; but it never outgrew the limita- tions of a book trade journal. It was started as a quarto, at $1 a year. With the issue for June, 1842, the paper was published ‘‘For free circulation.” In July, 1842, a new series was begun as an octavo. It seems to have maintained but a struggling existence. The latest issue I have been able to find is No. 20, dated July, 1843. It was conducted on the plan. afterward followed by Norton in his Literary Gazette.
The Book Trade, ‘‘ A Monthly Literary Journal, Record of New Publications and Advertiser,” was advertised to appear in New York in 1850, but it has proved impossible to find a trace of it. It is more than likely that it was never published.
In May, 1851, Charles B. Norton, then a book agent at 71 Chambers Street, (in the Irving House,) New York, began
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY xiii
the publication of a monthly journal entitled Morton's Literary Advertiser. Mr. Norton was assisted in the editorship of his Advertiser by S. Hastings Grant, Librarian of the Mercantile Library, New York, and afterward Comptroller of New York City. Beginning with the issue for January, 1852, the title of the journal was changed to Morton's Literary Gazette and Publishers’ Circular, and continued until September, 1855. In that year the Book Publishers’ Association became the owners of the Literary Gazette and changed its name to American Publishers’ Circular and Literary Gazette.
Mr. Norton was born in Hartford, Conn., July 1, 1825. In 1850 he came to New York and established himself as a library and purchasing agent at 71 Chambers Street. A year later he began the publication of Morton's Literary Advertiser, to assist him in bringing his name before the library profes- sion. Later, when the Duyckincks abandoned their Literary World, Norton enlarged the scope of his journal, which had already become Worton's Literary Gazette, and addressed himself to the reader as well as to the librarian and book- seller. Indeed, Norton spared no pains to represent the bibliographical and bibliopolistic interests of the United States; but his efforts were only indifferently successful, owing, prob- ably, to the fact that his enterprise was not backed by a suffi- cient interest in the subject.
In 1855, The Book Publishers’ Association was formed and assumed the publication of Morton's Literary Gazette, changing the name to the American Publishers’ Circular, etc. Mr. Norton was retained as managing editor of the publication, and acted also as Assistant Secretary and Libra- rian of The Book Publishers’ Association. In July, 1856, he severed his connection with the Association and with the Publishers’ Circular, and again devoted himself to his book- selling and publishing business. Besides the bibliograph- ical publications, noted on pages xxviii, xxx, and xxxi, Nor- ton also published Poole’s ‘‘ Index to Periodicals.”
In 1862 Col. Ratazzi organized the Garibaldi Guard, with which Norton went to the front. He served during the Civil War, was a member of General Fitz John Porter’s staff, and was mustered out with the rank of brigadier-general.
In 1867 he was appointed United States Commissioner to the Paris Exposition, having in 1866, according to the official
xliv AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
report of the United States Centennial Commission, been the first publicly to propose the Centennial Exposition. Mr. Nor- ton was well fitted for the position by experience, having served as Commissioner to the World’s Fair in London in 1851, and in 1853 as a juror in the New York World’s Fair. In 1873 he was called to Philadelphia by the Executive Com- mittee, and placed in charge of the press, the entire making public of the enterprise being placed in his hands, where his extensive knowledge of both the American and foreign press proved to be of the greatest value to the Centennial Board of Finance, under whose general direction he operated.
In 1883 he suggested and carried out the plan fora foreign exhibition in Boston, which proved a great success and led to the organization of the American Exhibition in London, 1887. Upon his return from London, Norton became editor of the Civil Service Chronicle.
In 1891, while in Chicago looking after details in behalf of the Fair Committee of the World’s Columbian Exhibition, he was stricken with paralysis, and died at the Palmer House, January 29.
CHARLES RUDOLPH RODE
Mr. Norton was succeeded as editor of the Publishers Gazette by Charles Rudolph Rode, who had just then been obliged to discontinue the publication of The Criterion. Mr. Rode was of German descent, and was born in New York in 1826. He was educated at Dr. Charles Anthon’s Columbia Grammar School, and subsequently studied law, but never took a degree. In 1845, or thereabouts, he became associated with John Doggett in publishing the ‘‘New York City Directory,” and upon Mr. Doggett’s death succeeded to his business. Mr. Rode published the * Directory” for several years, and his systematic mind and his thoroughness greatly improved the character of that necessary volume. Mr. Rode also published the first ‘‘ United States Post-Office Directory.” He also for several months published a journal entitled the United States Review, which sustained a high character, but was then discontinued for want of patronage.
In November, 1855, Rode published the first number of The Criterion, a weekly critical newspaper, which was con- tinued for nearly a year. It was an attempt to establish an ‘rgan of purely literary communication and conscientious
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY xlv
criticism, and as such was the best literary paper published in this country at that time.
In 1856 he was elected secretary of The Book Publishers’ Association, and assumed editorial control of the Pudlishers’ Circular. Two years later he became proprietor of the jour- nal, and continued its publication until ill-health obliged him to transfer the Publishers’ Circular to G. W. Childs, of Phila- delphia, who, in turn, sold it in January, 1872, to Frederick Leypoldt, under whose management it later became the present Publishers’ Weekly.
Mr. Rode was a member of the editorial staff of Appletons’ ‘*New American Cyclopedia,” and read the ‘stereotype proofs” of the larger part of that work. In 1864 he was enabled, through the generosity of the book trade, to take an Atlantic voyage to restore his health. But on his return he soon relapsed into ill-health, and died April 12, 1865.
OBADIAH RICH
Obadiah Rich, whose name, if not his work, is familiar to all collectors of Americana, was born in Boston, Mass., in 1783. While at Harvard College he became a member of the Anthology Club, which for six years published Zhe Monthly Anthology, and May 5, 1806, established a Reading-Room and Library on Congress Street, Boston. This library was re- ceived with so much favor that the club, desirous of rendering its efforts more widely useful, transferred its property to ten trustees, of whom Rich was one, and applied through them to the legislature of Massachusetts for a charter. This was granted in 1807, under the name of ‘‘ The Proprietors of the Boston Athenzum.” In 1808 the library was removed from its modest quarters on Congress Street to larger and more convenient ones in Scollay’s Building in Court Street. Two years later it was removed to the building on Common (now Tremont) Street, north of the King’s Chapel burying-ground. In 1822 James Perkins presented to the library a building in Pearl Street, and in July, 1849, the Boston Athenzum re- moved to its present home on Beacon Street.
In early life, Rich devoted himself to botanical pursuits ; but having been made a member of the Massachusetts His- torical Society (March 5, 1805,) he directed his attention to the study of bibliography, which became his ruling passion
xlvi AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
through life. In 1815 he received the appointment of United States Consul for Valencia, in Spain, from which he was after- ward transferred to Madrid. It was during his residence in Andalusia that he succeeded in gathering a large number of valuable books, which Prescott, Irving, and Ticknor consulted at the time they visited Spain for the purpose of writing the works which have rendered their names celebrated. Rich was fortunate in having reached his field at a time when, owing to the troubled state of Spain, he was enabled to amass a rich collection of books and manuscripts at very moderate prices. Indeed, had there been no buyer for them on the spot at the moment of the dispersion of many old libraries, both ecclesiastical and civil, during the progress of the Revo- lution, it is probable that many volumes of the greatest rarity would have perished altogether as waste paper.
His means being limited, Rich visited London at intervals for the purpose of disposing, by private sale or by auction, of the rare books which he was continually collecting in Spain. It is to this circumstance that we owed the formation of four of the greatest collections of books in America—those of J. Carter Brown, of Providence, R. I.; of Samuel L. M. Barlow, of New York ; of Peter Force, of Washington ; and of Henry Cruse Murphy at Owl’s Head, Long Island, N. Y.—as well as the American portion of the ‘‘ Bibliotheca Grenvilliana,” which contains gems not to be found in any other library, and which makes this collection almost indispensable to the study of collections of similar publications. To Rich, also, be- longs the merit of having awakened the attention of other booksellers to the importance of the earlier American history beyond the limits of the American continent.
In 1828 Rich removed to London, where he opened a place of business which existed as such during the re- mainder of his life, although in 1836 he accepted the con- sulate at the Balearic Isles, and fixed his residence at Port Mahon, attracted thither chiefly by the desire of examining at leisure one or two extensive private libraries in that vicin- ity. His book business meanwhile was carried on under the superintendence of his son George, but after a few years he returned to London and resumed the management of the busi- ness to the time of his death, which took place January 20, 1858. He was much regretted. A gentleman by birth and educa-
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY xvii
tion, Rich was a very different man from several of those who attempted to follow in his wake. Entirely reliable, he scorned to resort to the dextrous artifices which afterward be- came so much in vogue to enhance the price of a book; and modest, because he was really learned, he never thrust him- self before the public or worried reading communities with loud and egotistical appeals, from which a true bibliophile would turn with disgust.
The bibliographies published by Rich are only lists, chiefly composed of such works as he had for sale. They are com- piled with enough of accuracy for the purpose for which they were intended—a dealer's descriptions sufficiently full to en- able him to vend his wares ; and his notes are, on the whole, entitled to much consideration, though now and then slight slips occur.
His first publication was ‘‘ A Catalogue of Books relating principally to America, arranged under the years in which they were printed,” [from 1500 to 1700.] (London, O. Rich, 12 Red Lion Square, 1832. 129 p. 8°.) It contains the titles of 486 works, beginning with a Leipzig ‘‘ Vespuccius,” which is not mentioned elsewhere. Of these works, 90 were printed prior to the year 1600, and 396 in the.17th century. To some copies of this catalogue Mr. Rich added ‘‘A List of Books relating to’ America, 1493 to 1700” (16 p. 8°), which was afterward reprinted in 4°, in double columns (4 p.). The latter was ‘‘ printed by J. S. Hodson, 15, Cross Street, Hatton Garden,” but bears no date.
In 1834 Rich began the compilation of the work entitled : ‘* Bibliotheca Americana Nova; or, a Catalogue of Books in various languages, relating to America, printed since the year 1700, Compiled principally from the works themselves, by O. Rich, Member of the Massachusetts Historical Society ; of the Albany Institute ; of the Pennsylvania and New Eng- land Linnzan Societies ; Honorary Member of the American Antiquarian Society, &c.” (London, O. Rich, 12 Red Lion Square. New York: Harper and Brothers, 82, Cliff Street. 1835. 4+424 p. 8°.) The work progressed slowly, the first volume making its appearance after 1835. It contained 428 pages 8°, and was rendered more complete in 1841 by the is- sue of a ‘‘Supplement” of 82 pages and a table of nine pages, forming altogether 517 pages. Un 1846 the second and con-
xlviii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
cluding volume of 4+412 pages 8° was published. At that time the first volume was reissued with a new title-page. The two volumes embrace an enumeration of upwards of 5000 books, all published in the 18th and roth centuries, up to the year 1844.
At the end of the second volume is the prospectus ofa ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana Vetus,” including the former list of books, printed from 1493 to 1700 (16 pages), with a supple- ment of 8 pages. This work was completed by Mr. Rich, and prepared for the press ; but the manuscript having been accidentally left ina hackney-coach, was never recovered, and was sold to a butcher at Gravesend, in the vicinity of Mr. Rich’s residence, from whom only a few sheets were ulti- mately recovered. It is probable, however, according to Mr. Triibner, that the most valuable portion of its contents was given by him in his ‘‘ Part I. of Rich & Son’s Catalogue for 1848; containing near two thousand books, relating prin- cipally to America, now on sale at 12, Red Lion Square, London.”
Mr. Rich’s catalogues are deservedly cherished by all who feel interested in tracing the rise and progress of the New World since its first discovery by Columbus in 1492.
It may be news to many collectors that an interleaved copy of ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana Nova” (1835-1846,) with a large number of autograph additions and corrections by Rich, now reposes in the Lenox Library, together with the interleaved copies of the same book richly annotated by James Lenox and George Bancroft the historian.
HENRY STEVENS
Henry Stevens, son of Henry Stevens, the founder and first president of the Vermont Historical and Antiquarian Society (1791-1867), was born in Stevensville, Barnet, Ver- mont, August 24, 1819. He passed fifteen months, Septem- ber, 1838, to December, 1839, in Middlebury College. The ycar 1840 was spent in Washington, D. C., as aclerk in the Treasury and in the Senate; 1841 to 1843 in Yale College, where he won a B.A. degree; 1844 in Harvard Law School under Story; ‘‘all the while,” as he Says in his *‘ Recollections of Mr. James Lenox,” ‘‘dabbling in books and manuscripts by way of keeping the pot boiling.” During the vacations
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY xlix
and holidays of those five years he scoured through New England and the Middle States ‘‘ prospecting in out-of-the- way places for historical nuggets, mousing through public and private libraries and old homestead garrets, chiefly on behalf of Peter Force and his American archives. Rich harvests of old papers, early Americanimprints, and sallow pamphlets were gathered in these excursions, that extended from Maine to Virginia. These were bought, borrowed, and skimmed for Colonel Force, while many_collectors and libra- rians enjoyed some pickings.” In this way, too, the acquaint- ance of many of the chief authors and book-lovers of the country was made, and by the time he had reached his twenty- sixth year Stevens thought he had acquired sufficient experi- ence to try the happier hunting fields of the old world, its libraries, its archives, its bookstalls, and its homesteads.*
*Mr. Sparks was one of the earliest patrons of Henry Stevens, ‘‘the Green Mountain Boy”’ and American bibliophile in London. Ina letter, February 3, 1847, Mr. Stevens speaks of his great success in becoming a special agent for Panizzi, the librarian of the British Museum, and says he now has large plans, ‘‘ especially for a boy who was obliged to borrow $400 in order to leave home. God bless you for assisting me to that money. I shall never forget your kindness.’’ Panizzi employed Stevens to furnish the British Museum, at a commission of ten per cent., with every book and pamphlet relating to America, North or South, that could possibly be dis- covered in any language. Panizzi sent him on special commissions to the Continent and gave him letters of introduction to the great libraries of Paris, Stuttgart, Munich, Leipzig, Dresden, Vienna, Berlin, and Gottingen. Stever.s became the American agent of some of these libraries, and intro- duced into Europe hosts of American books. He once jocosely said to Mr. Sparks: ‘“‘It seems to me that 10o0oo volumes of good American books in Austria will be equal to half a dozen Presbyterian missionaries and two steam-engines.’? The international services of good booksellers, like Stevens in London, and Bossange in Paris, were incalculable. Stevens made the British Museum one of the best places in the world for American historical research. He patriotically gave, however, first choice to the John Carter Brown Library in Providence, to which, at one time, he sold his entire collection of Americana, two-thirds of which came from Mr. Obadiah Rich, his virtual predecessor, with whom Mr. Sparks had dealt for many years. Stevens said to Mr. Sparks in 1845: ‘“‘I doubt not Mr. Brown will soon have the most complete collection of books pertaining to North America, printed prior to 1700, inthe world.’’ Stevens also rendered important services to the Brinley Library, and to Mr. James Lenox, founder of the Lenox Library in New York. A very large portion of the Lenox books once belonged to Stevens (see ‘‘ Recollections of James Lenox,’’ p. 186). He was the literary agent in London of the Smithsonian Institu- tion. For Harvard and other colleges, for American historical societies,
1 AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
It seemed to many of his friends like a wild-goose chase ; but
the goose was caught, though in the chase after it Stevens—
ultra-American that he was—spent the remainder of his life ina foreign land. Those who may be interested in Stevens as
a book collector will find the autobiographical notes in his
‘* Recollections of Mr. James Lenox of New York and the
Formation of his Library’ (London, Henry Stevens & Sons,
1886, ix+2II p., portraits, 16°) truly charming reading, in
the best sense of the word. In this sketch the author is able
to give him only brief consideration as a bibliographer. In this capacity his services to the bookseller and librarian were of the highest importance.
Shortly after beginning his researches abroad, Stevens conceived the plan of compiling a list of all books relating to America, and of all books printed in America, prior to the year 1700. In 1848 he published a prospectus, in which he gave the following title to the work:
‘* Bibliographia Americana: a Bibliographical Account of the Sources of Early American History ; comprising a Description of Books relating to America, printed prior to the year 1700, and of all Books printed in America from 1543 to 1703; together with notices of many of the more important unpublished manuscripts. Prepared by Henry Stevens, and published under the direction of the Smithsonian Institution at Wash- ington.”
It was estimated that the work would contain not less than 5000 titles, which were to be obtained from the public libra- ries of Europe and America. Work was actually begun ; but the plan was so ambitious, and involved so much capital and expensive help, that it may be assumed that Stevens after a decade shrank from the sacrifices demanded ; and though he never admitted that he had abandoned the work, he let it drift until death relieved him of all further responsibility.
for public and private libraries throughout the United States and Canada, he secured many valuable books. The importation of English literature and periodicals into America he long carried on, single-handed, upon a large scale. At one time, 1854, he said he was doing ‘‘a cash business of upwards of £20,000 a year.” The great libraries of two continents were materially aided by this enterprising ‘‘Green Mountain Boy,” this protégé of Jared Sparks, who first set him upon the track of materials for American history in foreign archives.—‘* The Life and Writings of Jared Sparks, comprising selections from his journals and correspondence. By Herbert B. Adams, Professor in the Johns Hopkins Univeksity.” (2 vols., Bost., Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1893. v. 2 pp. 522, §23.)
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY li
Among his first important bibliographical publications was the one entitled ‘‘Catalogue of My English Library. ... Printed by C. Whittingham, November, 1853, for private dis- tribution.” (xi+107 p. 16°. 1000 copies.) In this volume Stevens describes 5751 volumes of more than average im- portance. In 1870 he was engaged in preparing an enlarged edition of this catalogue, to embrace about 10,000 volumes, with brief biographical notes of most of the authors. Un- fortunately this work was never completed.
In January and February, 1854, Stevens issued the first two parts of ‘‘Stevens’s American Bibliographer,’’ which he abandoned to take it up again in 1858, under the title of ‘‘ His- torical Nuggets: Bibliotheca Americana ; or, a Descriptive Account of My Collection of Rare Books relating to Amer- ica.” ...(C. Whittingham, 1858, 1862, vols. 1, 2, 805 p. 18°.) This work contains 3000 titles, given in full, with the collation and price of each work. It was intended, as far as it went, to be a manual for collectors of this expensive class of books. But it did not go very far, as it was nota selec- tion, but only a list of such books as Stevens happened to have for sale at that time. Stevens intended to supply the deficiency by additional volumes ; of these only two numbers of vol. 3 (160 p.) were published, in May and August, 1885. They cover the entries A-Backus, and were edited by Henry Stevens and Henry Newton Stevens. In the Morell and other catalogues it was noted that the greater portion of this work had been destroyed by fire in New York in 1864. Mr. Stevens, however, contradicted this report, having found that when Mr. Richardson’s fire occurred, the ‘‘ Nuggets,” of which only a few copies had been consigned to him, were not injured.
The auction catalogue, ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana: a Cata- logue of Books relating to the History and Literature of America, sold by Messrs. Puttick & Simpson, March, 1861, 273 p. roy. 8°, 2415 lots,” was abridged from the ‘‘ Historical Nuggets.” It is one of the most carefully-made auction cata- logues ever issued in London. The collations were given of every book, so that the volume is now of considerable value as a book of reference. Two hundred and fifty copies were printed on large paper and bound in cloth, and not offered for sale till after the auction was over.
li AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
Another auction catalogue prepared by Stevens that de- serves mention is the one prepared of the library of his father, and entitled: ‘‘ Bibliotheca Historica; or, A Cata- logue of 5000 Velumes of Books and Manuscripts relating chiefly to the History and Literature of North and South America, among which is included the Larger Proportion of the Extraordinary Library of the Late Henry Stevens, Sr., of Barnet, Vt., Founder and First President of the Vermont Historical and Antiquarian Society. The whole comprising such a collection of ancient and modern books, rich and rare, useful and common, as seldom occurs for sale in any country, including many titles never before recorded in an American Catalogue. Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by Henry Stevens, G.M.B., F.S.A., etc., sometime Student in Yale College, now residing in London at 4 Trafalgar Square. To be sold by auction, by Messrs. Leonard & Co., at their Li- brary Sales-Room, No. 48 Bromfield Street, in Boston, [Mass.] on Tuesday the 22d, Wednesday the 23d, Thursday the 24th, and Friday the 25th day of March, 1870. Sale each day to commence at 10 in the forenoon and 2 o'clock in the afternoon. Boston: H. O. Houghton & Co., Cambridge : Riv- erside Press, 1870." (256p.8°.) This beautifully-printed vol- ume was designed not merely as an auction catalogue, but as a kind of pious monument erected by the author in honor of his father. In some respects it is one of the most elaborate auction catalogues ever issued, either in this country or in Europe. The notes are peculiar, and are generally affixed to such books as are not usually so treated, while the well- known rare books have no comments, but stand on their known merits.
Two other auction catalogues with which Stevens's name was connected are those of the Crowninshield and of the Humboldt libraries. Mr. Stevens, having purchased Mr. Crowninshield’s library for about $10,000, had it withdrawn from sale in Boston and shipped to England. He took out of the collection the Bay Psalm Book and nearly all of the other bibliographical_rarities, the great attraction of the library to him. He then combined the rest with the re- mainders of two other fine libraries, flavoring the whole with many choice lots from his own stock, such as Hulsius, De Bry, Bibles, etc., and so compounded the remarkable col-
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY liii
lection, listed as ‘‘ Catalogue of a Collection of Singularly Interesting, Fine, and Rare Books, in which is included the Greater Portion of the Very Important Library of the Late Edward A. Crowninshield, Esq., of Boston.. Sold by Auction by Messrs. Puttick & Simpson, July, 1860.” (180 p. 2143 lots.) Lot No. 912, Hulsius, a very fine set, which he had taken infinite pains to make up, the 26 parts, all first editions, save one, brought the unprecedented price of £335. The Crowninshield copy of Smith’s ‘‘ Virginia and True Travels,” 2 vols. in 1, Lon., 1627-30, with the original portraits of the Duchess of Richmond and Pocahontas, brought about £30, and went to Dr. Barney, of Richmond. The same copy pro- duced $247.50 at auction in New York, January 19, 1870.
‘‘The Humboldt Library: a Catalogue of the Library of Alexander Von Humboldt, with a Bibliographical and Bio- graphical Memoir,” (London, 1870, xxxii+791 p., portrait, roy. 8°,) was prepared under the superintendence of Henry Stevens, by John Bohn, for Sotheby, Wilkinson & Hodge, with a view of selling the library by auction. But owing to the great fire in the auctioneer’s premises, in June, 1865, in which a large portion of the library was destroyed, the cata- logue was not finished and published until 1870. Extracts from Stevens’s Introduction will be found in an article from his own pen on Humboldt in Silliman’s American Journal of Sctence and Arts, January, 1870.
Between the years 1847 and 1857 above £30,000 worth of Bibles, in all languages, were collected, collated, and passed into the libraries of James Lenox, George Livermore, Francis Fry, the British Museum, the Bodleian, and other libraries. In order to reduce his labors to the greatest degree of preci- sion he had about 400 pages put up in very small clear type, uniform with the ‘‘ Historical Nuggets,’’ with most careful collations of each work. It was only in this way that he could identify and describe the various editions and ascertain their history. Not being satisfied with the work, only a few un- corrected proofs were taken to serve as copy for a larger and better work that was never completed,.under the title of ‘‘ Cata- logue Raisonné of English Bibles, New Testaments, Psalms, and Other Parts of the Holy Scriptures, from the Earliest Editions to the Year 1850.” C. Whittingham, 1855. (400 p. 18°.)
liv AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
‘*Soon after Stevens went to London he made the acquaint- ance of Sir Antonio Panizzi, who then ruled at the British Museum, and in time he became its agent for the buying of American books=-a relation that was not disturbed by any of Stevens's financial misfortunes, and that was maintained till the last. Panizzi understood Stevens’s value, and he made use of his services in a way for which no American can ever forgive either of the pair. As a result of Stevens’s efforts the British Museum contained at the time of his death a more extensive collection of American books chan any single library in the United States. The fact is a reproach not to Stevens, but to Americans in general, and to the Congress of the United States in particular.
‘“‘ Henry Stevens, an American to the backbone, would have rejoiced to do for his own country what he did for England. But England employed him to do it and America did not, and it is too late to repair the blunder. Neo collection of American books equal to that in the British Muséum can ever again be got together. The time is past. His ‘ Catalogue of the American Books in the Library of the British Museum at Christmas, 1856,’ (650 p. 8°,) ‘A Catalogue of Mexican and other Spanish-American and West India Books in the Library of the British Museum, Christmas, 1856,’ (64 p. 8°,) ‘A Cata- logue of Canadian and other British-American Books in the Library of the British Museum, Christmas, 1856,’ (16 p. 8°,) and ‘A Catalogue of American Maps in the Library of the British Museum, Christmas, 1856,’ (16 p. 8°,) published in 1859 in two volumes, comprised about 750 large octavo pages in double columns, similar to the ‘Bibliotheéa Grenvilliana,’ described about 20,000 volumes under about 14,000 full titles. When Stevens began collecting for the Museum, in 1845, the whole number did not exceed 4000. The other 16,000 were due to him. One of his reasons for printing the catalogue was to show, side by side, as he said, both the richness and the poverty of the collection. He effected his object, and be- tween 1857 and 1862 the number doubled. That is to say, in 1862 the number doubled. That is to say, in 1862 the Ameri- can Department in the British Museum possessed 40,000 volumes, counting only books printed in America, and not counting books, maps, etc., in all languages relating to
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY lv
America, in which the Museum is very rich, nor counting American books reprinted in England.” *
And for much of what we actually have in America concern- ing our own country we have to thank Henry Stevens. He was the agent of many American collectors, often with authority to buy on his own judgment. His best-known general client: was, perhaps, James Lenox, a large part of whose library was collected by Henry Stevens. No man knew so much about early editions of the Bible; no one perhaps so much about early voyages and travels. These, with the Americana, were the subjects to which Stevens devoted himself, and on which he will ever remain an authority. Caxton was another topic which interested him, and he did much for the Caxton Exhibition at South Kensington in 1877, in preparing, in an incredibly short time, a catalogue of the Bibles then shown, which was printed with the title: ‘‘ The Bibles in the Caxton Exhibition, 1877; or, a Bibliographical Description of Nearly One Thousand Representative Bibles in Various Languages.” (London, 1878. roy. 8°.)
Mr. Stevens also did excellent work in preparing indexes to the Colbnial Documents of New Jersey, Rhode Island, Maryland, and Virginia. The first of these was published under the following title: ‘‘An Analytical Index to the Colonial Documents of New Jersey in the State Paper Offices of England. Compiled by Henry Stevens. Edited, with Notes and References to Printed Books and Manuscripts in Other Depositories, by William A. Whitehead.” Published for the New Jersey Historical Society, 1858. (xxx-+504 p. 8°.)
The second index, entitled ‘‘ Stevens’s Collection of His- torical Papers relating to Rhode Island. Selected, Tran- scribed, and Arranged by him chiefly from the State Paper Offices in London, 1640-1775,” was made for and deposited in the library of John Carter Brown, of Providence, R. I. It forms six folio volumes.
His ‘‘ Historical Index of the Colonial Documents relating to Maryland, in her Majesty’s State Paper Office of England,”
*G. W. Smalley in the New York 7ri5une, April 6, 1886. Compare, also, note on page xlix
Ivi AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
was compiled by Stevens on his own responsibility and was sold to Mr. Peabody at £100—considerably less than the actual cost of engrossing the material, which formed ten quarto volumes. Mr. Peabody presented the work to the Li- brary of the Maryland Historical Society, where it is now preserved.
His ‘‘ Historical Index of Documents relating to Virginia, from 1585 to 1775, preserved in the State Paper Office of London,” was deposited by exchange in the Virginia State Library in 1858. It is on 2000 cards, chronologically ar- ranged, but was never completed and engrossed.
In 1857 Stevens edited Franklin’s ‘‘ Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain,” of which 25 copies were carefully reprinted in facsimile from the London edition of 1725, by Whittingham. It was reprinted in Vol. I. of Par- ton’s ‘‘Life of Franklin.” In 1862 he published No. 1 of ‘““My Informant: Containing a List of the Principal English, French, and German Periodicals and Transactions, with the Prices to the Public and the Trade; together with a List of above 200 Works for Sale, chiefly relating to America.”
In 1869 D. Appleton & Co. printed for Stevens 100 copies of a thin octavo volume of 40 pages, entitled ‘“ Historical and Geographical Notes, 1459-1869.” The work, according to the author, ‘‘ was seen through the press with some difficulty, and there are in it many typographical errors, and some ill- considered statements, so that the whole issue still slumbers in its original package. Some few of the mistakes are alluded to in the end in the sentence beginning, ‘ Let him that is not without errata in his own life correct neatly with his pen, and pardon these of mine.’”
In the same year, 1869, he published ‘‘ Historical and Geographical Notes on the Earliest Discoveries in America, 1453-1530. With Comments on the Earliest Charts and Maps ; the Mistakes of the Early Navigators, and the Blun- ders of the Geographers ; the Asiatic Origin of the Atlantic Coast-Line of North America, how it crept in and how it crept out of the Maps. The whole illustrated by the Tehu- antepec Railway Company’s Map of the World on Mercator’s projection, and photo-lithographic facsimiles of many of the earliest maps and charts of America. New Haven: office of the American Journal of Science. London: office of the Au-
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY lvii
thor, 4 Trafalgar Square, 1869.” (54 p. with frontispieces
and six large sheets of maps, royal 8°.)
Among his later bibliographical works were the fol- lowing :
Bibliotheca Geographica et Historica; or, A Catalogue of a Sale of An- cient and Modern Books, Maps, &c., illustrative of Historical Geog- raphy, History, &c. Part I. London, 1872. 8°.
American Books with Tails to ’em: a Private Pocket-List of the Incom- plete or Unfinished American Periodicals, Transactions, Legislative Documents, and other Continuations, etc. London, [Privately printed,] 1873. 16°.
Biot Hibliopalates or, A Word on Printed Card Catalogue of Old, Rare and Costly Books, and how to make them on a Co-Operative Sys- tem. London, 1878, [Privately printed.] 16°.
Historical Collections. 1881-1886. 2 vols.
Who Spoils our new English Books. Asked and Answered by Henry Stevens of Vermont, Bibliographer and lover of Books, etc... . Christmas, 1884. 38 p. 32°.
Henry Stevens was in his own department one of the most learned and accurate bibliographers who ever lived. Hecertainly had no superior, if he had an equal, in London. People who knew him slightly may easily be misled as to his real ability by the whimsicalities in which he delighted to in- dulge. On the title-page of the most serious volume he ever published he describes himself as ‘‘ Henry Stevens, G.M.B., M.A., F.S.A., etc.” The student of the British Museum or elsewhere might puzzle long over these initials before he discovered that G.M.B. stands for Green Mountain Boy. He clung to his birthplace and old home with pathetic, affec- tionate tenacity, and habitually signed himself, in print as well asin private, Henry Stevens, of Vermont. That is the name he puts to all of his publications. Then usually fol- lowed a list of antiquarian and historical societies, in both worlds, of which he was member; then, without visible tran- sition, or so much as a comma, ‘‘ Black Balled Atheneum Club of London also Patriarch of Skull and Bones of Yale. ... B.A. and M.A. of Yale College, as well as Cjtizen of Noviomagus et cetera.” Noviomagus, Mr. Smalley takes to be Croydon or some place near Croydon, in England, or per- haps Surbiton, and not one of the many other better-known places to which tha. name was given in earlier days. There is, however, a club of antiquaries called the Noviomagians to
which Stevens belonged.
lviii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
After a long and painful illness, Mr. Stevens was called away from his labors on the 28th of February, 1886. He was a real loss to letters as well as to bibliography. But, as the London 7imes said: ‘‘ Esteemed as he was for his knowledge, ability, and shrewd common sense, he was even more beloved for his frank manliness, his kindly nature, and rich genial humor.”
The following memorial card was issued by Henry Stevens & Son in March, 1886:
In Offectionate RememBrance of
HENRY STEVENS
Dober of Books BORN AT BARNET VERMONT 24 AUGUST I819 THE VOLUME OF WHOSE EARTHLY LABOR WAS CLOSED IN LONDON 28 FEBRUARY 1886 IN THE SIXTY-SEVENTH YEAR OF HIS AGE
“‘And another book was opened which is the book of Life.”
Books are both our luxuries and our daily bread. They have become to our lives and happiness prime ne- cesstties. They are our trusted favorites, our guardians, our confidential advisers, and the safe consumers of our leisure. They cheer us in poverty, and comfort us in the misery ofaffiuence. They absorb the effervescence of tm- petuous youth, and while away the tedium of age.—H. S.
The remains of the late Henry Stevens of Vermont were laid to rest in West Hempstead Cemetery on Thursday 4 riety 1886. ‘*To live in hearts we leave behind is not to die.
NICOLAS TRUBNER
Among the early workers in the field of American bib- liography, Nicolas Trilbner, though he was not an American, is entitled to a place of honor. Born in Heidelberg, June 12, 1817, his tastes early drew him to literature and decided his adoption of the business of bookselling. After serving with booksellers in various German cities, he attracted the atten- tion of Mr. Longmans, of London, who, in 1841, induced him to take a position in his foreign department. After ten years’ service in the Longmans house, Tritibner, in November, 1851, joined Mr. Delf, who had succeeded to the American Literary Agency, founded by Wiley & Putnam in 1837, and they com- menced business at 12 Paternoster Row, as Delf & Trtibner. Although the firm was not successful, Triibner here formed valuable connections with American publishing houses, as he
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY lix
had been enabled, while at Longmans, to establish relations with Continental houses. One of the. first to appreciate the value of American literature, he made a tour of the United States in order that he might become still better acquainted with the field.
In January, 1855, Trtibner published a thin sixteenmo volume, entitled ‘‘ Trtibner’s Bibliographical Guide to Amer- ican Literature, being a classified List of Books in all Depart- ments of Literature and Science published in the United States of America during the Last Forty Years, with an Index ” (xxxii+108 p.). The whole edition of this work was sold within four months of the date of publication. Thus encouraged, Triibner continued his researches and extended his plan, and after four years’ assiduous application pub- lished ‘‘ Trtibner’s Bibliographical Guide to American Liter- ature. A Classed List of Books Published in the United States of America during the Last Forty Years. With Bib- liographical Introduction, Notes, and Alphabetical Index. Compiled by Nicolas Trilbner. London. . . . 1859.” (i-x, Preface; i-xxxvi, Bibliographical Prolegomena [pre- pared with the assistance of Dr. Ludewig] ; xxxvii,* Contri- butions towards a History of American Literature, [by Benjamin Moran]; xcvii [stc]-cxlix, Public Libraries of the United States, [by Edward Edwards]; 1-554p. Bibliograph- ical Guide and General Index. This work received well- earned appreciation, not only in Europe but also in this country, and in recognition of its merits many of the learned societies of the United States made Triibner an honorary member. It was the first systematic synopsis of American literature, and still retains its value for the American as well as the general reader.
In 1858 he published ‘‘ The Literature of American Abo- riginal Languages,” by Hermann E. Ludewig, with Additions and Corrections by Professor William M. Turner, Edited by Nicolas Triibner, (xxiv+258 p. 8°,) which, like ‘‘ Triibner’s Bibliographical Guide,” though it was merely a first attempt to arrange the materials for a study of the subject, is still in- dispensable to the student of comparative philology.
Mr. Triibner then turned his attention to the literature of Asia, and established lines of communication with all the principal cities for the publication of Oriental works. In this
Ix AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
connection he founded, in 1865, his American and Oriental Literary Record, giving, as the title states, a register of the most important works published in North and South America, India, China, Europe, and the British colonies, with occasional notes on German, Dutch, Danish, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Russian, and Hungarian literature. The result of this labor and scholarship was to establish Triibner as the authorized publisher of more than fifty learned societies, and of the official publications of almost every branch of the Brit- ish and colonial governments, and to constitute his publishing house the foremost in its line. He may fairly be called the father of the interest in Oriental literature, which is now ex- tending even to this country.
After dissolving partnership with Delf, Triibner carried on the business in partnership with David Nutt, under the title of Triibner & Co. After the death of Nutt, in 1863, the busi- ness fell entirely into the hands of Triibner. A few years before his death, March 30, 1884, Trtibner had given an in- terest in the concern to Messrs. Edwards and Diiffing, his chief assistants. Triibner’s death was followed almost im- mediately by that of Edwards, and the surviving partner, Diiffing, was persuaded to sell the business, which then be- came part of the firm of Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co.
Personally, Mr. Triibner was the most genial, companiona- ble, and generous of men, dispensing the most liberal hospi- tality and drawing around him the most agreeable society and the most brilliant scholars.
JAMES KELLY
James Kelly, who was so intrepid as to take up the work of Roorbach, was born in Renaughmore, County Tipperary, Ireland, April 15, 1829. His father was a prosperous farmer, and young James received his education in the parish schools of his native place. Even in his boyhood he was noted for close application to such duties and tasks as fell to his share, and for a strong and rugged constitution, two factors that enabled him in later life to surmount difficulties and to accomplish labors from which a less patient man would have shrunk, and to which a weaker one might have suc- cumbed,
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Ixi
At the age of twenty Kelly resolved to join the Royal Irish Constabulary, and, having passed successfully all the preliminary examinations, he went to Dublin to receive his military training. Having completed the term of his novitiate as a soldier, he was ordered to County Meath for active service. His superiors soon discovered in him talents of no ordinary degree, and the qualifications that make an effective officer, and almost at once appointed him compiler of the gov- ernment agricultural and census statistics. In his new official position he was brought more intimately into communication with more classes of society than generally fell to the lot of other members of the constabulary. Hence it was that Kelly became a close observer of all social and political questions. In a series of letters to the Dublin press about this time he severely censured the British Government for its harsh treatment of the Irish constabulary, and the onerous duties the government imposed upon them. These letters elicited comments of hearty approval and admiration. In 1852 Kelly resigned his position and married the daughter of a well-to-do architect and builder who lived near Dub- lin. Shortly after, he came to this country, and in 1857 took charge of the order department of Wiley & Halstead’s wholesale book business—about a year before that firm pub- lished Roorbach’s ‘‘ Addenda to the Bibliotheca Americana.” Mr. Kelly remained with the Wiley firm seventeen years, and during that time acquired much of the bibliographical knowledge that is displayed in his two volumes of ‘‘ The American Catalogue.”
In 1863, impelled by his own needs, rather than by the hope of any material encouragement from his fellow-booksell- ers, he began the compilation of his continuation of Roor- bach’s ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana.” The period covered by him, from 1861-1866, was one of the most eventful in the © history of the United States, commencing in war and ending in peace. As for the greater part of that time all com- munication was cut off from the Southern States, Kelly nat- urally could not include in the main alphabet the titles of such books as were published in the South. He succeeded, however, in obtaining for the appendix to his volume the titles of forty-two books that were published during the war by four firms—in Columbia, S. C., Mobile, Ala,, Greensboro,
Ixii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
N. C., and Richmond, Va. It may be interesting to note that eleven of these were school text-books ; thirteen were devoted to military science; thirteen were novels; three were song-books for soldiers; and one was a ‘‘Confed- erate Receipt-Book.” By extensive correspondence Kelly created in the North and West a widespread interest in the subject of bibliography, and succeeded in cataloguing the titles of upwards of 11,000 books, in addition to over 2000 pamphlets, sermons, and addresses on the Civil War, and the publications of 73 Learned societies and other Literary associations.
All work on this catalogue was performed in about three years, single-handed, by Mr. Kelly, who, during this time, never failed to attend to his duties at the Wiley store. The volume made its appearance in the winter of 1866.
In the fall of 1871 Kelly published his second volume of ‘‘The American Catalogue,” covering the period from January, 1866 to January, 1871. It gave in alphabetical order the titles of over 18,000 books, and in an appendix the publications of 54 Learned societies and other Literary associations.
Bibliographically, Kelly’s work was far superior to that of his predecessors in completeness and accuracy. It is therefore humiliating to record that, in spite of the thorough and accurate work produced by him, he was not able to se- cure the needed pecuniary support to undertake the pub- lication of a bibliography of American literature from the introduction of printing in the colonies down to the beginning of the Civil War.
In 1874 Kelly accepted a position in the publishing house of James R. Osgood & Co., of Boston, and remained with them until 1877. In that year he returned to New York and established himself as bookseller and importer of rare books. He has devoted his life to a strict attention to his business ; punctuality, honesty, and fidelity have been his watchwords, and the mainspring of all his actions. There is at the pres- ent time no man better known in the book business in this country, none better informed on the subject of home and foreign publications, and none more thoroughly conversant with the general literature of the day. :
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Ixiii
JOSEPH SABIN
Joseph Sabin, who for upwards of a quarter of a century was one of the best-known figures in the book world of the United States, was born in Braunston, Northamptonshire, England, December 5, 1821. He received a common school education in Oxford, and in 1835, when fourteen years of age, was apprenticed to learn the bookbinding business in the store of Charles Richards, a prominent bookseller and stationer of Oxford. The indenture was for seven years, and young Sabin began to apply himself to the study of his business with assiduity. He was allowed to continue at the bookbind- ing trade only for a short time, because he took a lively inter- est in books, even at this early age, and his employer soon found that he could make him more useful in his salesroom than in the bindery; the result was that after a few months he was transferred to the store and made a salesman. After serving for three years as an assistant salesman, Sabin was made general manager of Mr. Richards’s business, and entrusted with the duty of buying, as well as selling books. Sabin remained with Mr. Richards until 1842, when the seven years provided forin his indenture had expired. In the meantime he had prepared several catalogues of libraries for sale, and he fancied that he could do a good business in the auction trade. He had become acquainted with the fam- ily of a Mr. Winterborn, an architect and builder in Oxford, and he formed a partnership with one of his sons, and began business as a bookseller and auctioneer. The business pros- pered fairly. In 1844 Sabin was married to Miss Winter- born, thesister of his partner, and in the same year he pub- lished a pamphlet on ‘‘ The XXXIX Articles of the Church of England, with Scriptural Proofs and References.” Sabin remained in business in Oxford for four years after the issue of his polemical brochure, the publication of which, together with his republican tendencies, and the rather unconventional expression of his views, did not aid materially in making him popular among his Tory neighbors.
In the early part of 1848 he determined tocome to America, with the intention of settling upon land in Texas, for which he had contracted in England through some colonization scheme. Selling his business, he embarked with his wife and two sons, Joseph and Frank, on the ship West Point,
lxiv AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
and arrived in New York on the evening of July 3. After consulting with some of his acquaintances in New York, he decided to abandon the project of settling in Texas. He passed a few days in New York, but finding nothing to suit him in the way of employment he took his family to Phila- delphia, and secured a position as a general assistant and salesman in the house of George S. Appleton, then on the south side of Chestnut Street, below Seventh. His knowledge of books directed Mr. Appleton’s attention to Sabin’s value, and he employed him in all the details of the business. At that time half binding in calf and morocco was not generally known in this country, and Sabin induced Mr. Appleton to introduce it. Sabin remained in Philadelphia but two years. In May, 1850, he came to New York, and secured an engage- ment with Cooley & Keese, the book auctioneers, who were doing business at Dey Street and Broadway. He was en- gaged as a general assistant, his duties being principally to catalogue books to be sold, and also occasionally to assist in the sales. Cooley & Keese abandoned the business in 1851, selling out to Lyman & Rawdon, but Sabin was retained by the new firm. The first important sale catalogue prepared by Sabin was that of the library of Rev. Samuel Farmer Jarvis, sold at auction by Lyman & Rawdon, October 14 (postponed to November 4,) 1851, and following days. The catalogue contains 3329 lots, classified under subjects, and is quite fully annotated. An author: index fills pp. 195-219. John Keese was the auctioneer.
On January 1, 1852, Sabin was engaged by Bangs Brothers, then at No. 13 Park Row (the predecessors of Bangs, Mer- win & Co., and the present firm of Bangs & Co.) With this firm he remained for five years, doing cataloguing and miscel- laneous work.
In 1856 Sabin started in business for himself at the corner of Broadway and Canal Street, upstairs, making a specialty of second-hand and miscellaneous fine books. But the rage for collecting had hardly begun, and after a year of only moderate success he sold out and returned to Philadelphia, where his family were still living at Chestnut Hill. In 1857 he established a store in Hart’s Building, at No. 27 South Sixth Street, above Chestnut Street, and until the breaking out of the war he did a good business. With the opening of
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Ixv
hostilities his business fell off, and in 1861 he abruptly left Philadelphia and came to New York. Under the firm-name of J. Sabin & Co. he opened an auction store on the south side of East Fourth Street, near Broadway. One of his first sales, indeed, his only sale of any special importance, was the library of the eminent comedian, W. E. Burton, which was sold by order of Mr. Burton's legal adviser and chief executor, Henry Cram. The disastrous result of the sale, and the pre- cipitate withdrawal of his partner, F. N. Jennings, involved Sabin in financial difficulties, and embarrassed him with vexatious litigation. It is to this episode in his career to which he refers in the first prospectus of his Dictionary as ‘an enforced retirement from business !”
For a few months he was in the employ of Sheldon & Co. The “‘‘Co.” was Melancthon C. Hurd, who afterward estab- lished the firm of Hurd & Houghton, in New York City. In 1864 he ventured again into business, under his own name, purchasing the stock and good-will of Michael Nunan, a genial and popular Irishman who had built up a fairly good business in second-hand and new books, at 84 Nassau Street. In 1869 the firm-name became J. Sabin & Sons; and in 1879 it was changed to J. Sabin’s Son. From 84,*Sabin removed to 64 Nassau Street, where he remained until his death on June 5, 1881.
About the year 1852 Sabin began to collect material for a ‘‘ Bibliographical Dictionary of all Books relating to Amer- ica,” using as authorities the bibliographies and catalogues of White Kennet, Obadiah Rich, Henri Ternaux, Boucher de la Richardiere, A. G. Camus, G. M. Asher, George B. Fari- bault, Leon-Pinelo, Hermann E. Ludewig, J. G. Meusel, Fred- erik Miiller, J. R. Smith, Isaiah Thomas, D. B. Warden, and others, besides the various library catalogues, the Adigemeine Deutsche Bibliothek, the London Magazine, the Monthly Review, etc. With good opportunities for examining books, he had accumulated over 15,000 titles when he issued his first pros- pectus, in May, 1859. The material thus brought together served only at the basis of the proposed Dictionary, the plan of which was to give the titles of all important works in full and ina uniform manner, with the number of pages, maps and plates, and to designate one or more public libraries where the book described could be found. In order tocarry out this
Ixvi AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
plan, it became necessary to examine every book anew, and to enlist the co-operation of librarians. In 1866, after four years’ labor in arranging the material, a new prospectus was issued, with specimen pages, and in January, 1867, the first part of the Dictionary appeared. It is not the writer’s inten- tion to decry the value of Sabin’s work—that has already been done ad nauseam by writers whose motives have not al- ways been above suspicion. Inasmuch as a mass of material on a given subject is brought together in the ‘' Bibliotheca Americana”—by which name the ‘ Dictionary ” is popularly known—it cannot fail, in however slight degree, to assist the collector and bookseller in their researches. That the infor- mation is not always definite, exhaustive, or correct in every particular is its greatest blemish, and one that would not have attached to it in so glaring a degree had the work been under the direction of one better qualified for the task. For nearly a quarter of a century he devoted all his spare time to the work. It exhausted all his available funds and kept him poor until his death. When he died, 80 parts, comprising over 58,000 titles, had been issued, bringing the work down in alphabetical order to the letter ‘‘P.” The clippings left unpub- lished were entrusted to Wilberforce Eames, of the Lenox Library, who, down to the present time, has edited 36 additional parts, completing the work as far as the entry: ‘Smith (Henry H[ollingsworth]).”
The publications of Sabin, aside from the “ Dictionary,” were a monthly magazine called the Aidiopolist, a Literary Register and Repository of Notes and Queries, etc., begun in December, 1868, and continued until April, 1877 + *“A. Bib- liography of Bibliography, or, a handy book about books which relate to books,” expanded, with large additions, from John Power's ‘‘ Handy Book about Books for Book-Lovers ar and a series of reprints of early American Tracts, ten of which were issued in quarto size and seven in octavo. A reprint, in two volumes, of Alexander Garden's ‘“ Anecdotes of the Revolution,” published in three sizes—ordinary paper, large paper, and what Mr. Sabin dubbed “ blanket folio ’— capped the climax of these typographical absurdities, and brought them into merited disfavor.
The book-auction sales at which Sabin officiated included some of the most important that have occurred in this coun-
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Ixvii
try. The last at which he presided was the Brinley sale. This was divided into five parts, and the sale of the third part was set for March, 1881, but was postponed on account of Sabin’s ill health. His family had already been informed by his physician of the fatal character of his illness. On April 4 Sabin began the sale, and conducted it to a satisfactory con- clusion. On this occasion he had the distinction of selling the only copy of the Gutenberg Bible that has ever been brought under the hammer on this side of the Atlantic. The book was bought by the late Hamilton Cole for $8000, and the sale created a sensation in the bookbuying world, which was re- vived when the two volumes again appeared at auction in the dispersion of the collection of Brayton Ives, and were taken to Chicago at a ransom of $14,800.
Against the advice of his physician, Sabin undertook the auction of the third part of the Brinley Library, and his labors in connection with it probably hastened his death, which occurred at his Brooklyn home on Sunday, June §, 1881. He was buried in Cypress Hills Cemetery, Brooklyn, N. Y.
FREDERICK LEYPOLDT
In the year 1855, when Roorbach was about to issue the second supplement to his ‘‘ Bibliotheca Americana,” there came to this country a German youth scarce twenty years of age, who was destined to render to the American book trade and to librarians and scholars services that are now recognized asinvaluable. Needless to say, I refer to Frederick Leypoldt. He was born in Stuttgart, Wiirtemburg, November 17, 1835. His father was a prosperous butcher, who controlled an im- portant part of the trade of the King’s household, and who took intense pride in his business, which he desired to see con- tinued by his namesake—his younger son Frederick. The older son, who had ataste for his father’s career, was destined for a,college life ; the younger son, who had inherited from his mother a warm poetic, idealistic temperament, was forced to learn his father’s trade. This stern, unyielding father and his sensitive, high-spirited son caused each other great mutual unhappiness. In his hard-earned and restricted leis- ure hours Frederick Leypoldt had made the acquaintance of several kindred spirits of literary and dramatic aspirations, young men willing to brave all things and risk all things to
Ixviii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
live their own lives and to realize the ideals which then fired ‘*Young Germany” in every strata of society. Frederick Leypoldt ran away from home and visited several cities of Germany, offering a play he had written, in which he hoped to be allowed to play a part. Meeting only rebuff and failure, he invested his few remaining pennies in books, which he sold by the roadside, and finally worked his way home again, and once more tried to conform to his father’s wishes. But the taste of freedom had been too powerful. He at length gained his parents’ consent to go to America and earn his own living.
On his arrival in New York, without friends and almost without money, he suffered much, and finally started out to tramp the streets in search of any work he could pick up. His tastes inclined him to books, and seeing a sign ‘‘ Boy Wanted,” he entered the foreign bookstore of F. W. Chris- tern, explained his position and obtained a situation. After working two years he went to Germany, intending to find a place in the German book trade; but he leaned toward American institutions, and in the fall of 1857 returned to America and became one of the most patriotic of American citizens. He found his place waiting for him at Christern’s, Mr. Christern was at heart a warm friend of Leypoldt’s to the very last, and helped him through many struggles; but he totally failed to understand or make allowance for the strong individuality and originality of his young clerk, Con- servative to a degree, the ideas and plans of Leypoldt, succeeding each other with lightning rapidity, irritated him and frightened him. He refused to have Leypoldt’s plans for extending business and other unconventional experiments tried on his premises, and finally advised him to set up in business for himself in Philadelphia, offering to help him generously and to let him manage his business untrammelled by interference.
In the fall of 1859 Leypoldt opened a store at the corner of Chestnut and Juniper Streets, in Philadelphia, with a well-selected stock of books in all languages. This store, which he fitted ‘up with exquisite taste, soon became noted and a favorite rendezvous of literary men and members of the musical and dramatic professions. He also.opened a reading-room, where the leading foreign periodicals and
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Ixix
magazines were kept on file, and later established a circulat- ing library of French and English literature. He soon counted among his patrons such men as Bayard Taylor, George H. Boker, Charles G. Leland, Rev. Dr. Furness, H. C. Lea, and many other prominent citizens of Philadelphia.
His prospects of success were of the brightest ; then came the Civil War. Duties on books and periodicals advanced from 7 per cent. to 25 per cent., and the gold in which these duties must be paid rose in value from 103 per cent. to 285 percent. This virtually stopped importation. Librariesand bookbuyers held back orders and waited for better times. Leypoldt, always full of resource, at once added an Eng- lish department to his business, and later on determined to publish. His first publishing venture was Andersen's ‘“‘ Ice Maiden, and Other Tales,” translated by Miss Fanny Fuller, which was successful. On the title-page of this book first appeared in this country the now familiar device of an owl seated upon an open book. This was followed by Leland’s translation of Heine’s ‘‘ Book of Songs,” and Charles T. Brooks’s excellent translation of Kortuin’s ‘‘ Jobsiad.” Then came Lady Wallace’s translation of ‘‘ Mendelssohn’s Letters,”’ Liszt’s ‘‘ Life of Chopin,” and Polko’s ‘‘ Musical Sketches,” all of which were well received. Leypoldt also first intro- duced Doré to Americans, publishing a Dante album of photo- graphic reproductions of the great artist’s work.
Leypoldt’s artistic taste and fearless originality were shown in all his publications. They at once attracted univer- sal attention by their dainty get-up. Indeed, his publications found almost as ready a sale in England as they did here. As an instance of what his confréeres thought of his work I may cite the following incident: When James T. Fields, of the then celebrated firm of Ticknor & Fields, of Boston, was on a visit to Philadelphia, he called at the store and inquired for Mr. Leypoldt. Upon Mr. Leypoldt introducing himself, Mr. Fields remarked, ‘‘I specially hunted you up to make your acquaintance, for I was curious to see the man who ventured to publish books that older and richer houses would be afraid of. I must say, however, that I am disappointed ; I expected to see a man at least six or seven feet high.” Leypoldt was a man below the average stature, though broad and well-built.
Ixx AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
As the war continued, foreign editions of books for the study of modern languages could not be imported, and Leypoldt conceived the plan of reprinting such books as were best adapted for American students. F. W. Christern and S. R. Urbino, of Boston, werked in conjunction with him in this plan. Leypoldt was indefatigable in securing the services of eminent American scholars to provide notes and com- mentaries for these text-books, and himself did a great deal of the work of editing, compiling, and indexing French gram- mars, readers, etc.
In 1864 Leypoldt established a branch house in New York, and shortly afterward removed the retail foreign branch of his Philadelphia business to this city, and in the course of a year or two closed up his Philadelphia house, selling his circulating library of 6000 volumes ex bloc to the Mercantile Library of Philadelphia.
In 1865 a translation of About’s ‘‘Man With a Broken Ear” was offered to Leypoldt for publication by Henry Holt, a young man just graduated from Yale University. Although obliged to refuse the manuscript, Leypoldt en- tered into relations with Mr. Holt, and in January, 1866, the firm of Leypoldt & Holt was formed. The first book to bear the new imprint was Charles Leland’s translation of ‘“Memoirs of a Good-for-Nothing.” Both partners deter- mined to put their strength into furnishing American readers with translations of literary excellence of the masterpieces of the standard authors of the Continent of Europe. The educa- tional books, however, remained the backbone of the busi- ness, and Leypoldt compiled many new ones, using the anagram L. Pylodet for this branch of the work. In 1867, at which time the firm was established at 451 Broome Street, Mr. Holt’s translation of About’s ‘‘Man With the Broken Ear,” which had led to their business partnership, was issued. This Mr. Holt very neatly dedicated to his partner in the following words:
‘** Dear Leypotpt: You have not forgotten that nearly two years ago, before our. business connection was thought of, the risk of publishing this identical translation,was ‘ respectfully declined’ by you with that same courtesy whose exercise in frequent similar cases each one of us now tries so hard to shove on the other’s shoulders. J hope that your surprise on reading this note of dedication will not intertere with your forgiving the pertinacity with which, through it, I still strive to make the book yours.
“451 BRoomE STREET, May 16, 1867,” H. H.
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Ixxi
All through his life Leypoldt was animated with the great desire to share with all those interested, any informa- tion he could gather relating to literature, art, and all that makes for true culture. He was untiring in his efforts to get at such information, spent time and money lavishly, and then felt impelled to offer it gratuitously to all interested. He took Leypoldt & Holt’s Literary Bulletin, a monthly record of current foreign and American books, under his personal charge, and conceived the idea of making an exhaustive record of American books, modelled on Brockhaus’s Monthly Bulletin and Reinwald’s and Bossange’s Bulletin Mensuel, This was supplied to the retail booksellers with their imprint and by them circulated to keep their customers posted on the news of the literary and publishing world. One idea after another was worked into the original plan in rapid succes- sion until the editorial work on the Literary Bulletin became very onerous, though much appreciated, as in a short time a monthly average of 30,000 copies were sold. The first ‘‘ Edu- cational Catalogue’”’ was the issue of this Literary Bulletin for August, 1869, and a trade edition was sent gratuitously to 2000 booksellers under the title of the 7vade Circular.
Leypoldt now made new arrangements with his partner in order to devote his entire attention to the bibliographi- cal part of the business. He sold to Mr. Holt his interest in the publishing business, but the firm-name remained un- changed until 1871, when it became Leypoldt, Holt & Will- iams, then Holt & Williams, and later became the present firm of Henry Holt & Co. In 1870 Leypoldt bound up the monthly lists of new American books which had appeared in the Bulletin for 1869, and issued them as ‘‘ The American Catalogue of Books for 1869, containing complete monthly lists of all the books published in the United States during the year 1869, with stateinent of size, price, place of publica- tion, and publisher’s name, to which are prefixed an alpha- betical and a classified index.’’ The second yearly issue of this catalogue, published under the title of the ‘‘ Trade Cir- cular Annual,” from 25 Bond Street, to which place the busi- ness both of the firm and of the periodicals had removed, was the germ of the ‘‘ Publishers’ Trade-List Annual.” The catalogue proper was followed by a valuable selected list of English books of 1870, a bibliography of ‘‘Aids for the Trade
Ixxii AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
and Bookbuyers,” a directory of publishing firms, a key to American merchandise in the stationery line, (which should have developed into a stationers’ trade-list annual, and did re- appear for one year in the ‘‘ Stationers’ Hand-Book,” issued by Leypoldt in 1876;) a variety of trade miscellany,with several portraits; a key to pseudonyms, a necrology of authors, and finally the catalogues of twenty-six publishing houses, bound as an appendix. The third and last of these annual cata- logues was issued in 1872, with an introductory paper on ‘Literature in America in 1871.”
About this ,time Leypoldt first began to lose faith in his optimistic idea that all that was needed was to provide the book trade with good tools, to make them appreciate them and support their inventor. His preface to the ‘‘ American Catalogue” for 1871 stated the great obstacles and discour- agements attending the preparation of such a work, and sadly confessed his decision to discontinue the publication. It was a personal grief to Leypoldt that his work appeared in such imperfect shape, owing to the indifference of the pub- lishers to whom he was forced to look for information. Early in 1871 Leypoldt’s name appeared as editor and publisher of The Trade Circular and Literary Bulletin, which, in July, became ‘‘ the official organ of the Publishers’ Board of Trade.” In the fall of 1871 Leypoldt withdrew from the firm of Ley- poldt, Holt & Williams, and established himself at 712 Broadway. His only important competitor at that time was The American Literary Gazette and Publishers’ Circular, issued by George W. Childs, of Philadelphia. It had long been Leypoldt’s ambition to incorporate the Gazette with his own paper, and in 1872 Mr. Childs sold it to him and it was con- solidated with the Zyrade Circular, which had become Zhe Publishers and Stationers Weekly Trade Circular, and in 1873 became The Publishers’ Weekly. Leypoldt now outlined his plans to the trade. His object was twofold—to make his paper a practical help in selling books, and also to make it ‘‘an organ of trade education.” His dream was to inspire the trade with a spirit of co-operation and progress, and for years he labored faithfully, though in vain, to bring about a union of the various organizations within the trade, and to establish a general Booksellers’ Union.
With all his originality and quick grasp of all that was
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Ixxili
good in all that was new, Leypoldt combined German thor- oughness and love of order. He could not understand that the book trade should rest satisfied to go ahead in haphaz- ard fashion when he was ready to place within their reach the tools they so much needed for the advancement of their own interests. He was discouraged often; but his elastic temperament and his genius for work prevented his abandon- ing his cherished schemes.
The ‘‘ Publishers’ Trade-List Annual” was started in 1873, in May of which year Leypoldt removed from 712 Broadway to 37 Park Row. While himself in the book busi- ness, he had, with his wonted system, arranged the lists of other publishers for his own use somewhat in this fashion ; but his own publication was anticipated by the ‘‘ Uniform Trade-List Circular,” a monthly issue of price-lists continued through a part of 1867, and by the ‘‘ Publishers and Station- ers’ Trade-List Directory,” issued from Philadelphia in 1869, both by Howard Challen. This scheme, however, was not continued by Mr. Challen, and the idea of reviving the plan was put forward by Leypoldt in The Publishers’ Weekly of May 3, 1873. The ‘‘Annual” was published in the fall of that year, binding up in alphabetical arrangement the catalogues of 1or publishers, with advertisements from 114 others, at the nominal price of 50cents. It has since then been kept up continuously, and the idea has been taken up in England, Italy, Germany, and France.
In 1875 the imprint periodical, originally the Monthly Bul- letin, continued as the Monthly Book-Trade Circular, was re- issued as the Literary News, and Leypoldt began to give more time to its development. In later years it became a special pet of his, and in 1880 he started a new series, includ- ing a subscription edition as well as imprints. The idea of this periodical was an eclectic thatshould be a useful aid to readers as well as a trade help.
During all these years Leypoldt’s genius for planning work and his wealth of ideas had brought him into contact with many business men in other lines of work who made him tempting offers to devote his inventive genius to their concerns. Even publishers made him offers to undertake the artistic side of their manufacturing. But Leypoldt was too strong an individuality to work for others. The slightest
lIxxiv AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
wavering in another from what he thought right and fitting ; the smallest defect of taste, or lowering of standard, he made a personal matter, and absolutely refused, at severe personal loss, to connect his name with anything that was not the best of its kind that could be furnished, always considering the questions of profit and loss as merely trifling incidentals un- worthy the consideration of men able to furnish something to benefit their fellow-men. He therefore refused splendid offers and set his whole mind upon the great plan of his life—to furnish the American book trade with a catalogue of the books in print in which they were dealing.
The plan had been mooted in 1872. In 1873 Leypoldt promised to undertake the work when a certain sum had been guaranteed ; in 1874 about half the sum was forthcoming ; but in 1875 he decided to undertake it without further delay, being fully persuaded that long before he had exhausted the amount guaranteed, the book trade would take pride in the undertaking and furnish him with the requisite means to carry ittothe end. Work was begun in 1876, Leypoldt fully expecting to accomplish it in one short year. But all too soon he found that he had undertaken to ‘‘ make bricks with- out straw.”’ He was obliged to fairly beg publishers to send him their catalogues and titles of current publications, and he was further obliged to train his staff of workers in the very A BC of cataloguing. All vexed questions were referred to him, and in all the complications that arose his knowledge, or at least his knowledge where to obtain information, was al- ways called upon. Leypoldt now worked night and day. His home was a workshop, as well as his office, and no one, except those who helped him faithfully according to their ability, will ever be able to realize the amount of work Leypoidt nersonally put into ‘‘ The American Catalogue.” And all the time the moral strain was even more severe than the mental, for very soon he realized how completely he had miscalculated the labor involved. Yet he had already gone so far that to turn back would seem bad faith toward those who had given him support. He found himself completely without prospects of getting the needed capital to carry the work to completion, and the salary account alone was stupendous. In this pre- dicament he made a financial arrangement with Mr. A. C. Armstrong, and so the first volume of ‘‘ The American Cata-
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Ixxv
logue” made its appearance during 1880, and the second volume a year later, with the publishing imprint of A. C. Armstrong & Son, and L. E. Jones’s name as compiler upon the title-page—a whole history in itself.
The organization of the book trade,was a consumma- tion to which Leypoldt looked forward with much desire, and Zhe Publishers’ Weekly was full of plans. In 1874 the American Book Trade Union was formed in a convention held by Western booksellers at Cincinnati, February 12 and 13, and July 21-23 of the same year a general convention was held at Put-in-Bay, Ohio, at which was formed the American Book Trade Association, with the late Mr. Anson D. F. Ran- dolph as president. One of the points of discussion at that time was the Trade Sale system, always deprecated by Leypoldt, despite any question of personal interest, and a committee on the subject projected the plan of a Book Fair, on the Leipzig principle, to take the place of the Trade Sale. The system was inaugurated by Messrs. Leavitt, under the title of the ‘‘ Booksellers’ Exchange and Clearing-House,” July 19, 1875, but it did not prove permanent and was ulti- mately replaced by the Trade Sale again. A second conven- tion was held by the A. B. T. A. at Niagara Fallsin 1875, and a third at Philadelphia during the Centennial. The Associa- tion endeavored to do away with the discount system, which simply raised prices to an artificial nominal rate in order to take off a fictitious discount. This endeavor was warmly supported by Leypoldt, but the general agree- ment made among publishers did not work satisfactorily, and at Philadelphia the trade proved unwilling to decide upon the further and logical step strongly urged by Zhe Publishers’ Weekly, of reducing nominal prices to real prices, and the A. B. T. A. came to an end. Leypoldt entered warmly into the plans for a Book Trade Exhibit at the Centennial, pub- lishing a Centennial number of Zhe Publishers’ Weekly, and also in the next year into the plans for an American exhibit at Paris. He was always a patriot in trade work.
During this Centennial year also, the Library Journal was started. Leypoldt had again and again started a li- brary department in The Publishers’ Weekly, and looked for- ward to the establishment of a separate periodical. In 1876 Mr. Melvil Dewey, now librarian of the New York State Li-
Ixxvi AMERICAN BOOK-TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY
brary, came to him with a similar plan, and after several con- sultations it was decided to go forward. During these con- sultations, the plan of a Library Conference, suchas had been held in 1853, was brought forward, and letters and telegrams were forwarded to leading librarians to get their views. The first issue of the American Library Journal, Leypoldt as publisher taking the entire risk, was issued September 30, 1876, and the conference was held at Philadelphia, October 4-6. Out of this came the American Library Association, of which Leypoldt was a councillor, and in turn the Library Asso- ciation of the United Kingdom. His sympathy with library work was always active and effective, and the libraries as well as the trade have much for which tothank him. He un- dertook the publication of Mr. W. E. Foster’s Monthly Reference Lists and prepared or promoted several library helps. His library work was never remunerative; in fact, it entailed a heavy loss, but it was very cordially recognized.
In 1879 Leypoldt, desiring to carry his bibliographical enterprise into fresh fields, projected the /udex Medicus, a monthly key to medical books and periodicals, which should be a periodical supplement to the great ‘‘ Index Catalogue of the Library of the Surgeon-General’s Office United States Army,” by Dr. John S. Billings, now of the New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox, and Tilden Foundations. Fearing that his friends and associates would be inclined to persuade him from new ventures, he kept his plans quiet until they were nearly ready for the launch. Dr. Billings and Dr. Robert Fletcher undertook the editorship, and the work proved professionally very valuable. But its too sanguine projector lost over $5000 by it, just as the skies were clearing for him, and for some years it was continued only as a labor of love, under certain guarantees from the profession.
In order to obtain the means to devote himself exclusively to developing the Jndex Medicus, and other undertakings, Leypoldt'sacrificed The Publishers’ Weekly, which in 1879 be- came the property of Mr. R. R. Bowker, who for a number of years had been a member of Leypoldt’s editorial staff. A year later, when Mr. Bowker went to England as the repre- sentative of Harper & Brothers, he leased Zhe Publishers’ Weekly to Leypoldt, who conducted it until the time of his death, since which time Mr. Bowker has again taken it under his personal control,
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY Ixxvii
In tine the effects of unremitting work and worry began to tell even on Leypoldt’s strong constitution. But his in- ventiveness, which amounted to almost a mania, would not let him rest, and plan after plan was projected, and work after work was begun, all consuming money and demanding close application. About the beginning of March, 1884, he was in- duced to remain at home to recover from headaches that had become almost ceaseless. A few weeks later, on the 31st of March, he succumbed to an acute attack of brain fever, at the comparatively early age of forty-eight.
Though gifted socially to a rare extent, Leypoldt was of a most retiring nature. Scarcely anyone knew him person- ally in a trade in which his name was a household word. It was a pity; for, personally, Leypoldt could, no doubt, have persuaded many whom he could not reach through an inter- mediary or by correspondence. He was magnetic and his friends were of the closest. He was true and honest to the core, and all humbug and false representation made him phys- ically ill, His tastes were all scholarly and artistic, his nature warm, poetic, fun-loving, and responsive to everything noble and elevating. He was enthusiastic to a fault, and, again, suffered agonies from depression amounting almost to melancholia. His was a wholly artistic nature, bound down by the logic and business considerations that always seemed to him so trivial. And yet he was scrupulous in meeting every obligation, and, probably, few men have ever been trusted so implicitly with money without being able to furnish one tangible asset but personal character.
- +4 ': > 22e - ~ % “< ~ > 24 = kK» ~ , :
Dawe Ail 2).0)p.20f, 90a a by ‘hana pas : ta abayoios <> (shy ane
ign) odiivodA 1 »Quinanilge
Poy Pies vlinallan om
aA
sWthlogral, sacanets the
bn 3 cabq, bge 0%, &
VRE its eouelaaw
eee aincuns A: hay Clin tA, jacegile BAHDQ ae
w@t>iwt at oga Jae 500m
anuod Tes
a A ~ ’ 4 * ‘ +. = Fl ¢ ; , _ > ~
as a ~ P >
ctr stem? ia aag Oni
; tw 32qee sigh ak
Catalogue published by American Booksellers
in 1804
x
d baie
iduq sigolsigd
Pl -_
Bly %
—~
aislls2Jood assivsmA * =~
Pres;
Gxyt ALO G UE
OF ALL THE
BOORS
FRINTED IN THE
UNITED STATES,
WITH THE PRICES, AND PLACES WHERE PUBLISHED, ANNEXED.
we
jOudlitbed bp the Booklellers in Botton.
& ? THIS Catalogue ig intended to include all Books of general fale printed in the United States, whether original, or reprinted; that the public may fee the rapid progrefs of book printing in a country,where,twenty yedts fince, fcarcely a book was publithed. Local and occafional tracts are generally pmitted. Some few of the boeks in the Catalogue are now out of print ; and others are {carce. It is contemplated to publifha new edition of this Catalogue, every two years, and tomake the neceffary adantions and corrections; and it is hoped the time is not far diffant, when ufeful Libraries may be formed of American editions of Books, woll printed, and handfomely bound,
LL INE ALLTEL T SOL ET EIR LE LE IEE OIE LAD GL ET LLC IL TLS EARS)
PRINTED AT BOSTON, FOR THE BOOKSELLERS,
Jan. 1804. {Price ten Cents. }
sical Bi] ui suyolaied BOTT ‘i. ' ya? sd eine; - {ez od) 29) vant ahi od 5a8 riny (Se Te aw, atts vin tfuns feaodasoo ba abt re supeles, ad al 7 hon lquressrve “ of 1 bee eet CMM Yes of of) ot Mt bene 5 aceiorre: | ty at ed gent wiles lotst
icihgat Baa bani ©
CAA OhG.ULE
OF
BOOKS;
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES.
LAW.
AMERICAN PRECEDENTS of Declarations, col- lected chiefly from the manufcripts of accomplifhed pleaders ; digefted and arranged under diftin¢t titles, and adapted to the moft modern practice. 8vo. Bo/- fon, 2 50
BLACKSTONE’s Commentaries on the Laws of Eng- land, 4 vols. 12mo. Bo/ffon. 5 dolls. —with Chriftian’s Notes, 4 vols. 12mo. 6 dolls. —in 5 vols. 12mo. 6 25
Blackftone’s Commentaries, ditto, with Notes of Refer- ence to the Conftitution and Laws of the United States. by Judge Tucker, of Virginia, 5 vols. 8vo. Balhmore.
Beccaria on the Law of Crimes and Punifhments, 18mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cents.
Burns’ Law of Marine Infurances, 12mo. MV. Vors. 1 dl.
CONDUCTOR Generalis, or the Power and Duty of Juftices, Sheriffs, Conftables, &c. 8vo. Philad. 2 50 Cooper’s Treatife on the Bankrupt Laws of England and
America, 8vo. Philad. 4 dols. Chriftian’s Notes to Blackftone’s Commentaries, 12mo.
Bofton. 1 25
4 LAW.
DALLAS’ Reports of Cafes adjudged in the Courts of the United States and Pennfylvania, held at Philadel- phia, 3 vols. 8vo. Philad. 15 dols.
ESPINASSE’s Digeft of the Law of Actions and Trials at Nifi Prius, 2 vols. 8vo. Walpole. 6 dols.
FREEMAN ’s Clerk's Magazine, containing the moft ufe- ful and neceffary forms of Deeds, Bonds, &c. 12mo. Bofton. 1 dol.
Freeman’s Town Officer, or the Power and Duty of Se- lectmen, Overfeers, &c. 12mo. Boffon. 1 dol.
Freeman’s Juftice’s Affiftant, a collection of the Laws of Maffachufetts relative to Juftices of the Peace, 8vo. Bofton. 2 dols.
Freeman’s Probate Directory, or Affiftant to Probate Courts, Guardians, Executors, &c. 12mo. Bofion. 1 dl.
GRAYDON's Digeft of the Laws of the United States, 8vo. Harrifburgh. 4 50
HERTY’s Digeft of the Laws of the United States, 8vo. Newbern. 4 50
INDEX to the Laws of Maffachufetts, from 1788 to 1 796, 12mo. Worceffer. 75 cts.
JONES’ Law of Bailments, 12mo. Bofton. 75 cts.
KYD’s Treatife on the Law of Bills of Exchange and Promiffory Notes, 12mo. Bo/fon and Albany. 1 dol.
LAW. af LAWS of Maffachufetts, 3 vols. 8vo. Boffon. 6 50 Same, 2 vols. royal 8vo. 7 50, and fine copy, 8 dols. Either of the three vols. may be had feparate. Laws of the United States, 5 vols. 8vo. PAzlad. 10 dols. Laws of New-Hamphfhire, 8vo. Port/mouth. 2 dols. Law of Partnerfhip, by Watfon, 8vo. Albany. 2 dols. Law of Contracts and Agreements, by Powell, 8vo. Walpole. 2 25 Law of Marine Infurances, by Burns, 12mo. Mew- York. 1 dol.
MARTEN’s Law of Nations, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
POWELL’s Effay on the Law of Contradts and Agree- ments, 8vo. Walpole. 2 25
Pothier’s Treatife on the Nature of Obligations, 8vo. Newbern. 3 50
Park on the Law of Marine Infurances, from the 4th London Edition, 8vo. Boffon. 4 dols.
ROBINSON’s Reports of Cafes, argued and determined in thé High Court of Admiralty, commencing Mich- aelmas Term, 1798, 3 vols. 8vo. Philad. 8 dols.
Rutherforth’s Inftitutes of Natural Law, being the Sub- ftance of a Courfe of Lectures on Grotius, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. § dols.
SULLIVAN’s Hiftory of Land Titles in Maffachufetts, 8vo. Boffon. 3 dols.
Tidd’s Practical Forms, 8vo. Albany. 2 50
PLY SEG.
AMERICAN HERBAL, or Materia Medica, where- in the virtues of the Mineral, Vegetable and Animal Productions of Americaare laid down, 12mo. Walpole. Lg2
REL Berean Vade Mecum, containing the Anatomy and Phyfiology of the Human Body; by Dr. Hooper, 1z2mo. Boffon. 87 1-2 cts.
Aikin’s Concife View ofall the moft important Fads, which have hitherto appeared concerning the Cow Pox. 12mo. Boflon. 62 1-2 cts. boards 50 cts.
BUCHAN’s Domeftic Medicine, or Family Phyfician, Svo. Boffon, 1 75 Ditto, revifed and improved by Griffith, 8vo. PA. 2 50 Ditto, revifed and improved by Cathrall, 8vo. do 2 dls.
Bell's (Benjamin) Syftem of Surgery, 4 vols. 8vo. Worcefler. 10 dols.
Bell’, (Benjamin) Syftem of Surgery, new improved Edition, 4 vols. 8vo. Zroy.
Bell's (Benjamin) Syftem of Surgery, abridged by Wa- ters, 8vo. Philad. 3 dols.
Bell's (Benjamin) Treatife on the Theory and Manage- ment of Ulcers, 8vo. Boffon. 1 50
Bell's (Benjamin) Treatife on Gonorrhea and Venerea, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
Baillies’ Morbid Anatomy of fome of the moft impor- tant parts of the Human Body, 8vo. Albany. 1 25
Blumenbach’s Elements of Phvfiology, 8vo. Pail. 2 dls.
Brown's Elements of Medicine, 12mo. Fazrhaven. 1 dol.
Same work, 8vo. Philad. 1 vais
Brown's Elements of Medicine, revifed by T. Beddoes, 8vo. Port/mouth, 2 25
Brown's (Samuel) Treatife on the Nature, Origin and Progrefs of the Yellow Fever, 8vo. Bofton. 62 1-2 cts.
Beddoes on the Medical and Domettic Management of Confumptions, 12mo. Zroy. 1 dol. :
Barton’s Sketch of the Materia Medica of America, T2MoO. 75 2cts,
PHYSIC. :
CHESELDEN’s Anatomy, with forty plates, 8vo. Bo/- ton. 2 dols.
Chefelden’s Anatomical Tables, 8vo. Boflon. 1 25
Cullen's Firft Lines of the Practice of Phyfic, with Notes, by John Rotheram, 8vo. MW. Fork. 2 50
Cullen’s Materia Medica, 8vo. MV. Fork. 2 50
Cullen’s Synopfis and Nofology, rz2mo. Springfield. 75 cts.
Currie on the Difeafes of America, 8vo. Philad. 2 dls.
Chaptal’s Elements of Chymiftry, 8vo. Philad. 3 dols.
Caldwell’s Medical and Phyfical Memoirs, relative to Yellow Fever, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
Chemiftry, Syftem of, from the Encyclopedia, 4to. Philad. 2 dols.
DARWIN’s Zoonomia, or Laws of Organic Life, 2 vols. 8vo. Boffon. 5 50. Fine, 6 75 Same work, 3 vols. 8vo, Philad. 6 75 Denman’s Practice of Midwifery, 2 vols. 8vo. New- Fork. 3 50
EDINBURGH New Difpenfatory, third American from the 4th Edinburgh Edition, with large additions, cor- rections and alterations, 8vo. Walpole. 2 50.
CS” New Edition, improved by Dr. Duncanof Edinburgh,in the press.
ELLIOT’s Medical Pocket Book, 18mo. Bo/ffon. 75 cts. FYFFE’s Anatomy, 2 vols. r2mo. M. Fork.
GARDINER onthe Caufes and Cure of the Gout, t2mc Philad.
Hamilton’s Outlines of the Theory and Prattice of Midwifery, 8vo. Worcefier. 1 50 Same work, 12mo. Northampton. 1 dol.
8 PHYSIC.
Hamilton’s Female Family Phyfician, or directions for the Management of Female Complaints, 8vo, Worce/fler. 1 50, 12mo. Vew-Fork. 1 dol.
Hayes on the Caufes and Cure of Coughs, Colds, &c. 12mo. Boffon. 40 cts.
Hunter on the Venerea, 8vo. Philad 2 dols. 50 cts.
Hunter on the Blood, Inflammation and Gun-Shot Wounds, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 4 dols.
Hooper’s Anatomift’s Vade Mecum, 12mo. SBo/ffon. 87 1-2 cts. |
Hooper’s Compendious Medical Dictionary, containing an explanation of the Terms in Anatomy, Surgery, &c. 18mo Boffon. 1 12 1-2 cts.
Haller’s Firft Lines of Phyfiology, tranflated from the third Latin Edition, 8vo. Zroy. 2 50
JACKSON on the Fevers of Jamaica, and the Intermit- ting Fever of America, 12mo. Philad. 1 dol.
LAV OISIER’s Elements of Chymiftry, in a new Syfte- matic Order, containing all the modern difcoveries, 8vo, Philad. 3 dols.
MOORE '’s Medical Sketches, 8vo. Providence. 1 25 Medical Repofitory, conducted by Drs. Mitchell and Mil- ler, of New-York, 6 vols. 8vo. MW. Fork. 18 dols.
ES" This Work is published inquarterly numbers. Subscribers sup- plied by the Booksellers in Boston. No’s.1 and 2 of a new Series, com- mencing with 1803, are already published, and the work will be regue larly continued,
Mitchell’s Nomenclature, 8vo. WV. Fork. 1 dol.
PARKINSON’s Chymical Pocket Book, or Memoranda Chemica, with an Appendix by Dr. Woodhoufe, 12mo. Philad. 1 75
Parkinfon’s Medical Admonitions to Families, 8vo. Port/mouth, 2 dols.
PHYSIC. 9
QUINCY’s Medical Lexicon, improved and enlarged, 8vo. WV. Fork. 3 50
RUSH’s Medical Inquiries and Obfervations, 5 vols. 8vo. Philad. 7 50
Rufh’s Lectures upon the Inftitutes and Practice of Med- icine, 8vo. Philad. 1 25
SMELLIE’s Midwifery abridged, with a fet of Ana- tomical Tables, 8vo. Worceffer. 1 50
Saunders on the Structure, Difeafes,and Economy of the Liver, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 1 dol.
Syftem of Anatomy, extracted from the Encyclopedia, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
Science of Life, on the Principles eftablifhed in Brown’s Elements, by M’Lean, 8vo. Dover. 1 dol.
Struve on fufpended Animation, 1t2mo. Troy. 75 cts.
TYTLER’s Treatife on the Plague and Yellow Fever, 8vo. Salem. 2 25
Townfend’s Elements of Therapeutics, or a Guide to Health, being Cautions and Directions for the treat- ment of Difeafes, 8vo. Bofion. 2 50
Thomfon’s Family Phyfician, or Domeftic Medical Friend, 8vo. WV. York. 2 dols.
UNDERWOOD on the Difeafes of Children, t2mo. Philad. 1 dol.
WALLIS on the Art of Preventing Difeafes and Reftor- ing Health, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
White on Lying-in Women, 8vo. Worcefier. 1 50
Webfters Hiftory of the Plague and of Peftilential Dif- eafes, 2 vols. 8vo. New-York. 4 dols.
TO DIVINITY.
Willich’s Lectures on Diet and Regimen, a Syftematic Inquiry into the moft rational means of preferving Health, 8vo. M Fork. 2 dols.—z2 vols. r2mo. Bof- 10, P20,
Same work abridged, 12mo. Boffon. 1 25
DIVINITY.
Avang (Hannah) View of the various religious de- nominations which have appeared in the world fince the Chriftian Era, 8vo. Boffon. 2 25
Antidote to Deifm, an ample refutation of all the objec- tions of Thomas Paine, (by Dr.Ogden) 2 vols. 12mo. Newark. 2 dols.
Addifon’s Evidences of the Chriftian Religion, 12mo. Bofton. 75 cts.
Afflicted Man’s Companion, by Willifon, rzmo. Bofion and Philad. 75 cts.
Alleine’s Alarm to the Unconverted, 12mo. E£vizabeth- Town. 50 cts.
Andrews’ Candid Examination of the moral tendency of the doctrines of Univerfalifm, 12mo. Bo/fton. 62 1-2 cts.
Alciphron, or the Minute Philofopher, in feven dialogues, containing an Apology for the Chriftian Religion, a- gainft thofe who are called Free Thinkers; by Bifhop Berkley, 8vo. WW. Haven. 2 dols.
BUTLER’s Analogy of Natural and Revealed Religion, 8v0, Boflon, 1 75
Blair's (Rev. Hugh) Sermons, new and complete Edi- tion, 3 vols. 8vo. MW. Fork. 7 dols. Ditto, 2 vols. 8vo> Boffon. 3 dols. Ditto, 2 vols. r1a2mo. Wew-Fork. 2 dols. Ditto, 3d vol. 12mo. Philad. 1 dol.
Brown's Concordance to the Holy Scriptures, 12mo. Charleflown. 1 dol.
DIVINITY. Vi
Brown's Dictionary of the Bible, containing a Hiftorical Account of the Perfons, a Geographical Account of the Places, and a Syftematical Defcription of other objects in the Old and New Testaments, 2 vols. 8vo PAi/. 5 dls.
Brown's Chriftian Journal, or Common Incidents, Spirit- ual Inftructors, r2mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Brown's Introduction to the right underftanding of the Oracles of God, 1z2mo. AdJany. 62 1-2 cts.
Bunyan’s Grace abounding, 12mo. Evefer. 62 1-2 cts.
Bunyun’s Holy War, made by Shaddai upon Diabolus, for retaking the town of Manfoul, 12mo. Evefer. 75 cts.
Bunyan’s Come and Welcome to Jefus Chrift, 18mo. Exeter. 50 cts.
Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progrefs, from this world to that which is to come, 12mo. Exefer. 75 cts.
Belknaps Differtations upon the Character, Death and Refurrection of Jefus Chrift, and the Evidence of his Gofpel, 12mo. Boffon. 62 1-2 cts.
Beauties of the Bible, a Selection from the old and new Testaments, with various remarksand differtations pro- per for Schools and Families; by EzraSampfon, 12mo. Hudson. 75 cts. 18mo. Boffon. 75 cts.
Brothers’ Prophecies, 12mo. P&ilad. 1 dol.
Boulanger on the Principles and Effects of the Chriftian Religion. 312mo. ¥. Fork. 75 cts.
Booth’s Reign of Grace, from its rife to its confumma- {ion remo.wy. Fork ©8712
Burkitt’s Expofition ofthe New Teftament, with Practical Obfervations, wherein the whole of the Sacred Text is recited and explained. folio. Philad. 8 25. 4to, £u- zabeth-Town. 7 dols.
Burkitt’s Poor Man’s Help, and Young Man’s Guide, 1z2mo. WV. Fork. 50 cts.
Barclay’s Apology for the People called Quakers. 8vo, ‘Phildd.2e1 025
Bellamy’s Effay on the Nature and Glory of the Gofpel, 12mo. Worcefler. 1x dol.
Bofton’s Human Nature in its Fourfold State. 12mo. Exeter. 87 1-2 cts.
Baxter’s Call to the Unconverted, to turn and live, and accept of mercy while mercy may be had, 12mo. Bo/- ton. 62 1-2 Cts.
12 DIVINITY.
Baxter's Saints’ Everlafting Reft, or the bleffed State of the Saints inHeaven. 12mo. Zxeferand Philad. 1 dol.
Bogatzky’s Golden Treafury for the Children of God, 1zmo. Boffon. 75 cts. WN. York. 75 cts.
Backus on Regeneration, 12mo. Hartford. 62 1-2 cts.
Backus’ Church Hiftory of New-England, from 1683 to 1796. 8vo. Boffon. 1 50
Bielby’s (Bifhop of London) Summary of the Evidences of the Chriftian Religion, rz2mo. Boffon. 62 1-2 cts. boards 50 cts.
Bielby’s (Bifhop of London) Ledtures on the Gofpel of St. Matthew, 8vo. New-Haven. 2 dols.
Book of Martyrs, by George Wright, 2 vols. 4to. Plates. New-York. 12 dols.
Bonnet’s Philofophical and Critical Inquiries concerning Chriftianity, r2mo. Philad. 1 dol.
Beveridge’s Private Thoughts upon Religion, and upon a Chriftian Life, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Baron Haller’s Letters to his Daughter onthe Truths of the Chriftian Religion, 18mo. NMew-Haven. 75 cts. Beauties of the Evangelical Magazine, 2 vols. 8vo. Phi-
ladelphia, 4 25 Boffuet’s Sermons. 12mo. Boffon 62 1-2 cts. Bible Stories, for Youth, Philad. socts. Albany. 75 cts.
CLARKE’s (Rev. Dr. John) Sermons, preached at the Firft CongregationalChurch, Bofton, 8vo. Bofion, 2 25
Centaur, not Fabulous, in Letters to a Friend; by Dr. Young, 12mo. Philad. 80 cts.
Coles’ Difcourfes on God’s Sovereignty, 8vo. Newbury- Port. 1 50 12mo. Pahilad. 1 dol.
Calvinifm Improved, or the Gofpel illuftrated as a Syftem of real Grace iffuing in Univerfal Salvation, 8vo. W. London. 1 50
Cotton’s Vindication of the Bible, 8vo. Boffon. 1 25
Chriftian Remembrancer, fhort reflections upon the Faith, Life and Condué of aChriftian. 12mo. New-York. 62 1-2 cts.
Chriftian Pilgrim, the Wonderful Adventures of a Chrif- tian in his Travels to the World which is to come, 18mo. Worceffer. 50 cts.
DIVINITY. 13
Campbell’s New Tranflation ofthe Gofpels from the Greek with Differtations and Notes, 4to. P&ilad. 5 dols. and coarfe, 4 dols.
Campbell’s Differtation on Miracles, im anfwer to David Hume, 1t2mo.
Chriftianity as old as the Creation, or the Gospel a re- publication of the Works of Nature, by Tindall, 8vo. Newburgh. 1 25
Clark’s Collection of the Promifes of Scripture, 12mo. Bofton. 1 dol.
Calvary, or the Death of Chrift, a Poem; by R. Cumber- land, r2mo. Soffon. 75 cts. and fine, 1 dol.
DAVIES’ Sermons on Important Subjects, 3 vols. 8vo,
New-Fork. 5 25 Same work, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 4 dols.
Dickinfon’s Familiar Letters upon a variety of Seafonable and Important Subjects in Religion,rz2mo. PAv. 1 dol.
Dickinfon’s Five Difcourfes on fome important points of Chriftian Faith, 12mo. Eiizabeth-Town. 67 cts.
Dodd’s Reflections on Death, 12mo. Philad. 80 cts.
Doddridge’s Rife and Progrefs of Religion in the Soul, I2mo. Exeter. 1 dol. 12mo. Boffon. 75 cts.
Doddridge’s Ten Sermons on Regeneration, 12mo. Prov- idence. 75 cts. 12mo. Boffon. 87 1-2 cts.
Dialogues between the Pulpit and Reading Defk, 12mo. Albany. 67 cts.
Dyer’s Famous Titles of Chrift, or the Believer’s Golden Chain, 12mo. Wewduryport. 1 dol.
Dictionary of the Bible, explaining the Proper Names and Difficult Words, 12mo. Worcefler. 87 1-2 cts.
Divine Maxims, or Aphorifms of Wifdom, r2mo. Bo/- ton. 67 cts.
Duke’s Clue to the Difcovery of Religious Truth, 12mo. Wilmington. 1 dol.
EDWARDS’ History of Redemption, on a plan entirely original, 8vo. Worcefler. 1 50
B
14 DIVINITY.
Edwards’ Hiftory of Redemption, with Notes Hiftorical and Critical, 8vo. V. Fork. 2 dols
Edwards on Religious Affections, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 1 dol.
Edwards’ Differtations on Liberty and Neceffity, 8vo. Worcefler. 1 dol.
Edwards’ Differtations on the Nature of Virtue, 12mo. Philad. 62 1-2 cts.
Edwards’ Treatife on the Millennium, 8vo. Philad. 1 50
Edwards on the Will, 8vo. Zroy. 1 75
Exercifes of Piety, from the German of Zollikofer, cor- rected and amended by T. M. Harris. 12mo. Wor- cefler. 87 1-2 cts.
Erfkine’s Sermons, 8vo. Mewburyport, 1 50
Erfkine’s Gofpel Sonnets, or Spiritual Songs, 12mo. Worcfler. 75 cts.
Enfield’s Biographical Sermons, or aSeries of Difcourfes upon the Principal Characters of Scripture, rzmo. Bo/- ton. 62 1-2 cts.
Enfield’s Prayers, for the ufe of Families, rzmo. Bo/- ton. 62 1-2 cts.
Evan’s Sketch of the Denominations into which Chrif- tians are divided, 18mo. Philad. socts. |
Evidences of Revealed Religion, by Mendon Affociation, 12mo. Northampton. 75 cts.
Emmons’ Difcourfes on fome of the firft Principles of the Chriftian Religion, 8vo. Wrentham. 2 dols.
FISKE’s Twenty-two Sermons on various important subjects, 8vo. Worceffer. 1 50
Fordyce’s Addreffesto Young Men, 12mo. Boffon. 1 dol
Fordyce’sSermonsto Young Women, 12mo. #o/f. 1 dol.
Flavel’s Hufbandry Spiritualized, or the Heavenly Ufe of Earthly Things, r2mo. Evizabeth-Town. 87 1-2 cts.
Flavel’s Navigation Spiritualized, ora New Compafs for Seamen, 12mo. Newburyport. 75 cts.
Flavel’s Token for Mourners, or the advice of Chrift to a Diftreffed Mother, 12mo. Exeler. 37 1-2 cts.
Flechere’s Paftoral and Familiar Letters, and Six Letters on the Spiritual Manifeftation of God, 12mo.
DIVINITY. 15
Flechere’s Pofthumous Pieces, 12mo. Albany. 87 1-2 cts. Fuller's Letters, in which the Calviniftic and Socinian Sy f- tems are compared, r2mo. Philad. 1 dol.
Fuller’s Gofpel its own Witnefs, 12mo. WV. Haven. 75 cts. Fuller’s Gofpel its own Witnefs, with Beilby’s Evidences of Chriftianity, annexed, rzmo. W. Fork. 1 doll. Fuller’s Gofpel its own Witnefs, with Letters to Mr. Vidler, upon Univerfalifm, 12mo. Boffon. 1 doll. Fuller’s Memoirs of Rev. Samuel Pearce, 12mo. Boff. 1d. Fuller’s Gofpel worthy ofallacceptation, 12mo. Bo/.75¢. Fuller’s Backflider, an Inquiry into the nature and effects
of Religious Declenfion, 18mo. Boffon. 62 1-2 cts. Fox’s Journal of his Travels, and Religious Labours, 2 vols. 8vo. WV. Fork. 3 dols. Fothergill’s Difcourfes to the Quakers, 12mo. PAil. 75 cts. Forbe’s Family Book, or Difcourfes on Doctrinal, Evan- gelical and Practical Subjects, 12mo. Salem. 1 dol. Fofter’s Examination of Strong’s Doctrine of Univerfal Mifery, &c. 8vo. Walpole. 1 50 Fleetwood’s Life of Chrift, with the Lives and Sufferings of his Apoftles, 2 vols. 8vo. Carhjle. 3 50
GIBBS’ Sacred Contemplations, 8vo. Philad. 1 50
Guthrie’s Trial of a Saving Intereft in Chrift, and the way to attain it, 18mo. Zxeler. 62 1-2 cts.
Gofpel News, Peace and Joy, by Shippie Townfend, 8vo. Bofton. 1 §0
Gofpel Sonnets, or Spiritual Songs, by R. Erfkine, 12mo, Worcefler. 87 1-2 cts.
Grubb’s (Sarah) Journal of her Life and Religious La- bours, 12mo. 87 1-2 cts.
Gofpel Alarm to Chriftendom, by H. Caffor, r2mo. PAi/. 1 doll.
HUNTER’s Sacred Biography, or Hiftory of the Pa- triarchs, to which is added the Hiftory of Deborah, Ruth and Hannah, 3 vols. 8vo. Boffon. 6 dols.—in 4 vols. 8vo. including the Life of Chrift, Wa/pole. 7 dols.
16 DIVINITY.
Hunter’s Life of Chrift, being a Continuation of Sacred Biography, 8vo. Walpole. 1 0.
Hopkins’ Syftem of Divinity, 2 vols. 8vo. Boffon. 5 dols.
Hopkins’ Treatife.on the Millennium, 8vo. do. 1 25
Horne’s Commentary on the Book of Pfalms, 8vo. Phil. 2 25, or in 2 vols. 2 50
Hervey’s Meditations and Contemplations, 12mo. E’xefer 87 I-2 cents.
Hervey’s Afpafio vindicated, 1z2mo. PAilad. 80 cents.
Horne on Miffions, 12mo. New-York. 37 1-2 cts.
Henry's Communicant’s Companion, or Inftructions and Helps for receiving the Lord’s Supper, 12mo. Leom- infler. 87 1-2 cents.
Hallyburton’s Inquiry into the Principles of modern De- ifts, 8vo. Philad. 1 75
Hallyburton’s Life and Memoirs, 12mo, Pz. 62 1-2 cts.
Hallyburton’s Great Concern of Salvation, rzmo. PAzv. 1 dollar.
Haller’s Letters to his Daughter on the Truths of the Chriftian Religion, 18mo. WV. Haven. 75 cts.
INFERNAL Conference, or Dialogues of Devils, 8vo. Worcefier. 1 50—12mo0. Philad. 1 doll. Index to the Holy Scriptures, 8vo. Salem. 50 cents.
JENYNS'’ View of the Internal Evidence of the Chriftian Religion, r2mo. Boffon. 75 cents.
Jenyns’ Lectures to a fele@t Company of Friends, 12mo. Bofton. 75 cts.
Jenyns’ Inquiry into the Nature and Origin of Evil, 1z2mo. Boffon. 62 1-2 cts,
Jenks’ Prayers and Offices of Devotion, for Families and Individuals,on moftoccafions,r2mo. Bofton 87 1-2 cts.
KLOPSTOCK’s Meffiah, (tranflated by Collyer) t2mo. NV. Fork. 87 1-2 cts.
DIVINITY. 17
Kelburn’s Five Sermons on the Divinity of Chrift, 8vo. Philad. 75 cts.
Key to the Prophecies, by Frafer, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
LIFE of Chrift and his Apoftles, by Wright, folio. NV. Fork. 5 dolls. Life of Chrift and his Apoftles, by Fleetwood, 2 vols. 8vo. Carhifle. 3 50 Life of Chrift and his Apoftles, by Taylor, 12mo. Green- field. 62 1-2 cents. Life of Joseph, by M’Gowan, 12mo. Exeter. 62 1-2 cts. Lives of Dr. Ifaac Watts and Dr. Philip Doddridge, 8vo. Bofton. 1 25 Life of Rev. John Fletcher, by Wefley, 12mo. MV. Fork. 75 cts. Life and religious Labours of Sufannah Anthony, 12mo. - Worcefter & Hartford. 62 1-2 cts. Life of Rev. Samuel Pearce, by A. Fuller, rzmo. Bo/- ton. 1 doll. Life of Rev. George Whitefield, by Dr. Gillies, 12mo. New London. 75 cts. Salem. 87 1-2 cts. Life of Francis Xavier, Apoftle of the Indies, 12mo. Philad. 62 1-2 cts. Life of Mrs. Ofborne, t2mo. Worcefler. 1 12 1-2 cts. Life of Col. Gardiner, 12mo. Boffon. 1 doll. Lathrop’s Sermons, on various Subjects, 2 vols. 8vo. Worceffer. 3 50 Lathrop’s Sermons, 1 vol. 8vo. Worceffer. 2 25 Levi’s Defence of the Old Teftament, in anfwer to Paine, 1zmo. M Fork. 75 cts. Lowth’s Tranflation of the Book of Ifaiah, 12mo. Alba- my. 75 Cts. Letchworth’s Difcourfes to the Quakers, (boards) 8vo. Bofton. 1 dol. Letters of Certain Jews to Voltaire, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols. Lyttleton’s Obfervations on the Converfion of St. Paul, being an experimental and rational Defence of Chrif- tianity, r12mo. Boffon. 62 1-2 cts. boards, 50 cts.
B2
18 DIVINITY.
Luthers Commentary upon the Epiftle of Paul to the Galatians, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
Letters from Baron Haller to his Daughter on the Truths of the Chriftian Religion, 18mo. Wew-Haven. 75 cts.
MASON on Self Knowledge, fhewing its Nature and Im- portance, and the way to attain it, 18mo. Bof, 75 cts. Hartford. 50 cts.
Melmoth’s Effay on the Sublime and Beautiful of Scrip- ture; 1 8mowVieVork. © esercts:
M’Ewen on the Types, Figures, and Allegories of the Old Teftament, 18mo. Exefer. 75 cts.
Mafon’s Student and Paftor, or direGiions how to attain to eminence and ufefulnefs in thofe characters, 12mo. Exeter. 62 1-2 cts.
Mafon's Select Remains, 12mo. Salem. 62 1-2 cts.
More’s (Hannah) Sacred Dramas, chiefly intended for young perfons, 12tmho. Boffon. 75 cts.
Mofheim’s Ecclefiaftical Hiftory, 6 vols. 8vo. PAz/. 12 50
M'Clure’s Twenty-four Sermons on the Moral Law, 8vo. Philad 21m S25
M'Gowan’s Life of Jofeph the Son of Ifrael, 18mo. Exe- ler. 62 1-2 cts.
Memoirs of eminently Pious Women, carefully abridged from the large work of Dr. Gibbon, by“ D. "Danas 12mo. Newburyport. 1 12 1-2
Melmoth’s Great Importance of a Religious Life, 12mo. Alexandria. 1 dol.
Maffillon’s Sermons, tranflated from the French, 2 vols. Sv, Wort 4. ts
NEWTON’s Differtations on the Prophecies which have been fulfilled and are at this time fulfilling, 8vo. Mew- Fork and Northampton. 2 25.—2 vols. 3 dols.
Newton’s (John) Works complete, 9 vols. r2mo. Philad. paso
Newton's Olney Hymns, r2mo. Philad. 62 1-2 cts. -
Newton's Letters to his Wife, rzmo. NW. Fors. 1 dol.
DIVINITY. 19
Newton’s Letters of Omicron and Vigil, 1zmo. PA: ladelphia. 80 cts.
Newton’s Cardiphonia. or the Utterance of the Heart, Z2wolsismos= FP hilad 9 r 7s
Neckar on the Importance of Religious Opinions, 1zmo. Bofton. 87 1-2 cts.
OWEN on Redemption, or the Death of Death, in the Death of Chrift, 8vo. Carlifle. 1 dol.
Owen on the Nature, Power, and Prevalency of Indwell- ing Sin, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Orton’s Letters to a Young Clergyman, (boards) 12mo. Bofton. 50 cts.
Orton's Difcourfes to the aged, 12mo. Salem. 1 dol. fine, I I2 1-2
PALEY’s View of the Evidences of Chriftianity, 8vo. Philad. 175. t2mo.,Boffon. 1 dol. and 1 12 1-2
Paley’s Natural Theology, or Evidences of the Exift- ence and Attributes of the Deity drawn from the Works of Nature, 12mo. Aléany. 1 dol. 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
Price’s (Dr. Richard) Sermons on various fubjects, 12mo. Bofton. 75 cts.
Petitpierre’s Thoughts on Divine Goodnefs, 12mo. Hart- WOT. 27, 1-2_Cts,
Prieftley’s Difcourfes on the Evidence of Revealed Reli- gion, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 3 50
Prieftley’s Hiftory of the Corruptions of Chriftianity, 2 vols. rz2mo. Bofton. 1 50
Pilgrim's Progrefs from this world to that which is to come, 12mo. Boflon. 75 cts.
Perkins’ (Rev. Nathan) Twenty-four Difcourfes, 8vo. Hartford. 2 dols. Pike and Hayward’s Cafes of Confcience, anfwered in an
Evangelical Manner, 12mo. Azad. 1 dol.
20 DIVINITY.
Poor Man’s Help and Young Man’s Guide, containing Doétrinal InftruGtionsand DireG@ions, Forms of Prayer, &c. r2mo. WV. VYork. 50 cts.
Path to Happinefs explored and illuftrated, 18mo. Bo/- ton. 50 cts.
Porteus’ (Bifhop) Evidences of the Chriftian Religion, 1z2mo. Boffon. 62 1-2 cts.
Porteus’ Lectures on the Gofpel of St. Matthew, 8vo. New-Haven. 2 dols.
Power of Religion on the Mind, in retirement, afflic- tion, and at the approach of death, r2mo. Mew-Bea- VOTE. 1S Clog
Penn’s Maxims and Reflections, r2mo. Philad. 62 1-2 cts.
ROWE’s Devout Exercifes of the Heart, 18mo. Hart- Jord. socts. Exeter. 37 1-2 cts..
Religious Courtfhip, or the Neceflity of Marrying Reli- gious Hufbands and Wives only, rzmo. Bo/fon. 75 cts.
Relly’s Union, or the Confanguinity and Affinity between Chrift and his Church, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 67 cts.
Reply to Wilberforce, on the Do@rine of Hereditary De- pravity, in letters by a Layman, (boards) 12mo. Bo/- fon. 50 cts.
Remarks on the Books of Daniel and John, 8vo. Wew- Fork, 2 dols.
SCOUGAL’s Life of God in the Soul of Man, 12mo. Philad. 62 1-2 cts.
Student and Paftor, by John Mafon, 12mo. Evxerer. 62 1-2 cts.
Seraphical Young Shepherd, or remarkable converfion of a young man in France, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 67 cts.
Spalding’s Nine Lectures, r2mo. Salem. 1 dol.
Sermons by Rev. S. S. Smith, Prefident of New-Jerfey College, 8vo. Mewark. 2 dols.
Sermons preached at the formation of the London Mif- fionary Society, t2mo. Mewéduryport. 75 cts.
DIVINITY. je
Strong's Sermons on various fubjeGs, experimental and pracical, 2 vols 8vo. Hartford. 3 dols.
Strongs DoGrine of Eternal Mifery, reconcileable with the infinite Benevolence of God, 8va. Hartford. 150
Seabury’s Difcourfes on feveral important {ubjeds, 2 vols. Bvo. WN. York. 3 dols.
Songs in the Night, by 2 Young Woman under heavy affiiGions, 12mo. Newhuryport. 62 1-2 cts.
Sturm’s Reflections on the Works of Nature and the dif- ferent Seafons of the Year, abridged by Rev. T. M. Harris, 1zmo. Charleflown. 1 dol.
Sermons feleGed from the Manufcripts of various Min- ifters belonging to the Northern Affociation. 8vo.
jorthampion. 1 25
Scott's Vindication of the Scriptures, in anfwer to Paine, 12mo. New-York. 62 1-2 cts.
Sermons on various important fubjects, by Andrew Lee, Bvo. Worcefler. 2 dols.
Sermons on the Principles of Revealed Religion, by John Smalley, D. D. 8vo. Hartford. 2 dols.
Sermons, tranflated from the French of Bifhop Maffilon, z vols. vo. New-York. 4 50
TRAVELS of Cyrus, to which is annexed a Difcourfe on the Mythology and Theology of the Pagans, 12mo. Boflon. 87 1-2 cts.
Travels of true Godlinefs and Ungodlinefs, by Benjamin Keach, 1zmo. Skenectady. 75 cts.
Traill’s Sermons on the Throne of Grace, 12mo. Vew- York. 7§ cts.
Taylor's Life of Chriftand his Apoftles, 1zmo. Greenfield. 62 1-2 cts.
VILLAGE Sermons, plain and fhort Difcourfes, by George Burder, 1zmo. Salem. 1 dol.
Venn’s Whole Duty of Man, 8vo. Worcefler. 2 dols.
Vindication of Divine Providence, extracted from St. Pierre’s Studies of Nature, 2 vols. 8vo. Worcefler. 3 50
22 DIVINITY.
WATSON’s Apology for Chriftianity, 8vo. Prov. 75 cts.
Watfon’s Apology for the Bible, being a refutation of Paine’s Age of Reafon, 1r2mo. Boffon. 55 cts.
Weft on Moral Agency, 8vo. Salem. 1 50
Whitefield’s Ten Sermons on various Subjects, 12mo. Port/mouth. 75 cts.
Whitefield’s Eighteen Sermons, 12mo. Vewduryport. 1dl.
Whitefield’s Life and Memoirs, by Dr. Gillies, 12mo. New-London. 75 cts. Salem. 87 1-2 cts.
Watts’ Glory of Chrift, as God Man, difplayed, 8vo. Bofion. 1 25
Watts’ Logic, or the right ufe of reafon, r2mo. Bo/fon. 1 dol.
Watts on the Improvement of the Mind, a Supplement to the Art of Logic, 12mo. Exefer. 1 dol.
Watts’ Mifcellaneous Thoughts, in profe and verfe, on Natural, Moral and Divine Subje@s, rzmo. Bofon. 87 1-2 cts.
Watts on the Love of God, 12mo. Philad. 75 cts.
Watts on the Paffions, 18mo. Eviz. Town. 50 cts.
Watts’ Scripture Hiftory, 8vo. Carlile. 1 dol.
Watts’ Hore Lyrice, Poems chiefly of the Lyric Kind, 18mo. Lveler. 66 cts. 18mo. Newburyport. 62 1-2 cts.
Watts’ Beauties, felected from his writings, r2mo. Wew- buryport. 75 cts.
Winchefter's Lectures on the Prophecies to be fulfilled, 2 vols. 8vo, Walpole. 4 25
Winchefter’s Dialogues on Univerfal Reftoration, 12mo. Bofion. 75 cts.
Wilberforce’s Practical View of the Prevailing Religious Syftem of profeffed Chriftians, in the higher and middle Claffes, contrafted with real Chriftianity, r2mo. Bofton. 1 dol. 8vo. Philad. 1 75
Willifon’s Sacramental Meditations and Advices ground ed upon Scripture Texts, proper for Communicants, 1z2mo. Boflon. 75 ets.
Willifon s Afflicted Man’s Companion, ora Directory for
Perfons and Families in Sicknefs or Diftrefs, 12mo. Philad. 75 cts. ’
DIVINITY. 7
Wefley’s Life and Death of the Rev. John Fletcher, 1z2mo. ‘Vew-Fork. 75 cts.
Wright’s New and Complete Life of Chrift, with a full and free account of his Life, Death, and Refurrection, and the Lives and Deaths of his Apoftles, folio. Wew- Fork. 5 dols.
Wright’s New and Complete Book of Martyrs, 2 vols. 4to. New-Fork. 12 dols.
Walker's Sermons on Pradtical Subjects, with an account of the Author’s Life and Charadter, 2 vols. 8vo. A/d- bany. 3 dols.
Witfius’ Economy of the Covenants between God and Man, comprehending a complete Body of Divinity, 3 vols. 8vo. Mew-Fork. 5 25
Whitby’s Six Difcourfes concerning Election, Reproba- tion, Extent of Chrift’s Redemption, Grace of God, &c. 8vo. Worceffer. 2 dols.
Witherfpoon’s (Rev. Prefident) Works, containing his Effays on Juftification and Regeneration, all his Ser- mons, &c. 4 vols. 8vo. Philad. 8 50
Wallin’s Lectures on Primitive Chriftianity, 8vo. W- mington. 1 75.
Watts’ Pfalms and Hymns, ona large type, fuitable for aged people, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 1 dol.
Watts’ Pfalms and Hymns, very fmall type, for the pock- et, on fine paper, handfome binding, Bo/fon. 1 dol.
YOUNG’s Letters, or Calvinifm and Univerfalism con- trafted, 12mo. New-Fork. 62 1-2 cts.
Young’s Night Thoughts on Life, Death and Immortal- ity, 12mo, Mew-Fork. 75 cts. Bo/ffon. 87 1-2 cts.
ZOLLIKOFER’s Exercifes of Piety, or Meditations on the Principal Doétrines and Duties of Religion, cor- rected by T. M. Harris, r2mo. Worce/fter. 75 cts.
24 DIVINITY.
BIBLES.
Fouro BIBLE, elegantly printed on fuperfine paper
and hot preffed, PAilad. 2 vols. boards. Ditto 2 vols. handfomely bound.
Folio Bible, with Plates, Dobfon’s Edition, PAzlad. 11 dls.
Ditto with 15 plates, Durell’s Edition, WV. Vor&. 12 dols.
Same bound in calf and gilt, 14 dols.
Same without plates, fheep. 11 dols.
Royal Quarto Bible, containing Apocrypha, Concor- dance, an Alphabetical Table of all the names in the Oldand New Teftaments, with their Significations, Ta- ble of Scripture Weights and Meafures, &c. &c. with a Map of the Holy Land, and nine Hiftorical Engrav- ings. Charlefiown. 9g dols.
Same without Concordance. 8 50
Demy Quarto, containing the fame as above, 8 dols and without the Concordance, 7 50
Demy Quarto Bible, containing Apocrypha, Concord- ance, &c. with fix Maps and twenty-four Engravings, Carey’s Edition, Philad. 9 dols.
Same without the Apocrypha, 8 50
Same on common paper, no Apocrypha or Concord- ance, 5 50
Thomas’s Royal Quarto Bible, with Apocrypha, Con- cordance and Plates. 9g 50
Same without the Concordance, 9 dols.
Quarto Bible, with Apocrypha, on fine paper,V. Fork. 5dls.
Same with Apocrypha, common paper, do. 4 dolls.
Octavo Bible, with Apocrypha, Worceffer Edition. 2 75
Same without Apocrypha, 2 37 1-2
Common School Bible. Boffon Edition. 87 1-2 cts.
Same on fine paper, 1 25
TESTAMENT, Demy Odtavo, Zrenton. 1 dol.
Teftament, Demy r2mo. large type. Charle/fown. 75 cents.
Teftament, Common for Schools, &c. 37 1-2 cts.
MISCELLANIES. 25
Book of Common Prayer, oGavo, large type, morocco, gilt. Brooklyn. 4 dols. Same in theep, lettered. 2 dols. 25 cts. Ditto, large duodecimo, fine moroc. gilt, Bofflon. 2 50
Same do. do. calf, gilt. do. 2 25 Same do. do. theep, do. 1 37 1-2 Same do. common. theep, do. 1 dol. Ditto, eighteens, fine paper. calf, gilt. No York 1 25 Same do. do. theep, do. 75 cts. Same do. common. fheep, do.621-2 cts
Ditto 24mo. Pearl type, morrocco. Wew-Vork. 2 dols. Same in fheep. 1 12 1-2
MISCELLANIES.
Apans’ (His Excellency John) Defence of the Conftitutions of Government of the United States, againfi the attack of M. Turgot. 3 vols. 8vo. Philadelphia. 7 ais.
Adams (Hannah) Summary Hiftory of New England, from its fettlement to the acceptance of the Federal Confiitution, comprehending a general Sketch of the American War. 8vo. Dedham. 2 25
Adams’ (Rev. John) Flowers of Modern Travels, being elegant and entertaining extracts from the works of the moft celebrated Travellers. 2 vols. 12z2mo. Bo/- tim. 2 dols.
Adams’ (Rev. John) Flowers of Ancient and Modern Hiftory, comprehending the moft remarkable inci- dents. 2 vols. 12mo. Philadelphia. 1 50
Adams’ Effay on the Ufe of the Celeftial and Terreftrial Globes, vo. Philad. 1 50
Adams’ Geographical and Aftronomical Effays on the Principles of Aftronomy, Ufe of the Globes, Planeta- rium, Lunarian, &c. 8vo. Philad. 3 50
c
26 MISCELLANIES.
Adams’ (Daniel) Scholar's Arithmetic, or Federal Ac- countant, 8vo. Leominfler. 1 12 1-2 Half bound, 87 1-2 cts.
Adam’s Rudiments of Latin and Englifh Grammar, r2mo. Soffon. 75 cts.
American Remembrancer; a Collection of Speeches, Debates, &c. upon the Britifh Treaty, 3 vols. 8vo. LUGAR 2 HSO
American Spectator, or Matrimonial Preceptor, 12mo. Boffon. 1 dol.
American Accountant, by W. Milns, 12mo. Mew-¥Fork. 1 dollar. .
American Clerk’s Magazine; Forms of Deeds, Bonds, Notes,-&c. 12mo. Boffon. 1 dollar.
American Young Man’s beft Companion, containing Writing, Arithmetic, Book-Keeping, Meafuring, Forms of Letters, Bonds, Deeds, &c. 12mo. Walpole & Phil, 87 1-2 cts.
American Jeft Book, or Merry Fellow’s Companion, 12mo. 62 1-2 cts. Half bound 50 cts.
American Pocket Atlas, (Carey’s) containing a Map of the United States and of each State, with concife Defcriptions, r2mo. 1 50. Half bound 1 25
Ditto, 2d Edition, much enlarged, 8vo. bound, 2 dols,
American Bee, a Collection of Entertaining Tales, 12mo. Leominfler. 75 cents.
American Senator, a ColleGion of important Speeches in Congrefs, 3 vols. 8vo. Philad. 5 25
American Coaft Pilot, Directions for failing into the va- rious Ports, Harbours, &c. in America, 8vo. New- buryport. 2 dolls.
American Farmer’s Letters, by Hector St. John, 12mo. Philad, 87 1-2 cts.
American Monitor, or School of Wifdom, a copious Col- lection of fublime and elegant Extra@s. By Matthew Carey. 12mo. Philad. 75 cts.
American Review of New Publications, 2 vols. 8vo. New-Fork. 4 50
Lhe Work may be had in Numbers at 50 cts.
American Mufeum, or Repofitory of ancient and mod-
ern Fugitive Pieces, in Profe and Verfe, 12 vols. 8vo. Philad. 20 dolls.
MISCELLANIES. 27
American Mufical Mifcellany, a Colle@ion of new and approved Songs, fet to Mufic, r2mo. Northampton. 1025
American Revolution, Hiftory of its Rife, Progrefs and Completion, by W. Gordon, 3 vols. 8vo. MV. Fork. 6 dollars.
American Revolution, concife and impartial Account of, with a general Hiftory of North and South America, by John Lendrum, 2 vols. 12mo. Boffon. 2 dolls.
American Revolution, written in the ftyle of Ancient Hiftory, by R. Snowden, 12mo. Baltimore.” 1 25
American Revolution, by David Ramfay, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 4 dols.
American Revolution, extracted from the Encyclopedia, 1z2mo. Philad. 1 dol.
Aikin’s Letters to his Son, on various Topics relative to Literature and the Conduct of Life, 12mo. PaAiled. 1 dol. 8vo. do. 1 50.
Aikin’s Life, Travelsand Philanthropic Labours of the Benevolent Howard, 12mo. Philad. 75 cts. 18mo. Bo/- ton. 62 1-2 cts.
Akenfide’s Pleafures of Imagination, with Armftrong’s Art of Preferving Health, 18mo. E£veler. 62 1-2 cts.
Anketell’s Poems on various Subjects, 12mo. Bo/- fon. 75 cts.
Almoran and Hamet, an Oriental Tale, r2mo. Litchfield. 62 1-2 cts.
Alexander’s Tranflation of the Works of Virgil. 8vo. Bofton, 2 50
Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, 2 vols. 12mo. Philad. and averer ss 1295
Art of Speaking, containing an Effay on Speaking, and Leffons for Reading and Speaking, 12mo. Bo/ffon.
cts.
rate Captive, or Adventures of Dr. Updike Under- hill, 2 vols. r2mo. Walpole. 1 50
Alexis, or the Cottage in the Woods, a Novel, 12mo. Bofton. 87 1-2 cts. .
Alexander’s Hiftory of Women, from the earlieft antiqui- ty to the prefent time, 2 vols. 8vo. 3 50
28 MISCELLANIES.
Art of Courting, r2mo. half bound. 67 cts.
Ambrofe and Eleanor, a novel by H. M. Williams, 12mo. Baltimore. 87 1-2 cts.
Arnold’s (J. L.) Mifcellaneous Poems, 12mo. Prov. 87 1-2 cents.
Amufing Companion, or Interefting Story Teller, t2mo. Boflon. 87 1-2 cts.
Ahiman Rezon of Free and Accepted Mafons, 8vo. Bal- timore. 1 50
Advertifement for a Hufband, or Adventures of Belinda, a novel, rzmo. Worceffer.. 75 cts.
Atlas Minimus, containing forty Maps, with a geograph- ical Defcription to each, 18mo. P&ilad. 1 dol.
Antoinette Percival, a novel, 12zmo. Philad. 75 cts.
Athlin and Dunbayne, a novel by Mrs. Radcliffe, r2mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Atala, or the Love and Conftancy of two Savages in the Defert,tranflated from the French,12mo. Boflon. 75 cts.
Anderfon’s Account of the British Embaffy to China, under Lord Macartney, r2mo. P&dlad. 1 dol.
Abbefs, a Romance by W. H. Ireland, author of the Shakefpeare Papers, 3 vols. r2mo. Baltimore. 3 dols.
Abelard and Eloifa, their lives, amours and misfortunes, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Armenian, or the Ghoft Seer, 2 vols. r2mo. Philad. 1 75
BLAIR’s Ledtures on Rhetoric, and the Belles Lettres, 2 vols. 8vo. Boffon. 3 50
Ditto abridged, 18mo. Bo/fon. 75 cts. and 12mo. Bof. 87 1-2 cts.
Brown on the Natural Equality of Man, r2mo. New- ark. 75 cts.
Burlamaqui on Natural and Political Law, 8vo. Bofion. 2 dols.
Belknap’s Hiftory of New-Hamphhire, 3 vols. 8vo. Bo/- fon. 5 dols.
Belknap’s American Biography, an Hiftorical Account ofthe moft diftinguifhed Charaters in America, 2 vols. 8vo. Boffon. 3 50
MISCELLANIES. 29
Baron Trenck’s Life and Adventures, 12mo. Philad. 1 dol. 12mo. Boflon. 1 25
Burton's Lectures on Female Education and Manners, 12mo. lVew-Vork. 87 1-2 cts.
Britifh Album, containing the Poems of Della Crufca, Anna Matilda, &c. 12zmo. Boffon. 1 25
Barlow’s Political Writings, containing, advice to Privi- leged Orders, Letter to the National Convention, &c. 1zmo. lV. York. 75 cts.
Barlow's Vifion of Columbus, a Poem, 12mo. Hartford. 1 dol.
Briffot de Warville on the Commerce of America with Europe, 12mo. WV. York. 1 dol.
Briffot de Warville’s new Travels in America, 12mo. Bafton. 1 dol.
Beauties of the Writings of Hervey, 12mo. Philad.
_ 87 1-2 cts.
Beauties of the Writings of Blair, 12mo. Philad. 50 cts.
Beauties of the Writings of St. Pierre, 8vo. VM. Fork. 1 50
Beauties of the Writings of Dr. Watts, 12mo. Mewbury- port. 75 cts.
Beauties of Nature delineated, felections from the wri- tings of Sturm, by T. M. Harris, 12mo. Charleflown. 1 dol.
Beauties of Hiftory, or Pictures of Virtue and Vice, drawn from Real Life, by Stretch, 2 vols. 12mo. Hartford. 2 dols.
Beauties of Hiftory, felected by Dr. Dodd, 12mo. Bo/- ton. 75 Cts.
Beauties of the Spectator, Tatler and Guardian, col- lected and arranged under alphabetical heads, 2 vols. 12mo. Boflon. 2 25
Beauties of Creation, a new Syftem of Natural Hiftory, for the Amufement of Youth, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts. 18mo. Worcefler. 75'cts.
Beauties of the Bible, a felection from the Old and New Teftament, with various remarks and differtations ; for the ufe of Schools and Families, 18mo. Bo/ffon. 75 cts, 12mo, Hud/fon. 75 cts. . Bible Stories, or Memorable Acts of the Ancient Patri-
- archs, Judges and Kings ; for the ufe of Children,
18mo. Philad. so cts. 12mo. Albany. 75 cts.
fi
30 MISCELLANIES.
Bruce's Travels into Abyffinia to difcover the Source of the Nile, abridged, 12mo. Boflon. 1 12 1-2
Briggs’ New Art of Cookery, a new and improved edition, rzmo. Philad. 4 50
Brothers’ (Richard) Prophecies, 1zmo. Philad. 1 dol.
Bennet's Letters to a Young Lady ona variety of ufeful and entertaining Subjects, 12mo. WV. Fork. and 18mo. Worcefler. 75 cts.
Bennet’s Strictures on Female Education, 12mo. Worce/- BCLS OT SUCES:
Brydone’s Tour through Sicily and Malta, 1zmo. Green- pela aaredol,
Rurgh’s Dignity of Human Nature, 8vo. Harford. 2 dls.
Bofton Orations, in Commemoration of the 5th March, 1770, 12mo. Boffon. 75 cts.
Barruel’s Hiftory of Jacobinifm, (boards) 4 vols. 8vo. iM, Dorks “aso
Barruel’s Hiftory of the French Clergy, 12mo. Burling- ton. 1 dol.
Boyle's (Capt. Robert) Voyages and Adventures, 12mo. Bofion and Walpole. 75 cts.
Beccaria on Crimes and Punifhments, 12mo. Pailad. 87 1-2 cts.
Beatties’ Elements of Moral Science, 2 vols. 12mo. Pe hilad. auiigs
Boarding School, or Leffons of a Preceptrefs to her Pupils, 12mo. Boffon. 1 dol.
Botanical Harmony delineated, from the French of St. Pierre, 8vo. Worcefler. 1 50
Bracken’s Farriery Improved, containing advice to pur- chafers of Horfes ; receipts for the Cure of Horfes, Sheep, &c. (half bound) 18mo. Philad. 50 cts.
Belifarius, by M. Marmontel, r2mo. Newburyport. 75 cts.
Bentham’s Defence of Ufury, fhowing the Impolicy of reftraint upon the terms of pecuniary bargains, 18mo. Philad Mysicssort
Barrow’s Travels into the interior of Southern Africa in 1797 and ’98, with curfory obfervations on its Geolo- gy, Geography, Natural Hiftory, &c. 8vo. witha map, BV. Worke » 20525
MISCELLANIES. 31
Bowditch’s New American Pra¢tical Navigator, being an Epitome of Navigation; containing all the Tables neceffary to be ufed with the Nautical Almanac, in determining the Latitude and Longitude, enriched with a number of new Tables, and a large variety of new and important matter, 8vo. Mewduryport. 3 dols.
Beggar Girl and her Benefactors, a novel by Mrs. Ben- net, 3 vols. 12mo. Philad. 3 dols.
Bloomfield’s Rural Tales and Ballads, 12mo. Baltimore. 75 cts. Wilmington. 1 dol.
Bloomfield’s Farmer’s Boy, a Poem, 12mo. Wilming. & Balt. 75 cts.
Beatties’ Minftrel, or Progrefs of Genius, with fome oth- er Poems, 12mordy, plorky 4.25 Ditto on vellum paper, hot preffed, 2 dols.
Bloody Buoy; horrible Cruelties and Enormities prac- tifed during the French Revolution, 18mo. Pahzilad. 75 cts, fine paper, 1 dol.
Burns’ Works complete, containing all his Poems, with Letters, the Life of the Author by Currie, &c. 4 vols. 12mo. P&hilad. 6 dols.
Burns’ Poems, 8vo. V. York. 1 50, and 12mo Pahilad. 1 dol.
Bordley’s Effays and Notes on Hufbandry and Rural Affairs, 8vo. Philad. 2 50
Builder’s Jewel, (by B. & T. Langley) with 100 copper- plates, explaining fhort and eafy rules, for drawing and working the five orders of Columns, to proportion Doors, Windows, &c. &c. fquare r2mo. Boffon. 1 75
Benjamin’s Country Builder’s Affiftant, fully explaining the beft method of ftriking regular and quirked Mould- ings, &c. &c. 4to. Boffon. 2 dols.
Burroughs’ (Stephen) Memoirs, 8vo. Hanover. 1 25 Ditto 2d vol. 1z2mo. Boffon. 75 cts.
Barton on the freedom of Navigation and Maritime Commerce, (boards) 8vo. Philad, 2 dols.
Berquin’s Friend of Youth, 2 vols. r2mo. Boffon. 1 50
Bloffoms of Morality, intended for the inftruction of Youth, 12mo. (various) 75 cts.
_ Beggar Boy, a novel by T. Bellamy, 12mo. Alexand. 1 d.
Baltimore Weekly Magazine, 4to. Baltimore. 3 dols.
32 MISCELLANIES.
Broad Grins, by George Colman the Younger, 12mo. Baltimore. 50 cts. fine, 75 cts. Boffon. boards, 62 1-2
Brown’s (Rev. Thomas) Mifcellaneous Poems, 12mo. N. Fork. 1 25
COXE’s View of the United States, 8vo. Philad. boards, 2 dols. bound. 2 25
Cowper’s Poems, a new and complete edition, with an account of his Life, 2 vols. r2mo. Boyfon. 2 25; fine, calf gilt. 3 50—2 vols. r2mo. Phi/ad. 3 dols boards. 4 dols. fheep gilt.
Cowper’s Tafk, to which is added Tirocinium, or a Re- view ofSchools, rz2mo. Boffon. 75 cts. Plates, 87 1-2 cts.
Cowper s Life by W. Hayley, including many of his Let- ters and Pofthumous Pieces, 2 vols. r2mo. Bo/ffon. 2 25 ; fine, calfgilt. 3 50; 8vo. V. FV. 3 dls. calfgilt 3 75
Cooper’s Hiftory of North America, 18mo. Albany. 50 cents.
Cooper's Hiftory of South Amenca, 18mo. Aléany. 50 cts.
Cooper's Hiftory of Grecian States, 18mo. A/Jany. 50 cts.
Charlotte Temple, a Tale of Truth, by Mrs. Rowfon, 12mo. Philad. 75 cts.
Carver's Travels, through the interior of North America for more than 5000 miles, rz2mo. Boffon. 1 dol.
Columbian Mufe, a SeleGtion of American Poetry, 12mo. Philad. 75 cts.
Chapone’s (Mrs) Letters on the Improvement of the Mind, 18mo. Walpole. 62 1-2 cts.
Clarke’s Farriery, 12mo, Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Cook’s Three Voyages to the Pacific Ocean, to which is prefixed the Life of Capt. Cook, plafes, 2 vols. 12mo. DOfun, a) Soe
Cook’s Laft Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, 4 vols. 8vo. NV. Fork, 8 dols.
Cook's Laft Voyage abridged, 18mo. Worce/ffer. 50 cts.
Cecilia, or Memoirs of an Heirefs, a novel by Mifs Bur- ney, 3 vols. r2mo. Boffon. 3 dols.
MISCELLANIES. 33
Camilla, or Picture of Youth, a novel by Mifs Burney, 3 vols. 12mo. Boffon and Philad. 3 dols.
Conftitutions of Free and Accepted Mafons, compiled by T. M. Harris, 4to. Boffon. -2 50
Children’s Friend, from the French of M. Berquin, 4 vols. Izmo. 3 dols.
Either volume may be had feparately at 75 cents.
Contes du tems Paffés, or Tales of Paft Times, French and Englifh, 1zmo. WV. Fork. 1 dol.
Clarke’s Letters to a Student, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 55 cts.
Children’s Mifcellany, many cuts, 12mo0. Philad. 1 dol.
Conftantius and Pulchera, or Conftancy Rewarded, 12mo. JV. York. 75 cts.
Cavern of Death, a Moral Tale, 12mo. Philad. 50 cts.
Columbian Orator, by Caleb Bingham, 12mo. Bo/fon. 75 cts.
Count Roderic’s Caftle, a Tale, 12mo. Philad. 75 cts.
Charlotte’s Letters, written during her connexion with Werter, 12mo. WV. York. 75 cts.
Ditto, with Sorrows of Werter, bound together, 12mo. Boflon. 1 dol.
Couftos’ Unparalleled Sufferings, for Mafonry, in the In- quifition, r2mo. 4. Fork. 1 dol.
Coquette, or Hiftory of Eliza Wharton, a novel founded on fact, 12mo. Boffon. 1 dol.
Caftles of Athlin and Dunbayne, a Highland Story, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Citizen of the World, or Letters from a Chinefe Philofo- pher refiding in London, 12mo. Adéany. 1 dol.
Country Builder’s Affiftant, fully explaining the beft method of ftriking regular and quirked mouldings, &c. 4to. Boffon. 2 dols.
Conftitutions of the United States, and of the feveral States, with the Declaration of Independence, &c. 1z2mo. Boflon. 75 cts.
Ditto enlarged and corrected, 12mo. WV. York. 1 dol. 8vo. Philad. 1 25
Chefterfield’s Principles of Politenefs, and Gregory’s Father's Legacy, bound together, 8vo. Worce/fler. 62 1-2 cts.
Chetterfield’s Letters to his Son, 2 vols. 8vo. Bo/fon. 3dls.
34 MISCELLANIES.
Clery’s Journal of Occurrences in the Temple, during the Imprifonment of Louis XVI. 12mo. Bo/fon. 75 cts. boards, 62 1-2 cts.
Carter’s Frugal Houfewife, or Complete Woman Cook, 1z2mo. Philad. half bound. 50 cts.
Same Work, 18mo. WV. Fork. 62 1-2 cts. r2mo. New- VORP ASICs.
Complete Fortune Teller, a new and regular Syftem of foretelling future events, 18mo. Bo/fon. 50 cts. Chaptal’s Elements of Chymiftry, 8vo. Pahilad. 3 dols. Campbell’s Pleafures of Hope,1z2mo. JV. Fork. 75 cts. Companion, an entertaining SeleCtion,12mo. Prov. 75cts. Conftant Lover, or William and Jeanette, a novel by
Kotzebue, 12mo. Boffon. 1 dol.
Cleveland’s Tables for calculating the amount of Duties, payable ad valorem, on Imported Merchandize, r2mo. Salem. in blue. 62 1-2 cts. half bound. 75, Ces,
Campbell’s Narrative of his Extraordinary Adventures, in a Journey overland to India, r2mo. Mew-¥Voré. Ty 2:5 N='2
Caroline of Lichtfield, a novel, rz2mo. WV. York. 1 dol
Cobbett’s Letters to Lord Hawkefbury and Mr. Ad- dington on the Peace with Bonaparte, 8vo. boards. Philad. 1 dol.
Catechifm of Health, 12mo. NW. Fors. 50 cts.
Condorcet on the Progrefs of the Human Mind, 12mo. Baltimore. 1 dol.
Cicero's Select Orations, with a tranflation, by Duncan, 8vo. WV. Fork. 2 50
Cicero’s Select Orations, with Notes, hiftorical and ex- planatory, 12mo. Exeter 1 25
Catharine II. Life of, by W. Tooke, 2 vols. 8vo. Fork. 6 25
Catharine II. Anecdotes of, by Rulhiere, 18mo. Bo/ffon. 75 Cts. ;
Colquhoun on the Police of London, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
Cheap Repofitory Trad, Entertaining, Moral and Relig- ious, for the amufement and inftruction of Youth, 3 vols. 12mo. Boffon. 3 dols. fine paper, 3 25 Same Work, 4 vols. 18mo. PAiad. boards, 2 50
Columbian Sonefter, or Free Mafon’s Companion, 12mo. Port{/mouth. 1 dol.
MISCELLANIES,. 35
Columbian Songfter, a Collection of modern Songs, 12mo. Wrentham. 75 cts.
Children of the Abbey, a novel by the author of Vicar of Lanfdowne, Nocturnal Vifit, &c. 2 vols. 12mo. WV. and Philad. 2 dols.
Clermont, by the author of Children of the Abbey, Maid of the Hamlet, &c. 2 vols. 12mo. Phrlad. 2 dols.
Child of Pallas, a Selection, 12mo. Ba/s 1 dol.
Carey’s General Atlas, folio. PAzlad. 10 dols.
Carey’s Minor American Atlas, containing 19 Maps, half bound. 4to. Philad. 1 50
Carey’s American Pocket Atlas, containing 19 Maps, with Defcriptions, 1z2mo. do. 1 50; half bound. 1 25
Carey’s American Pocket Atlas Improved, 8vo. bound. 2 dols.
Carey’s Mifcellaneous Trifles, in Profe, 24mo. Philad.
5. Ots,
Cavalry Difcipline, Hoyt’s Complete Syftem, 12mo. Brattleboro’. 1 dol.
Caftle of Otranto, by H. Walpole, and Lothaire, by Mifs Lee, bound togetner, r2mo. WV. York. 62 1-2 cts. Currie’s Life of Burns, with the whole of Burns’ Poems, &c. 4 vols. 12mo0. Philad. 6 dols. Clarke’s Nepos, 12mo. do. 87 1-2 cts.
-DAVIDSON’s Tranflation of the Works of Virgil into literal Englifh Profe, 2 vols. 8vo. 4. Fork. 4 dolls. bound in one, 3 75
Dickinfon’s (Hon. John) Political Writings, 2 vols. 8vo. Wilmington. 6 dols.
Dodd's Thoughts in Prifon, 18mo. Lefer. 62 1-2 cts.
Dodd's Selection of the Beauties of Hiftory, 12mo. Bo/- jon. 75 cts.
Devil on Two Sticks, French and Englifh, 2 vols. 12mo. LV. York, 2 dols.
Devil on Two Sticks, Englifh, r2mo. Philad. 75 cts.
Democrat, or Adventures of Jean le Noir, 12mo. Acw- Fork, 1 dol.
36 MISCELLANIES.
Dramatic Dialogues, for the ufe of Schools, by C. Stearns, 12mo. Leominfler. 1 dol.
Death of Abel and Cain, 18mo. PAzlad. 62 1-2 cts. 18mo. Newduryport. 50 cts.
De Lolme’s Comparifon of the Conftitution of England with the other Governments of Europe, 12mo. New- York dol.ras..cts,
Dodfley’s Select Fables of Efop, and other Fabulifts, 1z2mo. Philad. 75 cts.
Dana’s Selection of Leffons in Reading and Speaking, I2mo. Lo/flon. 75 cts.
Deane’s New-England Farmer, or Georgical Dictionary, fhowing the ways and methods in which the important Art of Hufbandry may be practifed to the greateft ad- vantage, 8vo. Worce/ffer. 2 dols.
Darwin's Botanic Garden, a Poem. Part 1. The Progrefs of Vegetation. Part 2. The Loves of the Plants, 8vo. New-Fork. 3 dols.
Darwin’s Syftem of Female Education, 12mo. Paévlad. 1 dol.
Darwin’s Temple of Nature, a Poem, 8vo. Pahilad.
D’Arcy, a novel by Charlotte Smith, 12mo, PAv/. 75 cts.
D’Argenfon’s Effays, Civic, Moral, Literary and Polit- ical, r2mo. Worcefler. 75 cts.
Duncan’s Tranflation of Cicero’s Orations, 8vo. New- TOR 2t 50
Duncan's Elements of Logic, r2mo. NW. Fork. 75 cts.
Damberger’s Travels through the interior of Africa, from the Cape of Good Hope to Morocco, through the great Defert, and varicty of kingdoms, from 1781 to 1797, 8vo. Boflon. 2 50—New-Fork. boards, 1 doll. bound, 1 25
Dibdin’s Songs, felected from his works, r2mo. Philad. dol, 12 12ers,
Delpino’s Spanifh Grammar, 12mo. Philad. 1 dol.
Dictionary, Walker’s Critical Pronouncing, 8vo. Phi. 3 50
Dictionary, Sheridan’s, Pronouncing and Explanatory, 8vo. Philad. 3 dols.
Ditto, r2mo. Philad, 1 75 : Dictionary, Perry’s Standard Englith, 12mo. Boflon. 1 dl. Dictionary, Sheridan’s Improved by Jones, r2mo. Wil-
mington. 1 dol,
MISCELLANIES. 37
Dictionary, Columbian, by Rev. C. Alexander, 12mo. Bofion. 1 dol.
Dictionary, Johnfon’s, in Miniature, fine, 12mo. Bofton. LI 2 122
Dictionary, Elliot and Johnfon’s, for fchools, r2mo. Suffield. 50 cts.
De Valcourt, a novel by Mrs. Bennett, r2mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts. fine, plates, 1 25
Denon’s Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt during the Campaign of Bonaparte in that country, maps and plates. 2 vols. 8vo. WV. Fork. 5 dols.
Debates in the Congrefs of the United States on the Bill to repeal the Judiciary Law, 8vo. Adéany. 2 50
D’Ifraeli’s Romances, 12mo. PAdlad. 1 dol.
Death of Abel, tranflated from the German of Gefner, elegant edition, 8vo. Phil. 2 dols.
Dorval, or the Speculator, a novel by a lady, 12mo.
meeaciomtanol.
D’Eeres’ (Charles D. R.) Captivity, Memoirs of, t2mo. WROTE 1/31 Cts:
Dinarbas, a tale, 18mo. Hartford. 50 cts.
Don Quixote, 4 vols. r2mo. Philad. 4 dols.
ENFIELD’s Inftitutes of Natural Philofophy, theoretic- aland practical. From the 2d London Edition, with corrections and additions, by Profeffor Webber, 4to. Bofton. 7 50
Evening Amufements for the Ladies, original anecdotes, intended to promote a love of virtue, 18mo. Bo/lon. 62 1-2 cts.
Evenings at Home, or the Juvenile Budget opened, 3 vols. 12mo. Salem. 2 dols.
Elements of Morality, from the German, 12mo. WM. York. and Phil. 87 1-2 cts.
Same Work, jla/es, 2 vols. 12mo. PAilad. 2 dols.
D
38 MISCELLANTIES.
Evelina, a novel by the author of Camilla and Cecilia, 2 vols. tz2mo. 1 50—1in one vol. 1 25
Enfield’s Speaker, or Mifcellaneous Pieces collected from the beft Writers, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 87 1-2 cts.
Ditto, and Exercifes in Elocution, bound together, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
Echo, or Federal Songfter, 18mo. Brookfield. 75 cts.
Edward, various views of Human Nature, by Doctor Moore, 2 vols. 12mo. Jount-Pleafani. 1 50
Emma Corbett, a novel, 2 vols. 1zmo. Newburyport. 1 50
Edgeworth’s Syftem of Practical Education, 2 vols. 8vo. LV. York. 4 dols. ;
Edgeworth’s Effay on Irifh Bulls, rzmo. J. Y. 87 1-2 cts.
Edgar Huntly, or Memoirs of a Sleep Walker, 3 vols. 12mo. Philad. 3 dols.
Edwy and Edilda, a Poem, wih plates, 12mo,. Albany. t dol.
Ellis’s Art of Dying, 12mo. Brookfield. 75 cts.
Elegant Fables, being a Selection from the beft Englifh Writers, 12mo. JV. York. 1 dol.
Elements of Criticifm, by Lord Kaime, 2 vols. 8vo. Bofton. 4 cols.
Eugenio and his Amelia, a novel, from the ‘ Look- er-On,” 18mo. Worcefler. 62 1-2 cts.
Eulogies and Orations, on the Lifeand Death of Wath- ington, 8vo. Boffon. 1 75
Emily Hamilton, a novel founded on fa@, by a Young Lady of Worcefter county, r2mo. Worce/ler. 75 cts.
Efop’s Fables, and others, felected by R. Dodfley, 12mo. New-York. 75 cts. .
Ellifon, (Sir George) the Man of Senfibility, r2mo. half bound, 37 1-2 cts.
Enchanted Plants, Fables in Verfe, addreffed to two daughters, by alady, elegant¢ plates, 12mo. WV. York. 1 75
Encyclopedia, or Univerfal Dictionary of Arts and Sci- ences, 18 vols. 4to: Pzlad. 162 dols. boards, 135
Supplement to the above, 3 vols. boards. 4to. PAu. 21 dols.
Encyclopedia (Minor), or Cabinet of General Knowl- edge ; being a Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and Po- lite Literature, by Thaddeus M. Harris, in « vols. 12mo. Boffon. 4 50
MISCELLANIES. 39
FRENCH Revolution, Impartial Hiftory of, from its commencement to the death of the Queen and Gironde Party, 8vo. Boffon. 2 dols.
Female Review, or Adventures of Deborah Gannett, who ferved as a common Soldier during the Ameri- can War, 12mo. Dedham. 87 1-2 cts.
Female American, Adventures of Unca Eliza Winkfield, 12mo. JVewduryport. 75 cts.
Female Quixotifm, or Extravagant Adventures of Dor- cafina Sheldon, r2mo. Boffon. 1 12 1-2
Female Jockey Club, a Sketch of the manners of theage, Remon ZV ey Oho 75.Ct5;
Federal Ready Reckoner, or Trader’s Valuable Guide, 12mo. Worce/ffer. 50 cts.
Federal Calculator, or Dilworth’s Schoolmafter’s Affift- ant, revifed, and adapted to the Federal Currency, 12mo. Zroy. 75 cts.
Forefters, an American Tale, being a Sequel to John Bull the Clothier, r2mo. Bo/fon. 1 dol.
Franklin’s Life, written by himfelf, 1z2mo. PAv/. 62 1-2 cts.
Franklin’s Life and Effays, 12mo. 1 dol.
Farmer's Friend, or Adventures of Charles Worthy, 12mo. Boffon. 75 cts.
Friend of Youth, from the French of Berquin, 2 vols. 12mo. Mewdburyport. 1 50
Fair Hibernian, a novel, r2mo. Mewdurypori, 75 cts.
Fool of Quality, a novel by Mr. Brooke, 3 vols. 12mo. LANDLESS
Family Inftructos, relating to Parents and Children, Mafters and Servants, Hufbands and Wives, 12mo. New-York. 75 cts.
Findley’s Hiftory of the Infurrection in the Four Wef- tern Counties of Pennfylvania, 8vo. boards. Phil. 1 75
Fenning’s Arithmetic, or American Youth's Inftructor, r2mo. Dover. 75 cts.
Frafer’s Young Gentlemen and Ladies’ Affiftant in Geog- raphy, Hiftory, Arithmetic, &c. 12mo. WV. Yor&. 75 cts.
Frugal Houfewife, or Complete Woman Cook, r2mo. New-York. 75 cts.
Same Work, r2mo. half bound. P#i/ad. 50 cts. 18mo. bound, 62 I-2 cts.
40 MISCELLANIES.
Fofs’s Journal of his Captivity and Sufferings at Algiers, 12mo. Newburyport. 75 cts.
Farmer's Boy, a Poem by R. Bloomfield, 12mo. 75 cts.
Free Mafon’s Monitor, or Illuftrations of Mafonry, by T. S. Webb, 12mo, Albany. 1 dol.
Forfyth’s Treatife on the Culture and Management of Fruit Trees, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols. 8vo. Albany. 1 75
Ditto, Epitomized, 8vo. PAzlad. 2 dolls.
Fortune Teller, or Infallible Guide to the Decrees of Fate, 18mo. Bo/ffon. 50 cts.
Fortunate Difcovery, or Hiftory of Henry Villars, r2mo. MEY OF Rx FS "Cts
Family of Ortenburgh, a novel by Kotzebue, 12mo. Philad. 1 dol.
Freeman’s Maffachufetts Juftice, 8vo. Bo/fon. 2 dols.
Freeman’s Clerk’s Magazine, or Valuable Affiftant to every man, r2mo. So/ffon. 1 dol.
Freeman’s Town Officer, or Power and Duty of Seledct- men, Overfeers, &c. &c. 12mo. Bo/ffon. 1 dol.
Freeman’s Probate Directory, or Affiftant to Probate Courts, Executors, &c. r2mo. Bo/lon. 1 dol.
Falconer’s Shipwreck, a Poem, plates, 12mo. MV. York, 1 25—Ditto, 18mo. o/ffon. 50 cts.
Female Mentor, or Select Converfations, 1:2mo. Philad. t dol.
Federalift, a Series of Publications, on the American Conftitution, 2 vols. 8vo. New-York. 4 50
Fernandez’ Spanifh Grammar, 8vo PaAilad. 1 75
Family Tablet, containing original Poetry, r2mo. Bo/fon. 50 cts.
GORDON’s American Revolution, 3 vols. 8vo. VV. Yor. 6 dols.
Goldfmith’s Hiftory of the Earth and Animated Na- ture, many' plates, 4 vols. 8vo. Philad. g dols.
Goldfmith’s Hiftory of Greece, from the earlieft dates to the death of Alexander, 12mo. Wa/hingion. 1 dol.
MISCELLANIES. 41
Goldfmith’s Hiftory of England, from the Invafion of Julius Cefar to the death of George II. abridged. 1z2mo. Philad. 87 1-2
Ditto, continued to 1802, by an eminent writer, 12mo. Wafhington. 1 dol.
Goldfmith’s Hiftory ofthe Roman Empire from its origin to its diffolution, abridged, 12mo. Zrenton. 87 1-2 cts.
Goldfmith’s Mifcellaneous Effays and Poems, 12mo. Brookfield. 75 cts.
Ghoft Seer, or Apparitionift, a Fragment, 12mo. New- York. 75 cts.
Godwin’s Enquiry concerning Political Juftice, 2 vols. 1z2mo. JV. York. 2 dols.
Godwin’s Enquirer, Reflections on Manners, Education and Literature, 12mo. Philad. 1 12 1-2
Godwin’s St. Leon, a Tale of the Sixteenth Century, 2 vols. 12mo. Alexand. 2 dols.
Gentleman’s Mifcellany of Effays, Anecdotes and Poems, moral and entertaining, 12mo. Bo/lon. 75 cts.
Gleaner, a Periodical Publication by a Lady, 3 vols. 1z2mo. Lofton. 3 25
Gifborne’s Duties of the Female Sex, 12mo.° PAz/. 1 dl.
Gentlemen and Ladies’ Monitor, 12mo. Harfford. 75 cts.
Guthrie’s Geographical Grammar, improved, corrected and very much enlarged, 2 vols. 4to. and Atlas. Philad. 17 dols.
Gardner’s (Col. James) Life, with a Sermon occafioned by his heroic death, 12mo. E'xeler. 67 cts. 12mo. 75 cts.
Gifford’s Letters, written during a refidence in France, in 1792, 93, 94, and 95, 8vo. WV. Fork. 2 dols.
Gibfon’s Atlas Minimus, or new Pocket Atlas, contain- ing 40 Maps, with a letter prefs defcription of each, 12mo0. Philad. 1 dol.
Gibfon’s Treatife of Practical Surveying, which is demon- {trated from its firft principles, 8vo. V. York. 2 dols.
Geodefia, or the Art of Surveying, by Love, 8vo. do. 1 25
Grafeville Abbey, a novel, 2 vols. 12mo. boards, Salem. 1 dol.
Grey Cap for a Green Head, or wife fayings of a Father to his Son, 12mo. PAilad. 62 1-2 cts.
George Barnwell, a novel, 1zmo. Boffon. 1 dol.
D 2
42 MISCELLANIES.
Gregory’s Elements of a Polite Education, feleéted from Chefterfield’s Letters to his Son. Improved by Dr. Morfe, 12mo0. Boffon, 1 25
Galatea, a Paftoral Romance, imitated from Cervantes by M. Florian, 1r2mo. Boffon. 1 dol.
Gallatin on the Finances of the United States, 8vo. boards. Tees
Greek Teftament, on largetype, rz2mo. Worce/fer. 1 37 1-2
Gurney’s eafy and compendious Syftem of Short Hand, adapted to the Arts and Sciences, 12mo. Philad. 1 50
Grandpré’s Voyage in the Indian Ocean and to Bengal, 1z2mo. Boffon. 1 dol.
Girl of the Mountains, a novel, 2 vols. 12mo. Phi. 1 50
Gleanings from the moft efteemed works on Gardening, Hufbandry, &c. 8vo. Philad. 2 25
Gymnaftics for Youth, or Practical Guide to healthful and amufing exercifes, for the ufe of Schools, from the German of Salzmann, 8vo. Philad. 2 50
HISTORY of the American Revolution, by W. Gordon, 3 vols. 8vo. New-York. 6 dols.
Hiftory of the American Revolution, by John Lendrum, 2 vols. rz2mo. Boffon. 2 dols.
Hiftory of Maffachufetts from its firft fettlement to 1750, by Thomas Hutchinfon, 2 vols. 8vo. Bofion. 4 dols.
Hiftory of Maffachufetts, (Minot’s) being a Continuation of Hutchinfon’s from 1748, to the Stamp A@, in 1765, containing a great variety of ufeful and interefting in- formation, 2 vols. 8vo. Boffon. 3 dolls.
Hiftory of the Rebellion in Maffachufetts, by Minot, 1 25
Hiftory of New-York from its fettlement to 1732, by W. Smith, 8vo. Mew-Fork. 1 25
Hiftory of Pennfylvania from its fettlement to 1770, by R. Proud, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 5 dols.
Hiftory of Kentucky by Filfon and Imlay, 2 vols. r2mo. New-York. 1 50
Hiftory of New-Hampfhire by Dr. Belknap, 3 vols. 8vo. Bo/flon. 5 dols.
Hiftory of Vermont by S. Williams, 8vo. Walpole. 2 dols.
MISCELLANIES. 43
Hiftory of the County of Worcefter, by Whitney, 8vo. Worcefler. 1 50
Hiftory of the Diftri@ of Maine, by J. Sullivan, 8vo. Bofton, 2 dols.
Hiftory of America, from the Encyclopedia, 12mo. Philad; 1 12 1-2
Hiftory of America by Dr. Robertfon, 2 vols. 8vo. Wew- York. 4 dols.
Hiftory of N. America in continuation, by do. 12mo, Walpole. 75 cts.
Hiftory of New-England by Hannah Adams, 8vo. Ded- ham. 2 25
Hiftory of Connecticut by Dr. Trumbull, 8vo. Hartford. 2 37 1-2
Hiftory of St. Domingo, by Moreau de St. Mery, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 3 50
Hiftory of the. French Revolution, from its commence- ment to the death of the Queen, 8vo. Bo/fon. 2 dols.
Hiftory of the French Revolution by M. Wolftonecraft.
Hiftory of England, abridged from Dr. Goldfmith, 1z2mo, PAhilad. 87 1-2 cts.
Hiftory of ditto, continued to 1798, 12mo. Waff. 1 dol.
Hiftory of China by W. Winterbotham, 2 vols. 8vo. New-York. 3 dols.
Hiftory of Ancient Europe, by Lord Ruffell, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad.
Hiftory of Modern Europe, by Lord Ruffell, 5 vols. 8vo. Philad, 12 dols.
Hiftory of the Reign of Catharine II. of Ruffia, by W. Tooke, 2 vols. 8vo. P&hilad. 6 25
Hiftory of Greece by Dr. Goldfmith, 12mo, Phd. 1 dol.
Hiftory of Rome, by Dr. Goldfmith, abridged. 12mo. Wafhington, 87 1-2 cts.
Hiftory of the Latter Times of the Jews, with the De- ftruGiion of Jerufalem, beginning where the Scripture ends, r2mo. Leominfler. 75 cts.
Hiftory of England, from the Invafion by Julius Cefar, to the end of the American War, by David Hume, T. Smollet, and others, 8vo. 12 vols. PAzdad. 27 dols.
Hiftory of Women by Dr. Alexander, 2 vols. 8vo. 3 50
Hiftory of Jacobinifm by Abbé Barruel, boards, 4 vols. 8vo. Wew-Fork. 4 50
44 MISCELLANIES.
Hiftory of the French Clergy, fince the Revolution, by Abbé Barruel, 12mo. PAz/ad. 1 dol.
Hiftory of Rome, with Sketches of Carthage, Macedon, &c. 2 vols. 12mo. Phzlad. 2 dols.
Hiftorical, Geographical, Commerical and Political View of America, by W. Winterbotham, wth a folio Ailas, 4 vols. 8vo. WWew-York. 11 dolls.
Hiftorical Journal ofthe American War,8vo. Bo/f.1 12 1-2
Hiftorical Grammar, or Chronological Abridgment of Univerfal Hiftory, Difcoveries and Inventions, 12mo. Bofion. 75 cts.
Holmes’ (Rev. A.) Life of Prefident Stiles, 8vo. Bo/- fon. 1 75
Humphreys’ (Col. David) Mifcellaneous Works, 8vo. NV. Fork. 1 50—new edition, with additions, 2 25
Humphreys’ Poems, 12mo. Philad. 37 1-2 cts.
Hive, a Collection of Thoughts on various Subjeds, E2mo.s|Worce/fer. 7s €ts.
Haplefs Orphan, a novel, 2 vols. r1zmo. Boffon. 1 50
Hoyle’s Games, directions for Whift, Quadrille, Piquet, Chefs and Back Gammon, 18mo. Bo/fton. 62 1-2 cts.
Haunted Priory, or Fortunes ofthe Houfe of Rayo, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Haunted Cavern, a Caledonian Tale, 12mo. WV. Yor’. 75 cts.
Hawkin’s Voyage to Africa, and Travels in the interior of that Country, r2mo. Philad. 75 cts.
Humming Bird, a Colle@tion of Modern Songs, 24mo. Bofton. 50 cts.
Hardie’s Tablet of Memory, or Records of Memorable Events from the earlieft hiftory till 1795, r2mo. Wew- York. 1 dol.
Hebrew Grammar, without points, defigned to facili- tate the ftudy of the Old Teftament, in the original, by Rev John Smith, 8vo. Bo/fon. 1 dol.
Harris’ (Rev. T. M.) Colleton of Mafonic Difcourfes, delivered on public occafions, 8vo. Boffon. 2 dols. Harris’ Natural Hiftory of the Bible, 12mo. do. 87 1-2 Cts. Harris’ Mafonic Conftitutions, compiled from Ancient
Records, Manufcripts,and Traditions,4to. Worcefi.2 50
Harris’ Selection from Sturm’s RefleGions on the Sea-
fons, 12mo. Charleffown. 1 dol.
MISCELLANIES. 45
Harris’ Abridgment of Zollikofer’s Exercifes of Piety, r2mo. Worceffer. 75 cts.
Hoyt's Treatife on the Military Art, being a comprehen- five Syftem of Cavalry Difcipline, e/u/frated with plates, 12mo. Brattleboro’. 1 dol.
Hawney’s Menfuration, 12mo. PaAzlad. 87 1-2 cts.
Hayley’s Life of Cowper, including many Letters and Pofthumous Pieces, 2 vols. 12mo. Boflon. 2 25; fine, Cali grit, 3° 25
Ditto, 8vo. with Plates, New-York. 3 dols.
Heath’s Memoirs,containing anecdotes, details of battles, &c. during the American War, 8vo. Boffon. 2 dols.
Honeywood’s (St. John) Poems, with fome pieces in Profe, 12mo. New-York. 1 dol.
Hutton’s Syftem of Bookkeeping by fingle entry, 4to: Philad. 50 cts.
Hindu Philofopher, or Letters of Shahcoolen, 12mo. Boflon, 87 1-2 cts.
Hamilton's (Mrs.) Syftem of Education, 2 vols. 12mo. Alexandria, 2 25
Henry’s Chymiftry, 12mo. Philad. 1 dol.
INQUISITOR, or Invifible Rambler, by Mrs. Rowfon, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Italian, or Confeffional of the Black Penitents, by Mrs. Radcliffe, 2 vols. rzmo. Mew-¥York. 1 75
Imlay and Filfon’s Hiftory of Kentucky, 2 vols. 12mo. New-York. 1 50
Innocent Sufferer, or Female Friendfhip, a novel, r2mo. Hallowell, 87 1-2 cts.
Incas, or the Deftruction of the Empire of Peru, by M. Marmontel, 2 vols. r2mo. Philad. 2 dols.
Ildegerte, Queen of Norway, a novel by Kotzebue, 12mo. Philad. 1 dol.
Italian Nun and Englifh Gentleman, Letters of, 12mo. Worcefler. 75 cts.
Imperial Epiftle from Kien-Long to George III. 8vo. Philad. 75 cts.
Interefting Memoirs, a novel by a lady, 12mo. Boffon. 87 1-2 cts.
46 MISCELLANIES.
Immortal Mentor, or Man’s unerring Guide to a healthy, wealthy and happy Life, r2mo. PAzlad. 1 dol.
JOSEPHUS’ Hiftory of the Jews, tranflated by May-
nard, folio. Mew-York. 11 dols. Ditto,tranflated by Whifton,6 vols.1z2mo. Worc. 5 dls.
Jockey Club, a Sketch of the Manners of the Age, 8vo. Bofton. 1 50
Jefferfon’s Notes on the State of Virginia, 8vo. Bo/fon. 2 dols.—18mo. Boffon. 1 25—8vo. Philad. 1 75—8vo. Baltimore. 2 50—8vo. hot preffed Phi/ad. 3 dols.
Julia de Roubigne, a novel, 12mo. Boffon. 75 cts.
John Bull the Clothier, an allegory, 12mo. Bo/fon. 75 cts.
Juliet Grenville, a novel, 2 vols. 12mo. P&zlad. 2 dols.
Jofeph Andrews, a novel by Fielding, 2 vols. rzmo. Vew- Fork. 1 50—1 vol. Philad. 1 dol.
Joan of Arc, an Epic Poem by R. Southey, 12mo. Bo/- fon. 1 12
Junius’ Letters to the People of England, t2mo. PAz/, 1 d. Ditto, with Notes by Heron, 2 vols. 8vo. 4 50
Jackfon’s Bookkeeping, in the true Italian Form of dou- ble entry, or Practical Bookkeeping exemplified, 8vo. Philad. 1 50
Jeft Book, or Merry Fellow’s Companion, r2mo. 50 cts.
Julia and the Illuminated Baron, a novel, 12mo. Port/- mouth, 1 dol.
Jones’ New and Complete Syftem of Bookkeeping, 4to. Vew-York, 2 dols.
Jane Talbot, a novel by the author of Arthur Mervyn, Wieland, &c. 12mo. Philad. 1 25
Jefs’ Syftem of Surveying, 8vo. Wilmington. 2 dols.
Jack Smith, or Caftle of St. Donats, a novel by Charles Lucas, 12mo. Balhmore. 1 dol.
Johnfon’s Lives of the moft eminent Englith Poets, with critical obfervations on their works, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 4 dols.
Johnfon’s Dictionary in Miniature, fine, 12mo. Bo/ffon. I 12 I-2
MISCELLANIES. 47
Journal of Andrew Ellicot, Efq. one of the Commiftion- ers appointed to fettle the boundary line between the Spanifh Settlements and the United States, with maps and plates, 4to. Philad. 6 dols.
Juvenile Letters, by C. Bingham, 18mo. 44 cts. half bound, 25 cts.
KEATE’s Sketches from Nature, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 87 1-2 ct.
Knox’s Moral and Literary Effays, 2 vols. r2mo. New- York. 2 dols.
Kaime’s Elements of Criticifm, with the Author’s laft ad- ditions and corrections, 2 vols. 8vo. Bo/ffon. 4 dolls.
Kotzebue’s Dramatic Works, 3 vols. 8vo. Mew- York. 6 dollars.
Kotzebue’s Ildegerte, Queen of Norway, r2mo. Philad. 1 dollar.
Kotzebue’s Conftant Lover, or William and Jeannette, 12mo. Boffon. 1 doll.
Kotzebue’s Life, written by himfelf, doards. 12mo. PAil. 1 dol.
Kett’s (Henry) Elements of General Knowledge, intro- ductory to ufeful books in literature and fcience, with lifts of the moft approved authors, 2 vols. 8vo. New- Fork. 4 dols.
Kelly’s Elements of Bookkeeping, 8vo. PAd. 1 25
LAWS of Maffachufetts, 3 vols. 8vo. Bo/fon. 6 50 Ditto 2 vols. royal 8vo. 7 50 and fine, 8 dols. Ditto, fingle. 1ft vol. demy fize, 2 50; 2d vol. 2 50; 3d vol. 2 dols.
Laws of United States, with the Conftitution, Treaties, &c. 6 vols. 8vo. Philad. 12 dols.—4th vol. feparate, 2 25; 5th, do. 2 dolls., 6th, do. 2 dolls.
48 MISCELLANIES.
Locke’s Effay on the Human Underftanding, with an analyfis of his do@trine of Ideas, a defence of his opin- ion concerning perfonal Identity, thoughts on Read- ing and Study, Elements of Natural Philofophy, new method of a Common-place-Book, &c. 3 vols. 12mo. Bofion. 3 dols.
Ditto abridged, 12mo. Boffon. 87 1-2 cts.
Lady of Quality’s Advice to her Children, 2 vols. 18mo. Newburyport. 1 25
Same bound in one, 1 dol. 1 vol. 18mo. Bo/ffon. 62 1-2 cts.
Lay Preacher, or Short Sermons for Idle Readers, 12mo. Walpole. 62 1-2 cts.
Letters of an Italian Nun and Englifh Gentleman, 12mo. Worcefter. 75 cts.
Letters on Courtfhip and Marriage, 18mo. Euz. Town. 50 cts.
Letters Addreffed to a Young Man on his entrance into Life, adapted to the prefent times, by Mrs. Weft, 12mo. Charleflown. 1 25
Letters of certain Jews to M. Voltaire, 8vo. PAz 2 dls.
Letters of Junius to the People of England, 12mo. Philad. 1 dol.—With Heron’s Notes, 2 vols. 8vo. boards, 4 50
Letters of Shahcoolen the Hindu Philofopher, r2mo. Bofton. 87 1-2 cts.
Letters of Gen. Wafhington to Congrefs during the A- merican War, 2 vols. 8vo. Mew-York. 2 50—2 vols. 12mo. Loffon. 2 dols. and with Portrait, 2 25
Literary Mifcellany, 3 vols. rzmo. New-Vork. 3 dols.
Love’s Art of Surveying and Meafuring Land, 8vo. WV. York, 1 25
Lavater’s Phyfiognomy, abridged, plates, 12mo. Bofton. 1533
Lavater’s Aphorifms on Man, 12mo. 42 cts. and fine, 50
Louifa, the Lovely Orphan, or the Cottage on the Moor, 12mo. Boffon. 62 1-2 cts.
Love and Patriotifm, or Adventures of M. Duportail, 12m0. Boffon, half bound, 37 1-2 cts.
Both the above bound together at 75 cts.
L’Abeille Francoife, by J. Nancrede, 12mo. Bo/ffon.
I 10
MISCELLANIES. 49
Letter Writer, or the Art of Correfpondence, 12mo. bound, 75 cts. 18mo. bound 62 1-2 cts. half bound, 5O*cts;
Looker-On, a periodical paper of great celebrity, 2 vols. 1z2mo. Philad. 2 50
Looking-Glafs for the Mind, or Intelle@ual Mirror, par- ticularly adapted for youth, r2mo. Mew-York. 75 cts.
Life of Col. James Gardner,12mo. Eveder.67cts.PA.75 cts.
Life of Charles XII. of Sweden, by Voltaire, 12mo. WV. Fork. 1 doll.
Life of Bonaparte, from his Birth to the Peace of Lune- ville, r2mo. Boffon. 1 doll.—12zmo. Mew-York. 1 25 1z2mo. Walpole. 87 1-2 cts.
Life of Alexander the Great, by Rollin, r2mo. Provi- dence. 75 cts.
Life of Catharine II. of Ruffia, by W. Tooke, 2 vols.
_8vo. Philad. 6 25
Life of the Benevolent John Howard, by Dr. Aikin, 1z2mo. WV. York. 75 cts.—18mo. Bo/ffon. 62 1-2 cts.
Life of General Putnam, by Col. Humphreys, 12mo. Middletown. 62 1-2 cts.
Life of Gen. Charles Lee, with fome Letters and Effays, 1zmo. JVew-York. 1 dol.
Life of Gen. Dumourier, 77 boards. 8vo. Philad. 1 dol.
Life and Works of Dr. B. Franklin, 12mo. 1 dol.
Life of James Lackington, the London Bookfeller, writ- ten by himfelf, r2mo. WM. York. 75 cts.
Life of Prefident Stiles, by Rev. A. Holmes, 8vo. Bo/ffon.
I
Life of Bampfylde Moore Carew, king of the Beggars, 1z2mo. New-Vork. 75 cts.
Life of Baron Frederick Trenck, 12mo. Philad. 1 dol. r2mo. Boffon. 1 25
Life and Adventures of Robinfon Crufoe, r2mo. Bo/fon. 75 cts.
Life of the late Mrs. Robinfon, formerly of Covent Garden Theatre, author of Vancenza, &c. 2 vols. 12mo. NV. Fork. 1 50—1 vol. 12mo. PAilad. 1 dol.
Life and Pofthumous Writings of William Cowper, au- thor of the Tafk, &c. by William Hayley, 2 vols. 12mo. Boffon. 2 25; fine, calf gilt, 3 25—Vew- York, 8vo. Plates, 3 dolls.
E
50 MISCELLANIES.
Life of Lorenzo de’ Medicis, called the Magnificent, by W. Rofcoe, 3 vols. 8vo. elegantly executed. Philad. g dols. calf gilt, 10 50
Lendrum’s Hiftory of the American Revolution, to which is prefixed a general Hiftory of North and South America, 2 vols. 1zmo. Bo/ffon. 2 dols.
Ladies’ Library, containing Mifs More’s Effays, Father’s Legacy, Moore’s Fables, &c. &c. 12mo. Chamber /ourg, 87 1-2 cts.
Lyttleton’s Dialogues of the Dead, 12mo. Worce/fier. 87 1-2 cts.
La Peyroufe’s Voyage round the world, in 1785, ’86, ’87, and ’88, to which is added an abftraG@ of Vancouver’s Voyage, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 1 dol.
Lavoifier’s Elements of Chymiftry, in a new Syftematic Order, containing all the modern difcoveries, 8vo. Philad. 3 dols.
Love’s Pilgrimage, a novel, 12mo. Philad. 87 142 Cts.
Langley’s Builder’s Jewel, or Youth’s Inftrucor, a much approved work on Architecture, fq. r2mo. Boffon. 1 75
Leonard and Gertrude, a Popular Story, 12mo. Phdad. 1 dol.
Linn’s (John Blair) Poem on the Powers of Genius, elegant plates, boards, 12mo0. Philad. 2 dols.
Little’s Ufher, a Syftem of Arithmetic, 12mo. Exe/er. 75 cts.
Lady’s Mifcellany, of Tales, CharaG@ers, &c. 12mo. Boflon. 75 cts.
Lady’s Magazine, and Mufical Repofitory, 3 vols. 8vo. New-¥Fork. 6 dols.
Letters on the Elementary Principles of Education, by Elizabeth Hamilton, author of Memoirs of Modern Philofophers, &c. 2 vols. 12mo. Alexandria. boards, 2 dols. bound, 2 50
Lecteur Frangois, ou Recuiel de Piéces, en Profe et en. Vers, par Lindley Murray, 12mo. WV. Fork. 1 25
MISCELLANIES. 51
MILLS' Syftem of Farriery, r2mo. Bo/fon. 1 dol.
Mills’ Treatife on Cattle, r2mo. Bo/fon. 87 1-2 cts.
Moral Library, containing M’Bride’s Principles of Virtue and Morality, Villette’s Effay on the’ Happinefs of the Life to come, &c. 12mo. Boffon. 75 cts.
Mafonic Conftitutions, compiled by T. M. Harris, 4to. Worcefler. 2 50
Man of the World, a novel, 12mo. Bo/fon. 87 1-2 cts.
Man of Feeling, by the author of Man of the World, 12mo. Worcefler. 75 cts.
Mifcellanies, in Profeand Verfe, for young perfons, 12mo. Philad. 75 cts.
Mirror, a Periodical Paper publifhed at Edinburgh, in 1779 and ’80, 2 vols. rzmo. Boffon. 1 67—Phil. 1 75
Myfteries of Udolpho, a Romance, by Mrs. Radcliffe, 3 vols. 12mo. Boffon. 2 50—Philad. 3 dols.
Milton’s Paradife Loft, and Regained, with other Poems, 12mo. Lofton. 1 dol.
Maynard’s Tranflation of Jofephus’ Hiftory of the Jews, folio. WV. York. 11 dols.
Moore’s (Dr. John) Zeluco, various Views of Human Nature, 8vo. Boffon. 1 75
Moore’s Mordaunt, a novel, 2 vols. rzmo. M. York. 2 dols.
Moore’s Edward, a novel, 2 vols. r12mo. Mount-Plea/ant, I 50
esis Journal during a refidence in France, 2 vols. 12mo. Boffon. 1 75
Moore’s (Edward) Fables for the Ladies, with Lang- horn’s Fables of Flora, 18mo. Lxe/er. 50 cts.
Moore’s (John H.) Young Gentleman & Lady’s Monitor, a Collection of Select Pieces from the beft Modern Writers, 1z2mo Hartford. 75 cts.
Morfe’s American Univerfal Geography, t/u//raled with twenty-eight Maps, 2 vols. 8vo. Boffon. 6 dols.
Ditto abridged for the ufe of Schools, 12mo. Bo/fon.
1 doll.
Morfe’s American Geography, wth eleven Maps, 8vo. Bofton. 3 50
Morfe’s Elements of Geography, 18mo. Bo/ffon. 31 cts.
Morfe’s Gazetteer of the Eaftern and Weftern Continents, comprehending the whole world, 2 vols. 8vo. 6 dols.
52 MISCELLANIES.
Morfe’s American Gazetteer, or Weftern Continent, a particular account of every State, City, Town, &c. in America, 8vo. Bo/ffon. 3 dols.
Morfe’s Gazetteer of the Eaftern Continent, and all the Iflands adjacent, 8vo. Boflon. 3 25
Morfe’s American Gazetteer abridged, r2mo. Boffon. 1 25
Millot’s Elements of Ancient and Modern Hiftory, 5 vols. 8vo. Salem. g dols.
Millot’s Elements of Ancient Hiftory, to 724, 2 vols. 8vo. Mew-Fork. 4 dols.
Minot’s Hiftory of Maffachufetts, from 1748 to 1765, being a Continuation of Hutchinfon’s Hiftory, 2 vols. 8vo. Bo/fon. 3 dols. in boards, 2 50
Minot’s Hiftory ofthe Rebellionin Maffachufettsin 1786, 8vo. Bofton. 1 25
Monk, a novel, by M. G. Lewis, 2 vols. r2mo. Bo/fton.
eS
Mufical Mifcellany, a Collection of favourite Songs fet to Mufic, r2mo. Northampton. 1 doll.
Macartney’s Embaffy to China in the years 1792, ’93, and ’94, with an account of the Cuftoms and Manners of the Chinefe, (by Anderfon) 12mo. PaAilad. 1 dol.
M’Fingal, a modern Epic Poem, by J. Trumbull, Efq. 18mo. Boflon. 75 cts.
Same Work with Plates, 8vo. MV. Vork. 1 25
Memoirs of Mrs. Coghlan, daughter of the late Major Moncrieffe, written by herfelf, 12mo. Mew-VFork. 62 1-2 cts.
Memoirs of the Year 2500, tranflated from the French,
Modern Geography, by John Pinkerton, revifed, corre@- ed and improved by Dr. Barton, 2 vols. 8vo. with 4to. Atlas, containing 60 Maps elegantly executed, Philad. t2 dols.
Montague’s (Edward) Life, Travels and Adventures, 18mo. Boffon. 50 cts.
Marfhall’s Introduction to the Knowledge and Praétice of Gardening, 2 vols. r2mo. Bo/ffon. 2 dols.
Milns’ American Accountant, 12mo. Wew-Yors. 1 dol.
Milns’ Well Bred Scholar, 12mo. Mew-Vork. 1 dol.
Miffes Magazine, Dialogues between a Governefs and her pupils, 2 vols. 18mo. Philad. 1 50
MISCELLANIES, 53
Malham’s Naval Gazetteer, or Seaman’s Complete Guide, being a full and accurate account of the feveral Coafts and Harbours in the known world, their latitude, lon- gitude, foundings, anchorage, &c. &c. with many Charts, 2 vols. 8vo. Bo/fion. 6 dols.
More’s' (Hannah) Sacred Dramas, chiefly intended for Young Perfons, the fubjects taken from the Bible, 1z2mo. Bo/ffon. 75 cts.
More’s Strictures on the Modern Syftem of Female Ed- ucation, with a View of the Principles and Condu& prevalent among Women of rank and fortune, 12mo. Boftonand Hartford. 1 dol.—Harfford, coarfe, 75 cts.
More’s Search after Happinefs, and Effays on various Subjects, 12mo. Worceffer. 50 cts.
Myftic Cottager of Chamouny, 12mo. Philad. 87 t-2 cts.
Mountain Cottager, or Wonder upon Wonder, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Marmontel’s Belifarius, 12mo. Mewduryport. 75 cts.
Mitchell's New and Complete Syftem of Bookkeeping, by an improved method of Double Entry, in dollars and cents, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
Maury’s Principles of Eloquence, adapted to the Pulpit and Bar, 12mo. Albany. 87 1-2 cts.
Montefquieu’s Spirit of Laws, 2 vols. 8vo. Worce/feer. 3507; fine; 4: dolls.
Mental Improvement, or the Beauties and Wonders of Nature and Art, in a feries of inftructive converfa- tions, 12mo. Mew-Bedford. 75 cts.
Montefiore’s Commercial and Notarial Precedents, con- fifting of all the moft approved Forms, with an Appen- dix, relative to Bills of Exchange, Infurance, &c. &c. 8vo. Philad. 3 dols.
Mackenzie’s Voyages from Montreal on the River St. Lawrence, through North America to the Frozen and Pacific Oceans, in 1789 and ‘93, 8vo. lV. Fork, 2 dols. t2mo. ew-Fork. 1 25
Ditto 8vo. Philad. boards, map, 2 50—do fine, map and portrait, 2 50—2 vols. boards, 3 maps and portrait, 3 50
Minftrel, or the Progrefs of Genius, with fome other Po- ems, by Dr. Beattie, plates. 12mo. Mew-York. 1 25 on fine wove paper, hot preffed, 2 dols.
‘ E 2
54 MISCELLANIES.
Man of Education, or Beauties of Lord Chefterfield, Se- lected from his Letters to his Son, r2mo. Bo/ffon. 1 dl.
Marmontel’s Incas, or the Deftruction of the Empire of Peru, 2 vols. r2mo. Philud. 2 dols.
Mallet du Pan’s Hiftory of the Deftruction of Helvetic Union and Liberty, 12mo. boards, Bo/fon. 75 cts. Montalbert, a novel, by Charlotte Smith, 2 vols. 12mo.
Philad. 2 dols.
Memory of Wafhington, containing a Sketch of his Life and Character, and the National Teftimonials of Ref- pect to his Memory, 12mo. Providence. 1 dol.
Martel’s Elements of the French Language, 2 vols. 12mo.
Midnight Bell, a German Story, 12mo. Phi/ad. 87 1-2 cts.
Moreland Vale, a novel bya lady, 12mo. NV. Fork. 1 dol.
Moral Monitor, a collection of Effays on various Subjects, difplaying the importance and enforcing the obferv- ance of Virtue, by Rev. Nathan Fifke, 2 vols. 12mo. Worcefler. 1 75
Mavor’s Hiftorical Account of the moft celebrated Voy- ages, ‘Travels and Difcoveries, from Columbus, to the prefent period elegant engravings, 24 vols. 12mo. Phil. 30 dols.
M’Neil’s Poems, in the Scottifh Diale@, 2 vols. 12mo. New-York. 2 dols.
Monimia, or the Beggar Girl, anovel, 12mo. Vew-Vork. 1 dol.
Mafonic Regifter, containing a collection of Mafonic Songs, and a Lift of the Lodges in Maffachufetts, New-Hampfhire, New-York, Vermont, Connecticut, and Rhode-Ifland, 12mo. Boffon. 1 25
Murray’s (Lindley) Englifh Grammar, t2mo. Bo/ffon, 81 1-4 cents; and Albany, 1 dol.
Murray's Englifh Reader, a collection of pieces in profe and verfe, felected from the beft writers, r2mo. Charles- town. 75 cts.
Murray’s Sequel to the Englifh Reader, a colle@iion of elegant pieces, 12mo. New-York. 1 dol. t Murray's Introduction to the Englifh Reader, 12mo.
New-York. 75 cents.
MISCELLANIES. 55
Murray’s Lecteur Francois, a collection of pieces in Profe and Verfe, for the ufe of Students in French, 12mo. New-York, 1 25
Minor Encyclopedia, or Cabinet of General Knowledge, being a Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and Polite Lit- erature, by Rev. T. M. Harris, 4 vols. r2mo. Bo/fon. 4 50
Mexico, true Hiftory of the Conqueft of, by Capt. Ber- nal D. Caftillo, tranflated from the Spanifh, 2 vols. 8vo. Salem. 4 dolls.
NATURE and Art, a Novel, by Mrs. Inchbald, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Naval Gazetteer, or Seaman’s Complete Guide, 2 vols. 8vo. LBoffon. 6 dolls.
Netley Abbey, a Gothic Story, r2mo. PA. 75 cents.
New Robinfon Crufoe, 12mo. Philad. 87 {-2 cts.
Nicholfon’s Philofophy, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 4 dolls.
New Pleafing Inftructor, or Young Lady’s Guide to Vir- tue and Happinefs, 1r2mo. offon. 1 doll.
Nocturnal Vifit, a Novel, by the author of Clermont, Children of the Abbey, &c. 2 vols. 12mo0. PAil. 1 75 fine, plates, 2 50
Naval Tactics, extracted from the Encyclopedia, wth plates, 8vo. Philad, 2 dolls.
New Mirror for the Female Sex, or Hiftorical Beauties for Young Ladies, by Mrs. Pilkington, 12mo. Hart- W0rd . 02 1-2 cents.
Negro, equalled by few Europeans, a Novel, 2 vols. 12mo. Philad. 1 75
Nightingale, a Collection of the moft approved ancient and modern Songs, fet to Mufic, r2mo. Port/mouth. 1ag2i5
56 MISCELLANIES.
ODIORNE'’S Poems on various Subjects, rzmo. Bo/ffon. 75 cents.
Ovid’s Art of Love, Remedy of Love, Court of Love, and Hiftory of Love, and Armftrong’s Economy of Love, 18mo. Wew-York. 62 1-2 cents.
Ormond, or the Secret Witnefs, a Novel, 12mo. Wew- York. 1 dollar.
Oriental Moralift, or Beauties of the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, 12mo. Boffon. 87 1-2 cents.
Oriental Navigator, or new Directions for failing to and from the Eaft Indies, 8vo. Philad. 4 50
Old Englifh Baron, a Novel, 12mo. Wew- York. 75 cts.
PINKERTON’S Modern Geography, including the moft recent difcoveries and political alterations, digeft- ed on a new plan, with an Aftronomical Introdudion, by Rev. S. Vince—revifed, correéted and much im- proved by Dr. Barton of Philadelphia, 2 vols. 8vo. with 4to Atlas. Philad. 12 dolls.
Paley’s Principles of moral and political Philofophy, 8vo. Bofton and Philad. 2 dolls.
Pleafures of Memory, a Poem, by Rogers, plates, 12mo. Bofton. 1 dollar.
Pleafures of Memory, and Pains of Memory, by Merry, plates, elegant, 12mo. New-York. 2 dolls.
Prieftley’s Syftem of Biography, with a fet of Biograph- ical Charts, and a Book of Defcriptions. PAz2. 2 dls.
Peter Pindar’s Poetical Works, 2 vols. 12mo. Wew- York. 225 Philad. 2 dolls.
Peter Pindar’s Tears and Smiles, 12mo. Balimore. 75 Cts. in.boards, 62 1-2 cts.
Pleafing Inftructor, or Entertaining Moralift, confifting of fele&t Effays, Allegories, &c. r2mo. Bofton. 87 1-2 ¢.
Paine’s (Thomas) Political Writings, 8vo. Albany. 2 dls.
Paine'’s Works complete, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 4 dolls.
Paine’s Age of Reafon, Parts I. and II. r2mo. Worce/fier. 87 1-2 cents.
Pelew Iflands, Keate’s account of, 12mo. Bofton. 75 cts.
Plowden’s Hiftory of the Britifh Empire, 8vo, PAi. 1 25
MISCELLANIES, 57
Pike’s new and complete Syftem of Arithmetic, 8vo.
Bofton. 2 25 Ditto, abridged, for fchools, r2mo. Bo/fion. 87 1-2 cts.
Prefident Wafhington’s Speeches to Congrefs, with the Anfwers, Addreffes to the Prefident, with his An- fwers, &c. 12mo. Bo/ffon. 1 dollar.
Pain’s Practical Builder, or Workman’s General Affift- ant, on 83 Plates, with Explanations, 4to. Bo/fon. 4 d.
Pain’s Practical Houfe Carpenter, on 148 Plates, with Explanations, 4to. Bo/ffon. 5 dolls.
Pain’s Builder’s Pocket Treafure, correétly engraved on 55 Plates, with Explanations, 12mo. Bo/fon. 2 dolls.
Pain’s Builder's Eafy Guide, or Young Carpenter’s Af- fiftant, engraved on 48 Plates, with Explanations, ato. Bo/fton. 2 dolls.
Poetical Mifcellany, valuable pieces from Goldfmith, Pope, &c. 12mo. Newburyport. 67 cents.
Prentifs’s Fugitive Effays in Profe and Verfe, 12mo. Leominfler. $7 1-2 cents.
Philip Quarll, the Englifh Hermit, who was lately dif- covered upon an uninhabited Ifland in the South Sea, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 75 cents.
Pomfret’s Poems, on feveral Occafions, 18mo. Bo/lon. 62 1-2 cents.
Pennington’s Chymical and Economical Effays, 8vo. PAil. I 12 I-2
Probate Directory, or Affiftant to Probate Courts, Ex- ecutors, Guardians, &c. 12mo. Boffon. 1 doll.
Polite Lady, or 4 Courfe of Female Education, in a fe- ries of Letters from a Mother to her Daughter, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Paul et Virginie, French and Englifh, 2 vols. 18mo. Bojlon, . 25
Ditto, French or Englifh only, 1 vol. 18mo. 62 1-2.
Pocket Farriery, by Bracken, 18mo. half bound, Philad. 50 cents
Park’s Travels in the Interior Diftricts of Africa, per- formed under the direction of the African Affociation, 8vo, Mew-York. 2.50; 12mo. 1 doll.
Police of London, Treatife on, by Colquhoun, 8vo. PAv7. 2 dollars.
Pigot’s Political Dictionary, 12mo. /Vew-Fork. 75 cts.
58 MISCELLANIES,
Pope’s Tranflation of Homer’s Iliad, r2mo. Philad. 1 d.
Purfuits of Literature, a fatirical Poem, in four Dia- logues, with Notes, 8vo. PA. 3 dolls.
Peafant’s Fate, a rural Poem, by William Holloway, 12mo. Boflon. 37 1-2 cents.
Parent’s Friend, or Extraéts from the principal Works on Education, from the time of Montaigne to the prefent day, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 4 dolls.
Patriotic Medley, a Collection of Songs, 18mo. Balhmore. 62 1-2 cents; coarfe, 50 cents,
Plain Senfe, or Hiftory of Ellen Mordaunt and Henry Villars, 2 vols. 1zmo. Philad. 2 dolls.
Payfon’s Proofs of the real exiftence and dangerous ten- dency of Illuminifm, 12mo. Charleffown. 1 doll. Pleader’s Guide, a Dida@tic Poem, by John Surrebutter, Eefq. Special Pleader and Barrifter at Law, 8vo. Pail.
U2
Public Characters, or Contemporary Biography, (being a felection from the work publifhed in England under the fame name) of the moft celebrated characters both Eu- ropean and American, 8vo. Baltimore. 2 50
Playfair’s Hiftory of Jacobinifm, its Crimes, Cruelties, and Perfidies, 2 vols. 8vo. PAilad. 4 dolls.
Payne’s New and Complete Syftem of Geography, 4 vals. 8vo. Mew-York. 10 dolls.
Parkinfon’s Medical Admonitions to Families refpecting the Prefervation of Health and Treatment of the Sick, 8vo. Port/mouth. 2 dolls.
Prieftley’s Lectures on Hiftory, new improved Edition, with additions by the author, 2 vols. 8vo. Phvlad. 4 dls.
Plutarch’s Lives, by Langhorne, 6 vols. r2mo. Worcefler.
ROBERTSON’s Hiftory of America, from its difcoves ry to 1776, principally of South America, 2 vols. 8vo, New-York. 4 dolls.
Ditto, books g and to, containing the Hifto- ry of Virginia to 1688, and of New-England to 1652, 8vo. Mew-Fork, 1 doll.—12mo. Walpole. 75 cts.
MISCELLANIES. 59
Robertfon’s Hiftorical Difquifition concerning Ancient India, its Policy, Laws, Arts, Sciences, &c. 8vo. PAz. LGt rs)
Rights of Woman by Mary Wolftonecraft, 8vo. Bo/fon. I 50
Rowe’s Letters from the Dead to the Living, to which are added Letters, Moral and Entertaining, 12mo. New-Fork. 75 cts.
Romance of the Foreft, by Mrs. Radcliffe, 1rzmo, PAz?. 1d.
Royal Captives, a fragment of Secret Hiftory, 2 vols. 1z2mo. Philad. 1 75
Rudiments of Reafon, 3 vols. 18mo. New-York. 1 50
Rural Walks, in dialogues intended for young perfons, by C. Smith, 12mo. P&dlad. 75 cts.
Roderic Random, a novel, 2 vols. r2mo. Philad. 1 50 nie, 1975
‘Rouffeau’s Social Compact, r2mo Albany. 1 doll.
Reuben and Rachel, a novel, by Mrs. Rowfon, 12mo. Boon dol:
Rulhiere’s Anecdotes of the Revolution in Ruffia, 18mo. Bofton. 75 cts.
Ruth’s Effays, Literary, Moral and Philofonhical, 8vo. Philad. 2 dolls.
Rawfon’s Compendium of Military Duty, adapted to the Militia of the United States, 8vo. Dover. 1 25
Robifon’s Proofs of a Conf{piracy, againft all the Reli- gions and Governments of Europe, by Illuminati, Free Mafons, &c. 8vo. New-York. 1 75
Rumford’s Experimental Effays, Political, Economical, and Philofophical, 2 vols. 8vo. Boflon. 5 dols.
Rumfords’ Effay on Chimney Fire Places, being No. Io, boards, 1 dol.
Rambler, a periodical paper of great celebrity, by Dr. Johnfon, 4 vols. 8vo. Philad. 5 dols.
Riley’s Natural Hiftory, or Beauties of Creation, 18mo. Worcefler. 75 cts.—12mo0. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Revolutionary Juftice, or Infide View of the Prifons of Paris, 12mo. Philad. 62 1-2 cts.
Ruffell’s (Lord) Hiftory of Ancient Europe, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad.
60 MISCELLANIES.
Ruffell’s Hiftory of Modern Europe, with an account of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 5 vols. 8vo. Philad. 12 dols. boards, 10 dols.
Roland’s (Madame) Appeal to Impartial Pofterity, 2 vols. 8vo. New-York. 3 50
Reid’s Effay on the Mind, 8vo. Paéilad. 1 75
Ring, or the Merry Wives of Madrid, t2mo. Balhmore. 75 cts.
Romans in Greece, an Ancient Tale, doards. 12mo. Bof- fon. 50 cts.
Robinfon Crufoe, his Life and Adventures during 28 years, on an uninhabited Ifland, 12mo. various. 75 cts.
Romance of real Life, a collection of furprifing Incidents, by Charlotte Smith, 18mo. PaAd. 87 1-2 cents.
Raffelas, Prince of Abyffinia, a Tale, by Dr. Johnfon, 18mo. Hartford. 50 cents.
Ditto, with Dinarbas, a Tale in continuation of Raffelas, by another hand, 18mo. Hartford and Greenfield. 87 1-2 cents.
Rochefaucoult's Maxims, 18mo. Bofion. 50 cents.
Rofcoe’s Life of Lorenzo de’ Medicis, called the Mag- nificent, 3 vols. 8vo. elegant edition. Phil. 9 dolls. Calf gilt, to 50
Rotchfords, or the Friendly Counfellor, rz2mo. Philad. 1 dollar.
Rees’ New Syftem of Short Hand, 12mo. Phil. 50 cts.
SMOLLET’s Hiftory of England from 1688, to the end of the American War, being a Continuation of Hume’s Hiftory, 6 vols. 8vo. Phil. 13 50
Staunton’s Account-of the Embaffy from the King of Great-Britain to the Emperor of China, with obferva- tions on the Manners and Cuftoms of the Chinefe, &c. 8vo. Philad. Plates. 3 dols.
Sterne’s Sentimental Journey, 12mo. Norwich. 75 cts. 12mo. New-Fork. 87 1-2 cts.
MISCELLANIES, 61
Smith’s (Charlotte) Elegiac Sonnets, fine, plates. 18mo. Worcefter. 1 doll.
Smith’s Rural Walks for young perfons, 12mo. New- York. 75 cts.
Stewart’s Elements of the Philofophy of the Human Mind, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
ea See OLYs a novel, by Mrs. Inchbald, 12mo. PAdad. 1 dol.
Seneca’s Morals, by way of abftraé, to which is added a Difcourfe under the title of an After Thought, 12mo. Bofion. x dol.
Saunders’ (Daniel) Journal of his Travels and Sufferings on the coaft of Arabia, 18mo. Salem. 50 cts.
Sky Lark, or Complete Modern Songfter, 18mo. Wor- cefler. 75 cts.
Steuben’s (Baron) Rules and Regulations for the order and difcipline of the troops of the United States, with nine plates, 12mo. Boffon. 75 cts.
Ditto, half bound, eghs plates, 50 cts. Ditto, with all the Militia Laws annexed, 87 1-2 cts.
Sullivan’s (James) Hiftory of the Diftri@ of Maine, 8vo. Bofton. 2 dols.
Sullivan’s Hiftory of Land Titles in Maffachufetts, 8vo. Bofton. 3 dolls.
Scott’s Gazetteer of the United States, r2mo. PA. 1 50
Swan’s Britifh Architect, or Treafury of Stair Cafes, folio. Boffon. 5 dols.
Smith’s Inquiry into the Nature and Caufes of the Wealth of Nations, 3 vols. 12mo. Philad. 3 dols. | Sheridan’s Complete Dictionary of the Englifh Lan- guage, 8vo. Phdad. 3 dols.
Ditto, rzmo. Philad. 1 75
Salem Witchcraft, or more Wonders of the Invifible World difplayed, 12mo. Salem. 1 dol.
Smith’s Letters to Married Women on Nurfing and the Management of Children, 12mo. Philad. 75 cts. Shakefpeare’s Dramatic Works, complete from the lateft and beft London Editions, with a Gloffary and Life
of the author, 8 vols. 12mo. Pé&zlad. 10 dols.
_ Scott’s Leffons in Elocution, a felection of Pieces in profe
and verfe, for the ufe of Schools, 12mo. 87 1-2 cts.
62 MISCELLANIES.
Sandford and Merton, a tale for Children, r2mo. Pil, 1 dol.
Ditto, 1 vol. 18mo. 1 dol. 2 vols. r8mo. 1 25 2 vols. 12mo. Philad. 2 40
Smith’s Hiftory of the State of New-York. 8vo. 1 25
Secrets of Arts and Trades, or approved directions from the beft Artifts for Engraving, Painting, Dying, Gild- ing, Moulding, Copperplate Prints, Colours, &c. &c. 12mo. SBo/flon. 87 1-2 cts.
Stephens’ Literary Mifcellany, 12mo. Philad. 1 12 1-2
Sorrows of Werter; alfo Charlotte’s Letters, written during her connexion with Werter, 12mo. Bo/fon. 1 dl
Stiles’ Hiftory of the Three Judges of Charles I. Whaley, Goffe and Dixwell, 1:2mo. Harfford. 1 dol.
St. Pierre’s Studies of Nature, tranflated by Henry Hun- ter, 3 vols. 8vo. Worcefler. 8 dols.
St. Pierre’s Botanical Harmony delineated,8vo. Worce/fer. 150
St. Pierre’s Vindication of Divine Providence, 2 vols. 8vo. Worcefler. 3 50
St. Pierre’s Beauties, fele@ed from his Works, 8vo. New-York. 1 50
Story Teller, or Amufing Companion, 12mo. o/fon. 87 1-2 cts.
Shepherdefs of the Alps, a moral tale, r2mo. 50 cts. Smart’s Tranflation of the Works of Horace into Lite- ral Englifh Profe, 2 vols. 18mo. New-Vork. 1 50
Spirit of Mafonry, 1zmo. New-Fork. 1 dol.
Spirit of the Farmer’s Weekly Mufeum, a collection of Anecdotes, &c. 12mo. Walpole. 1 12 1-2
Select Pamphlets, chiefly relating to the politics of A- merica at the clofe of the Revolution, 8vo. PdAzlad. 2 dols.
Secret Memoirs of the Court of Peterfburgh, towards the clofe of the reign of Catharine II. and commencement of that of Paul I. 8vo. Philad. 2 25
Songs in the Night, by a young woman under heavy afflictions, 12mo. Newduryport. 62 1-2 cts. :
Sturm’s Reflections on the Works of Nature and the Sea- fons of the Year, abridged by T. M. Harris. 12mo. Charleflown. 1 dol.
Southey’s Poems, doards. 1zmo. Boflon. 62 1-2 cts.
MISCELLANIES, 63
Southey’s Joan of Arc, an Epic Poem, 12mo. Bofton. Plz ol -2 Cts.
Sailor Boy, a celebrated novel, r2mo. Exeter. 1 dol:
Socrates out of his Senfes, or dialogues of Diogenes of Sinope, 12mo. §0 cts.
Siamefe Tales, told to the Son of the Mandarin Sam Sib, 12mo. Philad. 67 cts.
St. Leon, a tale of the 16th Century, by W. Godwin, 2 vols. 12mo. Adexandria. 2 dols.
Sewall’s Poems, with feveral fpecimens from his Mant- {cript Verfion of Offian, 12mo. Port/mouth. 1 dol. Sele& Poems, containing Art of Health, The Minftrel, Pleafures of Imagination and the Tafk, 12mo. Bad-
timore. 1 dol.
Select Plays; Caftle Speétré, Heir at Law, Stranger, Se= crets Worth Knowing, Robbers, Fiefco, Cabal and Love, Poor Gentleman, Folly as it Flies, Gamefter, Douglas, Mourning Bride, Orphan, Secret, 4 vols. r2mo. Saltimore. 5 dols.
Select Novels; De Valcourt, Notturnal Vifit, 2 vols. Jane Talbot, Clermont, 2 vols. Emmeline, 3 vols. on fuperfine paper, elegant plates. g vols. 12mo. Phil. 7 50
Sheridan’s Courfe of Lectures on Elocution, t2mo. Troy. 87 1-2 cts.
Storm, a novel, 1z2mo. Morriffown. 87 1-2 cts. ;
Spirit of the Caftle, a novel, by C. Proby, 12mo. Bal- fimore. 1 dol.
Spirit of Defpotifm, 12mo. PAilad. 1 dol.
Salzmann’s Gymnatftics for Youth, or Practical Guide to healthful and amufing Exercifes, for the ufe of Schools, 8vo. Philad. 2 50
Songfter’s Mufeum, a collection of Modern Songs, fet fo mufic, 12mo. Vorthampton. 1 dol.
Spectator, by Addifon, Steele, and others, 8 vols. 12mo. Philad. 6 dols. fine, 8 dolls.
64 MISCELLANIES.
TOOKE’s Life of Catharine II. Emprefs of Ruffia, 2 vols. 8vo. Philad. 6 25
Thomfon’s Family Phyfician, or Domeftic Medical Friend, 8vo. WV. Fork. 2 dols.
Tom Jones, the Foundling, a novel by Fielding, 3 vols. 1z2mo. Wew-York. 3 dols.
Taplin’s Compendium of Practical and Experimental Farriery, 8vo. Phil. 2 25 12mo. do. 80 cts.
Trimmer’s Introdudtion to the Knowledge of Nature, in- tended for Children, 18mo. Bo/ffon. 50 cts.
Trials of the Human Heart a novel, by Mrs. Rowfon, 2 vols. 12mo. Péhilad. 2 dols.
Telemachus, Adventures of, French and Englifh, 2 vols. 12mo. Boffon. 2 25 French or Englifh only, 1 12 1-2
Telemachus, Englifh only, wove, hotpreffed and plates, 2 vols. 8vo. V. York. calf gilt, 8 50
Thomfon’s Seafons, new and elegant edition, wove paper, plates, 12mo. NV. Fork, calf gilt, 2 25
Ditto, common, 12mo. 75 cts.
Town Officer, or Power and Duty of Sele@tmen, Affef- fors, Overfeers, Conftables, &c. r2mo. Boffon. 1 dol.
Tales of Paffed Times, French and Englifh, 1z2mo. Vew- York. 1 dol.
Two Coufins, a moral Story for the ufe of young Per- fons, 18mo. Bo/ffon. 50 cts.
Trumbull’s Hiftory of Connedticut, 8vo. Hartford. 2 37 I-2
True Republican, or Oriental Philanthropift, 12mo. Port{/mouth. 87 1-2 cts.
Tale of the Times, a novel by Mrs. Weft, author of the Goffip’s Story, &c. 2 vols. rgzmo. Alexand. 2 dols. Tales of Wonder, written and collected by M. G. Lew-
is, 2 vols. rz2mo. JV. Fork. 2 dols. Tafk, a Poem by W. Cowper, 12mo. Boffon. 75 cts. plates, 87 1-2 cts. ~ Three Spaniards, a romance, 12mo. WV. Fork. 1 12 1-2 Tranflations and Imitations from the French of Mar- montel and Greffet, 1zmo. M. Fork. 1 dol. : Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, in the French Ar- my, during the campaigns of Bonaparte in that coun- try, by Vivant Denon, with a genuine Hiftory of the
MISCELLANIES, 65
Invafion of Egypt, &c. tranflated by Arthur Aikin, with a map and 12 plates. 2 vols. 8vo. New-York. 5 dls.
Theodore Cyphon, or the Benevolent Jew, a novel by George Walker, author of the Vagabond, &c. 2 vols. t2mo. Alexand. 1 7
Tranfactions of the Agricultural Society of New-York, 8vo. Albany. 2 dols.
Traveller's Diretory, or a Pocket Companion, fhowing the courfe of the Main Road from Philadelphia to New-York, and from Philadelphia to Wafhington, from actual Survey, with Maps, &c. Philad. 2 dols.
UNIVERSAL Merchant in Theory and Pra@ice, im- proved and enlarged, by W. I. Aldridge, 8vo. Philad. 2 dols.
VOLNEY’s Travels in Egypt and Syria, with remarks on the Political State of thofe Countries, their Arts, Productions, Manufacturesand Commerce, 8vo. Vew- Fork, 2 vols. 3 dols. 1 vol. 2 25
Volney’s Lectures on the Study of Hiftory, delivered in the Normal School at Paris, r2mo. Philad. 75 cts.
Volney’s Ruins, or a Survey of the Revolutions of Em- pires, 8vo. Philad. 2 25 boards, 2 dols.
Vicar of Wakefield, a novel by Dr. Gold{mith, 12mo. Salem. 62 1-2 cts. M. Fork. 75 cts.
Valuable Secrets of Arts, Trades, &c. giving directions for the moft approved methods of Engraving, Paint- ing, Varnifhing, Gilding, &c. &c. &c. 12mo. Bo/fion. 87 1-2 cts.
Voyages of Amafis, in Frenchand Englifh. 12mo. Bo/fon. 1 doll.
Vaitel’s Law of Nations and Principles of the Law of Nature, applied to the conduct and affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, 8vo. Wew-York, 2 25
Village Curate, a poem, 12mo. Wewdsuryport. 62 1-2 cts.
Vifit fora Week, 12mo. PA&ilad. 75 cts.
F 2
66 MISCELLANIES,
Vinall’s Arithmetic, 1z2mo. Boffon. 87 1-2 cts.
Voltaire’s Philofophical Dictionary, 12mo. WV. York. 1 dl.
Voltaire’s Life of Charles XII. of Sweden, r2mo. Wew- York. 21 idol.
Vifion of Columbus, a poem, by Barlow.
Vagabond, a novel by George Walker, r2mo. Bo/f. 1 dl.
Vicar of Lanfdowne, a novel by the author of the Chil- dren of the Abbey, 12mo. Baltimore. 1 dol.
Viaud’s Shipwreck and Adventures, tranflated from the French, 18mo. Dover. 62 1-2 cts.
Vocal Medley, a collection of Favourite Songs, 12mo. Alexand. 62 1-2 cts.
WASHINGTON’s Official Letters to Congrefs, written during the War between G. Britain and America, 2 vols. 8vo. New-York, 2 50—2 vols. r2mo. Boffon. 2 dols. do. portrait. 2 25
Wafhington’s Epiftles, Confidential and Domeftic, 8vo. New-York. 1 50
(Some of the/e Epifiles are /purious.)
Wafhington’s Political Legacies, containing his Inaugu- ral Speech, his Farewel Addrefs, &c. with an account of his Illnefs and Death, and the National Tributes of Refpect to his Memory, 12mo. Mew-Fork. 1 dol.
Wafhington’s Letters to Arthur Young, and Sir John Sinclair, on Agriculture, and the rural Economy of the United States, doards, 8vo. Alexand. 1 dol.
Wafhingtoniana, a Biographical Sketch of the Life, with outlines of the Chara@er, and Funeral Honours to the Memory, of Wafhington, 12mo. Baltimore. 1 dol.
Williams’ Natural and Civil Hiftory of the State of Vermont, 8vo. Walpole. 2 dols.
Williams’ (Helen Maria) Letters from France, 2 vols. 12mo. MVew-Vork. 1 62 1-2 cts. fh
Ditto, vol. 3d. containing an account of Scenes
which paffed in the prifons of Paris, 12mo. Pdilad. 87 1-2 cts.
MISCELLANIES, 67
Watts’ Logic, or the right ufe of Reafon, r2mo. Bofton. 1 dol.
Watts on the Improvement of the Mind, a fupplement to the Art of Logic, r2mo. Exeter. 1 dol.
Webfter’s Differtations on the Englith Language, 8vo. Bofton. 1 50
Wifdom in Miniature, 24mo. Worce/fer. 37 1-2 cts.
Workman’s Gauging, epitomized, in which that art is rendered familiar to the meaneft capacity, 8vo. Phil. I 37 I-2
Whitney’s Hiftory of the County of Worcefter, 8vo. Worcefler. 1 50
Wollftonecraft’s Vindication of the Rights of Woman, 8vo. Boffon. 150
Wollftonecraft’s Hiftorical and Moral View of the French Revolution, 12mo.
- Wollftonecraft’s Letters, 12mo. Wilmington. 87 1-2 cts.
Wollftonecraft’s Mary, or the Wrongs of Woman, 12mo. Philad. 87 1-2 cts.
Wollftonecraft’s Memoirs, publifhed by W. Godwin, 1z2mo. fhilad. 62 1-2 cts.
Wonderful Story Teller, or Pocket Library of agreeable entertainment, r2mo. So/ffon. 1 dol.
Wieland, or the Transformation, a novel, 1r2mo. New- VorkG ts dol.
Warville, (Briffot de) on the Commerce of America with Europe, 1z2mo. Mew-F¥ork. 1 dol.
Warville’s Travels in the United States in 1788, 12mo. Bofton. 1 dol.
Winterbotham’s, Hiftorical, Geographical, Commercial and Philofophical View of the United States, and of the European Settlements in America and the Weftt- Indies, with a folio Atlas, 4 vols. 8vo. VV. Yorks. 11 dls.
Winterbotham’s Hiftorical, Geographical and Philo- fophical View of the Chinefe Empire, 2 vols. 8vo. NV. Fork. 3 dols.
Webber’s Mathematics, compiled from the beft authors, and intended to be the text-book of the courfe of Pri- vate Lectures in that Science, at Cambridge Univerfi- ty, 2 vols. 8vo. Boffon. 6 dols.
Wortman’s Inquiry concerning the Political Freedom of the Prefs, 8vo. WV. Fork, 1 50
68 MISCELLANIES.
Welt’s (Mrs.) Letters addreffed to a Young Man on his entrance into Life, r2mo. Boffon, 1 25
Walth’s New Syftem of Mercantile Arithmetic, adapted to the Commerce of the United States, in its foreign and domeftic relations, 8vo. & 12mo. Wewburyport. I 25
William and Jeannette, or the Conftant Lover, by Kot- zebue, 12mo. Bo/ffon. 1 dol.
Well Bred Scholar, or Practical Effays on the beft meth- od of improving the tafte, and affifting youth in their literary purfuits, by W. Milns, 12mo. WV. Yor&. 1 dol.
Willock’s Voyages and Adventures, with remarks on the different Countries of Europe, Africa and America. 12mo. Philad. 1 dol.
Willich’s Le@tures on Diet and Regimen, a Syftematic Inquiry into the moft rational means of preferving Health and prolonging Life, 2 vols. 12mo. Bo/fton. 2 25—8vo. WV. Fork. 2 dolls.
Ditto, abridged, 12mo. Boffon. 1 25
Wonderful and deplorable Hiftory of the Wars of the Jews, by Jofephus Ben Gorion, 12mo. Leominfler. 75, cts.
Wordfworth’s Lyrical Ballads, with other poems, r2mo. Philad, 1 12 1-2
Wilfon’s (Sir Robert) Journal of the Britith Expedition to Egypt, with a Sketch of the prefent ftate of that Country and its means of defence, 8vo. Philad. 2 50
Williams’ Tranflation of Solomon’s Song, doards, 8vo. Philad. 1 50
Witherfpoon’s (Prefident) Mifcellaneous Works, 8vo. Philad. 1 75
Me Oene Works, complete, 4 vols. 8vo. Pahilad.
50
YOUNG Ladies’ Parental Monitor, 12mo. Hartford. 50 cts.
Young Gentleman’s Parental Monitor, 12mo. Hartford. 50 cts.
SCHOOL BOOKS. bg
Young Man’s Beft Companion, containing Infiructions for Reading, Writing, Arithmetic, Bookkeeping, Mea- furing, Guaging, Letters on Bufinefs, Friendthip, &c. Forms of Deeds, Bonds, &c. 12mo. Walpole. 87 1-2 cts.
ZIMMERMAN on National Pride, with an account of the Life and Writings of the author, 8vo. New-York. I 50
Zimmermann on Solitude, with refpeG toits influence up- on the Mind and Heart, 12mo. 1 dol.—éavo. New- Vork, 125
Zuco, various views of Human Nature, by Dr. John Moore, 8v0. Boflm. 175
Loonomia, ot the Laws of Organic Life, by Dr. Eraf- mus Darwin, 3 vols. vo. W. York. 6 75—Improved Edition, 2 vols. vo. Boflon. 5 50, and fine, 6 75
SCHOOL BOOKS.
A RT of Speaking, containing rules for expreffing pro- petly the principal paffions; and leffons taken from the ancients and moderns, exhibiting a variety of mat- ter for praGtice, 75 cts. 8 dols. per dozen.
Ast of Reading, containing a number of ufeful rules, and a variety of feleGed and original pieces, calculated to improve the fcholar in Reading and Speaking, by D. Stanniford, 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per dozen.
Ath’s Englith Grammar, 25 cts. 2 25 per dozen.
70 SCHOOL BOOKS.
American Selection of Leffons in Reading and Speaking, being the Third Part of Webfter’s Grammatical Infti- tute, 37°1-2) cts... 3 50 per dozen.
American Preceptor, a new Selection of Leffons for Read- ing and Speaking, by Caleb Bingham, 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per dozen.
American Monitor, or School of Wifdom, a copious collection of fublime and elegant extracts, by M. Ca- Tey, 075 (Cis:
Adam’s Rudiments of Latin and Englifh Grammar, re- commended by Harvard Univerfity, Cambridge, 75 cents. 8 dols. per dozen.
Same Work abridged by W. Biglow, 44 cts. Alexander’s Introduction to making Latin, 62 1-2 cts. Alexander’s Greek Grammar, 62 1-2 cts.
Alexander's Englifh Grammar, 22 cts. 2 dolls. per doz.
Alexander’s Spelling-Book, 20 cts. 1.75 per doz.
Alexander’s Latin Grammar, 37 1-2 cts.
Alexander’s Elements of Englifh Grammar, 12 1-2 cts.
Alexander’s new and complete Syftem of Arithmetic, 50 cents.
Aftronomical and Geographical Catechifm, by C. Bing- ham, 10 cts. 75 cts. doz.
Alden’s Columbian Spelling-Book, vol. 1, 20 cts. 1 75 doz.
Ditto vol. 2, 31 1-4 cts. 3 dols. doz.
Alden’s Reader, 31 1-4 cts. 3 dols. doz.
Adams’ (Daniel) Scholar’s Arithmetic, or Federal Ac- countant, in a form and method altogether new, in Federal Money, and £. s. d. with blank {paces for working the fums, 87 1-2 cts. 9 dolls. per doz.
Same bound in leather, 1 12 1-2 cts.
Adams’ Thorough Scholar, or reafons, principles and rules of Englifh Grammar, 25 cts. 2 25 per doz.
Adams’ Underftanding Reader, or Knowledge before Oratory, a new feleCion of leffons, 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per dozen.
BIGLOW’s New Latin Primer, containing leffons for Conftruing and Parfing, extra@s from the Minor
SCHOOL BOOKS. 7
Latin Claffics, and the Firft Part of Lyne’s Latin Pri- mer, 87 1-2 cts. 9 dolls. per doz.
Biglow’s Introduction to the making of Latin, felected chiefly from Ellis’ Exercifes, to which is fubjoined the Second Part of Lyne’s Latin Primer, 87 1-2 cts. 9 dolls. per doz.
Biglow’s Elements of Latin Grammar, being an abridg- ment of Adam’s Latin Grammar, 44 cts.
Biglow’s Rudiments of Englifh Grammar, extra@ed from Adam’s Latin and Englifh Grammar, 12 1-2 cts.
Biglow’s Child’s Library, a feleGtion of leffons in read- ing, 25 cts.
Beauties of the Bible, by Ezra Sampfon, 18mo. 75 cents, 8 dolls. per doz.
Burr’s Englifh Grammar, 16 cts. 1 50 per doz.
COLUMBIAN Orator, a variety of original and felect- ed pieces : together with rules calculated to improve youth and others in the art of fpeaking, by C. Bing- ham, 75 cts. 8 dolls. per doz.
Columbian Dictionary, by C. Alexander, 1 doll. 10 dolls. per doz.
Columbian Preceptor, leffons for reading and fpeaking, by D. Heaton.
Columbian Spelling-Book, by Benja. Heaton, 20 cents, 175 per doz.
Columbian Grammar, by P. Cochran, 20 cts. 1 75 doz.
Columbian Accidence, by D. Gurney, 12 1-2 cts 1 17 doz.
Columbian Primer, by H. Mann, 12 1-2 cts. 1 17 pr. doz.
Child’s Spelling-Book, Hartford, 12 1-2 cts.
Child’s Companion, a concife Spelling-Book, by C. Bingham, 12 1-2 cts. 1 17 per doz.
Child’s Firft Book, an eafy introduction to reading and fpeaking, 12 1-2 cts. 1 17 per doz.
Child’s Friend, tranflated from the French of Berquin, 4 vols. 75 cts. each vol.
72 SCHOOL BOOKS.
Child’s Affiftant, by Temple, 12 1-2 cts. 1 25 doz.
Child’s Library, by W. Biglow, 2 vols. 12 1-2 cts. each. Laty per.doz.
Clarke’s Erafmus, 12mo. Worceffer. 50
Clarke’s Corderius, 12mo. Worceffer. 37 1-2 cts.
Clarke’s Eutropius, 12mo. Worceffer. 67 cts.
Clarke’s Introduction to the making of Latin, r2mo. Worcefier. 75 cts. New-York. 87 1-2 cts.
Clarke’s AEfop's Fables, Latin and Englifh. 50 cts.
DILWORTH’s Schoolmafter’s Affiftant. 50 cts.
Dilworth’s Spelling-Book, or only Sure Guide to the Englifh Tongue. 12 1-2 cts.
Dana’s Selection of Leffons in Reading and Speaking. Bofion. 75 cents. 8 dolls. per doz.
Dwight’s Syftem of Geography, by way of Queftion and Anfwer. 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per doz.
Dearborn’s Columbian Grammar. 50 cts.
ENFIELD’s Speaker, a colle@ion of Mifcellaneous Pieces from ‘the beft Writers. 87 1-2 cts. 9 dols. doz.
Efop’s Fables, Latin and Englih. 50 cts.
Elliot's and Johnfon’s School Didtionary. 50 cts. 5 dls. per dozen.
FENNING?’s Arithmetic. 75 cts.
Frafer’s Young Gentleman and Lady’s Affiftant in Ge- ography, Hiftory, Arithmetic, &c. 75 cts.
Federal Calculator, or Dilworth’s Schoolmatter’s Af- fiftant revifed and adapted to the Federal Currency. 75 Cts. :
Fifher’s Young Man’s Companion. 87 1-2 cts.
Fifke’s New-England Spelling-Book. 20 cts. 1 75 doz.
Franklin Primer. 12 1-2 cts. 1 doll. per dozen.
SCHOOL BOOKS. 73
Gloucefter Greek Grammar, 1 dol. 10 50 per doz.
Greek Teftament, Worce/fer Edition, large type. 1 37 1-2
Gurney’s Columbian Accidence, 12 1-2 cts. r 17 per doz.
HISTORICAL Grammar; an Abridgment of Univer- fal Hiftory, with an abridged Chronology, &c. 12mo. 75 cts. 8 dols per. doz.
Hebrew Grammar, without points, defigned to facili- tate the ftudy of the Scriptures in the original, by Profeffor Smith, 8vo. half bound, 1 dol.
Hubbard’s Rudiments of Geography. 50 cents.
JUVENILE Inftructor, a ufeful Book for Children. 10 cts. 75 cts. per doz.
LITTLE’s Ufher, or Federal Arithmetic. 12mo. Exeter. 75 cts.
Lyne’s Latin Primer, Part 1ft. r2mo. 25 cts. Ditto Part 2d. 12mo. 25 cts. Both parts bound together, r2mo. 50 cts.
MURRAY’s Englifh Grammar. 12mo. Soffon. 81 1-4 cents. Albany. 1 doll. Ditto abridged, 18mo. Albany. 25 cts. 2 25 per doz. Ditto abridged, 18mo. Soffon, 12 1-2 cts. 1 17 per doz. Murray's Introdudtion to the Englifh Reader, 12mo. New-York 75 cts. Murray’s Englifh Ree 12mo. Charlefiown. 75 cts.
74 SCHOOL BOOKS.
Murray’s Sequel vo the Englifh Reader, r2mo. Mew- York. 1 dol.
Murray’s Lecteur Frangois. Mew-Pork. 1 25
Murray’s Englifh Exercifes, 18mo. 37 1-2; 3 50 per dozen.
Murray’s Key to Englifh Exercifes. 37 1-2; 3 50 per dozen.
Mair’s Introduction to the Latin, rz2mo. 87 1-2 cts.
Maine Spelling Book, by T. Prentifs. 20 cts. 1 75 per dozen.
Morfe’s Univerfal Geography abridged. 1 dol. 10 50 per dozen.
Morfe’s Elements of Geography. 31 1-4 cts. 3 dols. per dozen.
NEW Pleafing Inftru@or. remo. Boffon. 1 dol.
New-Hamphhire Latin Grammar, by Profeffor Smith, 12mo. Boffon. 62 1-2 cts.
Nichols’ Federal Arithmetic. 37 1-2 cts.
Noyes’ Federal Arithmetic.
New Latin Primer, by W. Biglow. 87 1-2 cts. 9g dolls. per dozen.
ORATOR’s Affiftant, a Sele@ion of Leffons in Read- ing and Speaking, by A. Thomas. 34 cts. 3 dolls. per dozen.
PERRY’s Standard Englith Dictionary. 1 dol. ro dol. per dozen. Perry’s Spelling Book. 22 cts. 2 dols. per dozen. Pike's Arithmetic, 8vo. 2 25 Ditto abridged, 87 1-2 cts. 9 dolls. per dozen. Prentifs’ Maine Spelling Book. 20cts, 1 75 per dozen.
SCHOOL BOOKS. 75
Pennfylvania Latin Grammar. 25 cts. 2 25 per dozen.
Pleafing Inftructor, r2mo. 87 1-2 cts.
Perry’s Spelling Book Improved.
Primers, Common. 6 cts. 37 1-2 cts. per doz. 4 dolls. per grofs.
ROOT’s Introduction to Arithmetic. 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per dozen. Rofs’s Latin Grammar. 25 cts.
STANIFORD’s Art of Reading. 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per dozen.
Staniford’s Englifh Grammar. 22 cts. 2 dols. per doz.
Schoolmafter’s Affiftant, by Dilworth. 50 cts. § dols. per dozen.
Smith’s N. Hampfhire Latin Grammar. 62 1-2 cts.
Smith’s Hebrew Grammar, without points. 1 dol.
School Dialogues, felected chiefly from the beft Dramatic Authors. 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per dozen.
Sele@z e Profanis Scriptoribus Hiftoriz, quibus admifta funt varie Honefte vivendi precepta, &c. 12mo. Phil. 1 doll.
TEMPLE’s Syftem of Arithmetic. 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per dozen.
Thorough Scholar, or the Nature of Language, by D. Adams. 25 cts. 2 25 per dozen.
UNDERSTANDING Reader, or Knowledge before Oratory. By D. Adams. 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per doz.
76 SINGING BOOKS.
WEBSTER’s Firft Part, or American Spelling Book. 20 cts. I1~7§ per doz.
Webfter’s Second Part, being an Englifh Grammar. 22 cts. 2 dols. per doz.
Webfter’s Third Part, or American Sele@ion of Leffons in Reading and Speaking. 37 1-2 cts. 3 50 per doz.
YOUNG Lady’s Accidence, by C, Bingham. 12 1-2 cts. I 17 per dozen.
SINGING BOOKS.
Arr of Singing, upon a plan entirely new, by An- drew Law. 75 cts. 7 50 doz.
Beauties of Church Mufic, by William Cooper. 1 doll. 10 dolls. per doz. Bofton Collection of Mufic. 1 doll. 10 dolls. per doz.
Columbian Repofitory of Sacred Harmony ; including the whole of Dr. Watts’ Pfalms and Hymns, to each of which a tune is adapted, by S. Holyoke. 3 dolls. bound, 3 50
Columbian and European Harmony, or Bridgewater Collection of Sacred Mufic. By Bartholomew Brown, and others. 1 doll. 10 dolls. per doz.
Charleftown Colle@ion of Sacred Songs, by O. Holden, 50 cts. 5 dolls. per doz.
Collection of Pfalm Tunes and Anthems, by John Cole, 37 1-2 cts. 4 dolls. per doz.
Continental Harmony, by W. Billings. 1 doll. to dols. per doz. :
Evangelical Harmony, by D. Belknap. 44 cts. 4 50 doz. Effex Harmony, by J. Kimball. 75 cts. 8 dolis. doz.
SINGING BOOKS. 7]
Harmonia Americana, by S. Holyoke. 87 1-2 cents. g dolls per doz.
Harmony of Maine, by S. Belcher 75 cts. 8 dolls. doz.
Modern Collection of Sacred Mufic. 1 dollar. 10 dolls. per doz.
Middlefex Harmony, by Samuel Babcock. 75 cents. 8 dolls. per doz.
Maffachufetts Compiler of Theoretical and Pra@ical El- ements of Sacred Vocal Mufic, together witha Mufic- al Dictionary, and a variety of Pfalm Tunes, Cho- tuffes, &c. chiefly fele@ed or adapted from modern European Publications. By Gram, Holyoke and Holden. 4to. 1 75
Maffachufetts Harmony, by W. Janes. 87 1-2 cts. 5 dols. per dozen.
Middlefex Collection, by Belknap. 67 cts. 7 dolls. doz.
Northampton Collection, by Mann. 87 1-2 cts. g dolls. per dozen.
New England Sacred Harmony, by B. Holt, jun. 37 1-2 cts. 4 dolls. per doz.
Rural Harmony, by J. Kimball. 75 cts. 8 dolls. per dozen.
Pfalmodift’s Affiftant, by A. Furbuth. 44 cts. 4 50 doz. United States Sacred Harmony, by Amos Pilfbury. t-257;0r2 dollspper'doz,
Union Harmony, or Univerfal Colle@ion of Sacred Mu- fic, by O. Holden. 75 cts. 8 dolls. per doz.
Village Harmony. 1 doll. 1o dolls. per doz.
Worcefter Collection of Sacred Harmony, 8th Edition, I doll. 10 dolls. per dozen.
OMISSIONS.
ABBOT’s Law of Shipping, relative to merchants’ fhips and feamen, in four Parts. 8vo. PA7l. 2 50 Aonian Banquet, a felection of Poems, 12mo. PAz. 75 cts. American Coaft Pilot, new Edition, much improved and
enlarged, 8vo. Newburyport. 3 dolls.
BURNS’ Poems, new edition, with additions, 12mo. Baltimore. 1 25 Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progrefs, with Scott’s Notes.
COX on Vaccination, 8vo. Phil. 1 25 Chefs made eafy, with examples from Phillidor. PAz. 50 cents.
GIFFORD's Works, containing the Baviad and Mevi- ad, 2 vols. r2zmo. Mew-Fork. 2 50
LIFE, Adventures and Opinions of Col. George Hang- er, 8vo. New-¥ork. 2 dolls.
NURSE, a Poem, tranflated from the Italian, by W. Rofcoe, 18mo. Vew-Fork. 1 doll.
ORTON’s Letters to a Young Clergyman, r2mo. doards. Bofton. 37 1-2 cents.
Obi, or Three Fingered Jack, in a Series of Letters from a Gentleman in Jamaica. Worceffer. 50 cts. and 62 1-2 cts.
POCKET Hoyle, containing the games of Whift, Crib- bage, Ombre, Piquet, Chefs, &c. &c. 1 doll.
Peafant’s Fate, a Poem, by W. Holloway, 12mo. fine, Plates, Baltimore. 1 25; common, 1 doll.
Pulpit Orator, 1z2mo, Boffon. 75 cents.
SERMONS to Young Perfons, by John Clarke, D. D. 1zmo. SBofion. 1 doll.
OMISSIONS. 7y
TRUTH and Excellence of the Chriftian Religion, ex- hibited, in 2 Parts—containing Sketches of the Lives of the moft eminent Laymen, and extracts from their Works—by Hannah Adams. 12mo. Bo/fon.
UNSEX’D Females, a Poem, by Rev. R. Polwhele, 18mo. New-York. 75 cents.
WYCHE’s Practice of the Supreme Court of the State of New-York. 8vo. /Vew-York.: 2 dolls.
FINIS.
v2 _
aa
Z aheihee”. ert inet wileilenet ance 6B
Satter ely aes “ip ose vem: 46d fae Py - mits Fa, 10 Thr Agere: [etl 5 @ eanepel . >. eileen an (dm \aenelan Hagia ee as 72 o> be —_— a SESH TF -2T picipte, ane thy TU
i a ‘ sa : te i
ur = : eo :
“9 Sites ait 14 spate tne F emval st!s oan? axinizinay—enn' © al
Se ene |
ieee And fears, i sland dietbeaiionine ee
i e ae ako |
rf
on ves Oa Dd eler
= f ; =.
i | . <2 re a 4 ire) vad}
; ba == rer ~ _ pare aid ey (Dl ros tage € "rit
_
. ; aS _ =p |e 7h ie } , ren Taye fivee the Ted lind, Tees 2 : ow
Dk SP a : i, t
-. Pamela > cf
q1s.73 6884 4.965
+5 (7s. eases 1965
GROWOL L AX BOOK TR ADE
INSERT BOOK WASTER CARD pee EOP IN
FROWT SLOT OF S.R. PUNCHI
MASTER CARD
SLOBESONIAE-O
Bi BLIOGRAPHY 1N
T44
UNIVERSITY OF ARIZON:
Ll
BRARY
anh iets
tae és at aN mare A meatetarehsy? : me itenotey yy M4 ae Seer SS ’ E Fy a ene By NO ab, Siu bat als ‘
& ax
Ra
Lonek AL oe ately
= a 4
ees
us $ owe Viorate Ay Oa My Py vepia
Era pitt * ay
=
ie Oe. Fe ae wee,
pes oe Regus hooa nh alia ernie vars esis
eprane eek toe A oe, Tee
Rtatae teh tbeeleat si Rok iba kets ; , Si heared
eke RL hak ee on 2 # PA eno Ce sitet tet te) . SAO SE
windy bans eae ote stata viet Shia agra ether at Ty ei a NN ea herent . repr wiesmeerere: TOES IP OLS hes DA re os bedi bias ; ; Nyine ew ames
bette sa seis
PRR M Ts
Fs) M shehee te a an
yom ay Sem Sa rer
