ta ee ee ee ee a
— -Plaver.
CROSBY HALE RESIDENCE FOR
a) we) <l ge e) ea O. t— <l Za (ae. LL) fb Z.
CHEYNE WALK; CHELSEA, saws LONDON
/NAWOM ALISYSAINA
Mui
ay
LY Trew
SOKUO
THE
POEMS AND BALLADS
OF
SCHILLER.
“ff CHANDOS CLASSICS,”
THE
POEMS AND BALLADS
OF -
21015 Ibi biden
TRANSLATED BY
SIR EDWARD BULWER LYTTON, Barr.
WITH MEMOIR.
Pondon anv Mew Work: FREDERICK WARNE AND CO. 1887.
“LONDON BRADBURY, AGNEW, & C0. PRINTERS). ae
Enseribed
TO
JAMES F. FERRIER, Esq.,
PROFESSOR OF UNIVERSAL HISTORY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF FDINBURGI,
A SLIGHT TOKEN OF GRATITUDE FOR CANDID CRITICISM AND
OF RESPECT FOR ENLIGHTENED ERUDITION.
ADVERTISEMENT.
—
In this volume, containing a translation of Schiller’s Poems, an attempt is made to supply a desideratum long felt in England, not only by the cultivators of German literature, but by those un- acquainted with the original, and anxious to obtain some glimpse of a genius whose influence upon the Intellect of Europe has been so pervading and pro- found. There have been many translations, it is true, of detached poems by Schiller—and some deserving of high commendation for their elegance and fidelity—but detached poems convey a very imperfect idea of the general character of a Collec- tion remarkable both for the rich variety it embraces, and the noble mind that it reflects.
To estimate Schiller as a Poet, and to appreciate him as a Man, the reader should be invited to a survey of the whole of those poems in which — Schiller has developed the flower of every faculty he possessed—the fruit of every study he pursued ; in which a few lines sometimes concentrate the purpose of his most elaborate Dramas—or contain the pith of his most thoughful essays; and there- fore, with very trivial exceptions, the whole Coilec-
ai ADVERTISEMENT.
tion ig included in this translation. Several specimens have appeared in ‘‘Blackwood’s Maga- zine.’ They have been carefully revised,* and some of them re-written. The object of the Translator has been to adhere with as much fidelity to the original, as the necessity of construing ' poetry into poetry will permit. The best plan to ensure such fidelity, that of rendering line by line, has been for the most part adopted. Where ampli- fication, or departure from the literal meaning has been indulged, it has been with an earnest view to give livelier expression to the spirit, or distincter clearness to the meaning, of the author.t Of course there will be instances, in a collection so various, where the critic may discover a looser interpretation of the text than he may perhaps be inclined to excuse ; but, taken as a whole, we venture to believe that there are few translations of poems equally numerous and diversified, in which loyalty and allegiance to the sense of the original have been more sedulously rendered.
In the choice of metre, adherence has generally been sought to the essential sound and spirit of the German; but not without those deviations
* We have invariably followed the text as settled by Schiller him- self, and found in all the later editions of his works—not permitting ourselves to restore what he has omitted, even where we haye
ventured to regret that the omission was made. Anauthor has a right to decide on his own bequests to posterity.
t Hyery one acquainted with Schiller, knows that it is occasionally necessary to translate his ideas as well as his words.
ADVERTISEMENT. ix
warranted by our own laws of metrical construction, and the usages which our classical writers have rendered familiar to the ear and to the taste ;—in such matters, indeed, the ear and the taste can alone decide the judgment, and no one can be a critic who is not at the same time a poet, or, at least, a verse-maker. The boldest, and yet perhaps the most pardonable deviation from the original metre, is to be found in such poems as “‘ The Walk” (Der Spaziergang), ‘‘ Pompeii and Her- culaneum,”’ &c., composed by Schiller in the classic verse* for which the English language has no musical analogy, and for which we have, therefore, considered ourselves at liberty to substitute such metres as seemed best to suit the nature of the subjects,—or such as an English poet, adopting subjects of a similar character, would probably have selected.
In the received editions of the original, the poems are classed in three divisions, according as they were composed in the three Periods which biographers
have regarded as the great epochs of Schiller’s life. These divisions have not been confounded in the translation, but we have inverted the usual order— placing the maturest poems first,+ and the youthful
* The Elegiac, or alternate hexameter and pentameter.
+ And in the “third division ” we have not given to each poem the place it occupies in the editions of the original. This requires no
excuse, as they are not, in the German, printed according to chrono- logical or any other systematic arrangement; and we were, therefores
x ADVERTISEMENT.
compositions last. It would not be doing justice to Schiller, in introducing him to the English public— to give to his most imperfect performances the place of honour—and perhaps, as a general rule, it is always more interesting to follow the stream to its source, than to track from the turbid spring the smoothness of the after current.
A sketch of the life of Schiller has been prefixed to the Translation, in which the author is chiefly indebted to the recent biographies of Hoffmeister and Schwab, as well as to the charming narrative of Madame von Wolzogen,* and the Correspondence of Schiller and his Contemporaries. If after “‘ The Life of Schiller,” written by a man so eminent as Mr. Carlyle, a new biography for the English reader has been judged necessary, it is because vast additions to our information respecting the great Suabian Poet have been made since the appearance of Mr. Carlyle’s work.
In conclusion, the Author must gratefully ac- knowledge his obligations to many—German as well as Hnglishmen—who have generously lent him their invaluable aid in the task he has undertaken; but to no one so much as the late Professor Ferrier, to whose accurate scholarship and graceful taste will be mainly owing whatever favour this Translation may receive.
at full liberty to select the order which appeared to give the most relief and variety.
* Schiller’s sister-in-law.
CONTENTS.
DEDICATION . . ; - ° ‘ ‘ ; een. ADVERTISEMENT . 2 : : A $ : ; . Vii
A Brier SKETCH oF THE LIFE OF SCHILLER . : eee at
THe Diver, A BALLAD . : 4 ° = 5 ye Ol THe GLuovr, A TALE . “ - : ° é ‘ - 108 THe Kynicut oF ToGGENEURG. C . . seriou 210 Tur MEETING : . . ° ° 5 ° 4 . 113 THE ASSIGNATION . ° . ° é 5 5 ope et THE SECRET. : . . . ° : . 116 To Emma. : : od gan are c : 2 thee LLi7: Tue Porr To HIS FRIENDS (WRITTEN AT WFIMAR) . . 118 EVENING (FROM A PICTURE) .. . : F A Arar tial) ‘Tur Loncine C = . > . - A c eval THE PincRim . c 5 s . - c . Ao tee THE DANCE . = 2 ° 7 : : : ‘ . 123 THE SHARING OF THE EARTH . . . : . Oo eee) Tur INDIAN DratTu-Dirce . < 7 . : 5 . 126 Tue Lay or THE MounTAIN . ° : . ‘ Boe, els Toe Atp HuNnTER : : . ° . ° é ., 129 RUDOLF oF Harspurc, A BALLAD . ‘ c 3 A, OEM
xii CONTENTS.
Tur FIGHT WITH THE DRAGON . é i “ er is DITHYRAMB ‘ 2 5 : 6 : : . Yo THE KNIGHTS OF Sr. JOHN . 6 5 5 4 . . TuE MarpEen rrom Arar (oR FROM ABROAD). 5 Sic
Tur Two GurpeEs or LIFE—THE SUBLIME AND THE BEAUTIFUL Tur Four AGEs oF THE WORLD 4 5 : : : THE MAIDEN’s LAMENT A é A cC 5 : ou Tur IMMUTABLE . é 6 . ’ . . . . THE VerLeD IMAGE AT SAIS . 5 . 5 Sc Tur CHILD IN THE CRADLE. 5 4 “ c 5 “ Tur RING oF PoLYCRATES, A BALLAD . 5 5 eels Horr . ; 5 4 E Tur SpxEs ‘ : .
Honours ; < 5 5 5 < : Pomprtt AND H@ERcuLANEUM . ° 4 5 . LIGHT AND WARMTH . : c : :
BREADTH AND DEPTH : : : 5 r . THE PHILOSOPHICAL EcorstT. ° é ‘ FRrIpoLin ; on, THE MrssAcE To THE Force. . ° Tar YOUTH BY THE Broox. ‘ c * ° To THE IDEAL. ; °
PHILOSOPHERS 5 . ‘ Puncn Sona . : % 5 Puncu Sone, TO BE SUNG IN THE NorTH . s . Preasus In Harnnss ; Hero AND LEANDER, A BALLAD. .
Tor Puayinc INFANT .
CONTENTS.
CASSANDRA . “ . : A 3 ‘ THE Vicrory FEAST : ‘ 5 5 5;
THE CRANES OF IBycUS
Tuer Hostacr, A BALLAD Z F ‘ 5 THE COMPLAINT OF CERES . < ° ° THE ELEUSINIAN FESTIVAL , e : . PARABLES AND RIDDLES : . : ‘ THE Micut oF Sone - ° : . Honour To WoMAN  . : : ‘ °
THE WoRDS OF BELIEF . . s : ° THE Worps oF Error . i : 5 THE MERCHANT : : ° > : . Tur GERMAN ART : = . : : THE WALK. ; : : : = ° THE LAY OF THE BELL 2 . . : Tue PorETryY oF LIFE
THE ANTIQUE AT PARIS (FREE TRANSLATION) THE MaArp oF ORLEANS . : 4 fi 4
THEKLA (A SPIRIT VOICE) . ° . >
WILLIAM TELL . 5 ° ° 4 5 ARCHIMEDES . : : ? F c c CARTHAGE , A - : = A -
CoLtuMBUS . : . . ° 5 ; NaNIA. A ° . ° . ; F Jove TO HERCULES ° F F 5 c Tur IDEAL AND THE ACTUAL LIFE fe . Toe FAvoUR OF THE MOMENT . F 4
THE FORTUNE-FAVOURED . : : 5 ;
xiv CONTENTS.
THE SOWER . = 5 4 ' 5 ; A ° : SENTENCES OF CONFUCIUS ; 4 5 : ; are Tar ANTIQUE TO THE NoRTHERN WANDERER . ‘ « GENIUS (FREE TRANSLATION) . : . : ; x: = ULYSSES Ga 6 ° : ° fs 6 C : . VotTivE TABLETS . 6 : 5 i f : ies OTHER EPIGRAMS, &0. . ¢ 7 ;: P ' : 5
To tHE HerEepITARY PRINCE OF SAXE WEIMAR, ON HIS JOURNEY TO PARIS, WRITTEN FEBRUARY, 1802 . te
To A YOUNG FRIEND DEVOTING HIMSELF TO PHILOSOPHY . Tur Pupper-sHow OF LirE (DAS SPIEL Des LEBENS). : Tur MINSTRELS OF OLD . : : : : A eae
Tur COMMENCEMENT OF THE NEW CENTURY . 6 5
SECOND PERIOD.
Hymn To Joy. 5 ; 5 : 5 THe INVINCIBLE ARMADA ... ‘ : ° THE CONFLICT . 5 A A . 5 3 RESIGNATION 0 : ; ‘ x 5 Tur Gods OF GREECE . 5 ; :
THE ARTISTS. : a :
THE CELEBRATED WOMAN ; AN EPIsTLE By A MArrrep Man —TO A FELLOW-SUFFERER .
To A FEMALE FRIEND (WRITTEN IN HER OWN ALBUM)
296 299 3801 302 304 309
330 337
CONTENTS. XV
FIRST PERIOD; OR, EARLY POEMS.
HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE . : : ° . . . 339 AMALIA. : : : % . ns . . 340 A FUNERAL PHANTASIE ° : c . . A . 341 _ FANTASIE To LAURA - ‘i ‘< . : ° - . b44 To Lavra PLAyine-—. . 3 5 - : : . 346 To Laura (RArTuRE) . ‘ : : - fs ae REY?
To GAuRA (THE Mystery oF REMINISCENCE) . . » 848
MELANCHOLY; TO Laura : ‘ : : 5 + « 850 THE INFANTICIDE. : A E A P A . 3854 THE GREATNESS OF CREATION. - 2 2 - =) 6 860 ELEGY ON THE DEATH oF A YourH . : “ 5 . 861 THE BATTLE . - 5 ; ° 5 5 . . 364
ROUSSEAU (FREE TRANSLATION) . : ° . : . 366 FRIENDSHIP, : F : ° ; 7 « . 367 A Group IN TARTARUS z F 2 2 cs . 369 ELYSIUM . - ° - 2 3 - : A *| « O00 Tur REFUGEE . 2 2 Suet ; : eoTO Tue FLOWERS . . A : > = se oe To Minna . : - - Z 3 2 5 . 373 To THE SPRING : ; : 3 . - 2 se O74 Tue TriumpPH oF Lovze, A Hymn : c : : SS To a Monatist A : : - : 5 5 . . 880 ForTUNE AND WisboM c F ; zi : c . 880 Count EBERHARD, THE QUARRELLER (DER GREINER) OF WURTEMBERG . i : : F é 5 6 Skehil FAREWELL TO THE READER (TRANSFERRED FROM THE THIRD PERIOD) . - : 0 a : : 5 5 v 884
A BRIEF SKETCH
OF THE
LIFE OF SCHILLER.
CHAPTER LI. FIRST PERIOD,
SCHILLER’S BOYHOOD.—HIS PARENTAGE.—EARLY STUDIES AND INCLINATIONS.—HIS ENTRANCE AT THE MILITARY ACADEMY.—HIS YOUTHFUL POEMS, AND PREDILECTIONS FOR THE DRAMA.
CtosE by the village of Lorch, on the borders of Wiirtem- berg, rise the ruins of a castle, the hereditary seat of the Counts of Hohenstaufen. The graves of that illustrious family surround a Convent, placed upon a neighbouring eminence, and half hid by a venerable lime. Upon another hill, stands an old chapel; below, flows the river Rems, through luxuriant vineyards and fertile corn-fields, Amidst the ruins of Hohenstaufen, or amidst the graves of its ancient lords, between the years 1765-68, might often be seen two children—a boy and girl,—so strongly resembling each other, as to denote their relationship as brother and sister.* Usually, they were seen alone; sometimes with young companions,—sometimes with a man in a military uniform, and in the vigour of life—to whom the boy, especially, listened with avidity, whether he explained the plan upon which the old Castle had been built, or pleased the infant
* Hofimeister, Schwab.
2 LIFE OF SCHILLER,
spirit of adventure, by anecdotes of camp and field.* More often, perhaps, their companion was a female, of mild exterior, and manners peculiarly gentle, though somewhat grave and serious, And she, too, found in the children, still more especially in the boy, eager listeners to the talk by which she sought to instruct the understanding or arouse the fancy. She had tales of witch and fairy to relate ;—but, as the children grew older, she preferred rather to please the imagination with verses from Klopstock, Gerhard, and the pious Gellert. More than all, she at once charmed and instructed her young pupils by stories and passages from the Gospel, adapted to their understanding; and their tears flowed betimes at the sufferings of the Redeemer.t Already, perhaps, the scenes which he loved to haunt, and certainly the subjects he was accustomed to hear, had produced strong and deep impressions upon the mind and character of the boy. Already he had conceived a passion for Nature—formed habits of reverie and reflection—and looked forward to the Ecclesiastic Profession, for which his parents designed him,, with a religious and earnest enthusiasm. At eight years old, alone in the woodlands, with a boy about his own years, he exclaimed, “O Karl, how beautiful is it here! All—all could I give, so that I might not miss this joy !”{ His very sports partook of his serious character: nothing pleased him more than, by the help of a cap and a black apron, to assume the attire of the priest, mount a stool, and deliver extempo- raneous and fervent homilies, to an audience consisting of his mother and sisters. From his earliest childhood he was ever delighted to leave his infant games, to join the prayers or Bible lectures of the pious family to which he belonged ; and his favourite sister has left a pleasing description of the child at such moments—with his folded hands, his blue eyes raised to Heaven, and the fair hair clustering over the broad forehead, which he inherited from his mother. But though from infancy unusually serious, and from infancy, also, impatient of restraint, his temper was sweet, and. his disposition full of tenderness and compassion. If he met a
* Hoffmeister. t Ibid. Schwab. r } Hoffmeister, Schwab.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 3
poor child in his way to school, he would bestow on him all he had ; even his books—his aie were not sacred against his compassion. With all this softness of heart—this lovnie solitude, and this pious temperament, there was no less manifest a resolute and determined spirit. He was peculiarly fond of reading Voyages and books of Travels; and the Histories of popular heroes, such as Alexander the Great, He would often exclaim, “I must go into the world!” His reyeries were, in short, those that denote not an indolent temper but an active mind. His musings were not merely day-dreams—they were animated by that zeal for inquiry which usually foretells, in childhood, the career of men destined to think boldly, and love truth. In his seventh year, one evening, during a storm of thunder and lightning, the boy was missed at supper; he was found at last at the top of a tall lime-tree, near the house, enjoying the tempest. and, to use his own apology, “ wishing to see where so much fire in the heavens came from !””*—Such in childhood was the character of Johann Christoph Friedrich Schiller.
His birth placed him in that condition, between wealth and penury,—(a condition bordering on two classes—the Popular and the Refined) which is perhaps the most favourable to intellectual eminence.
His father, Johann Caspar Schiller, was of humble extrac- tion, the son of a baker, who held the office of Bailiff in the village of Bittenfeld.t He was a man of an adventurous and restless character ; stern and severe indeed in manners; but warmly attached to his family, of good abilities, of exemplary probity, and a strong and fervent sense of religion. He had held the rank of Surgeon in a Bavarian Regiment. In 1749, a year after the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle, he married Elizabeth Dorothea Kodweiss, a young woman, born at Marbach (about eight miles from Stuttgard), of parentage suitable to his own; though it is said that her more distant descent could be traced to the noble House of Kottwitz.t oe
After his marriage, Caspar Schiller resigned the medical
* To this anecdote Schwab gives the weight of his authority.
t Schwab. :
t Kattwitz, eet to Hofimeister—corrected by re pe to Kottwitz.
BQ
4 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
profession ; but at the breaking out of the Seven Years’ Wat in 1757, entered the Wartemberg Army as ensign and adju- tant, It was not till after some years that their union was blest by children : Elizabeth the eldest daughter, born 1757 ; Johann Christoph Friedrich, the Poet, born at Marbach, Noy. 11, 1759 ;* Dorothea Louise, born two years afterw ards ; and Nannette, the youngest. t When Friedrich Schiller was six years old, his father, then risen to the rank of captain, was sent to Lorch as recruiting officer. Here the boy received the first regular rudiments of education, including Latin, and something even of Greek, from the Clergyman of the Parish, Philip Moser; whose name and virtues he afterwards immortalised in ‘ The Robbers.” His favourite companions were his eldest sister, and the son of his tutor, Karl Moser.—But no observation is at once more true and more hackneyed—that it is to the easy lessons of a mother men of genius have usually owed their earliest inspiration. Schiller’s mother had tastes and acquire- ments rare in women of her rank—she was a good musician —-fond of poetry, and even wrote it; and the gentleness of her temper gave a certain refinement to her manners. 1768.  +‘Friedrich Schiller was nine years old when his father was removed by the Grand Duke to Ludwigs- burg, and the boy was entered at the Public School, instituted at that place. The academical discipline revolted one who had already formed his own desultory modes of self-instruc- tion, and his industry was reluctant and constrained. Still he passed his examinations with credit ; was ever one of the first in the Latin class to which he belonged, and received marks of approbation in the four several examinations he underwent before the School Commissioners at Stuttgard. His character betrayed itself rather with his playfellows than his preceptors. He obtained an ascendancy over them ; and his high spirit would brave those older and stronger than himself, if he suspected any intention to affront him. With his superiors he was reserved and awkward. But what, at this time, chiefly influenced his future fate, was the sight of the Theatre at Ludwigsburg—the remembrance of that
* «<A few months later than our own Robert Burns, "—CARLYLE. t Two other children died soon after birth.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 5
spectacle which, according to the fashion of the day, seems to have been a gorgeous spectacle, half opera half melodrame, began to colour all his thoughts, and dictate the character of his sports in the hours of play. At the 1770. age of eleven, a change was noticeable in his habits ;
he shrank from the games in which he had been hitherto amongst the most active. In the play-hours he would wander with some friend amongst the neighbouring plantations, and, in those moods of premature gloom and speculation, which so often cloud the dawn of illustrious manhood, complain of present thraldom, and form wild conjectures of future fate. Already he began to throw thought into verse—already he began to meditate the scheme of some elaborate tragedy. But lis religious bias was still his strongest, and at the age of fourteen, he still shared the predilections of his parents in favour of the ecclesiastical profession. But 1773. now came the first great revolution and crisis of his
life.
Karl, Grand Duke of Wiirtemberg, a luxurious and osten- tatious Prince, but one possessed of many excellent qualities, formed the notion of a great National Academy, first insti- tuted at ** Solitude,” one of his country places,—afterwards transferred to Stuttgard. This establishment was called a Military Seminary, but not confined entirely to those intended for the Military Profession.
The majority of the pupils were, indeed, the sons of officers—or even privates—in the Wiirtemberg Army ; but those of civilians were admitted also ; and suitable instruction was given to students intended for the peaceful profession -of the Law. But the school rightly deserved the distinguishing epithet of Military, from the discipline by which it was characterised.
The father of young Schiller had recently been promoted by the Grand Duke to the office of Inspector and Layer-out of the grounds at “ Solitude,” and was subsequently raised to: the rank of Major. But these benefits were not cheaply pur- chased. The.Grand Duke in return desired to send Friedrich Schiller to his Military Seminary. This was tantamount to the rejection of the long-cherished scheme of the clerical pro- fession. After much painful embarrassment, the elder Schiller
re
6 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
frankly represented to his Prince the inclinations of himself and his son. The Grand Duke, however, repeated his request, proposed to leave Friedrich the choice of his studies at the Academy, and promised him, when completed, an ap- pointment in the Royal Service. There was no resisting a Petitioner, whose request was in reality a law, and from whose favour was derived the very bread of the family. Friedrich
‘ Schiller could not and did not hesitate to sacrifice his own wishes to the interests of bis parents. But this renunciation of his young hopes and the independence of his free-will, wounded alike his heart and his pride. With grief
1773. and resentment, equally keen, at the age of fourteen, he entered the Academy as a student in a ‘irieprudence.
The studies thus selected were, in themselves, sufficiently un- congenial ; but to the dulness of the Law Lecture was added the “austerity of a corporal’s drill. The youths were defiled in parade to lessons, in parade to meals, in parade to bed. At the word “ March,” they paced to breakfast—at the word “Halt,” they arrested their steps—and at the word “ Front,” they dressed their ranks before the table.* In this miniature Sparta, the grand virtue to be instilled was subordination, Whoever has studied the character of Schiller, will allow that its leading passion was for Intellectual Liberty. Here mind and body were to be alike machines. Schiller’s letters at this time to his friend Karl Moser, sufficiently show the fiery tumult and agitation of his mind ;—sometimes mournful— sometimes indignant—now sarcastic, now impassioned —weary disgust and bitter indignation are seen through all. The German works, not included in the school routine, were as contraband articles—the obstacles to obtain them only in- creased the desire: no barrier can ever interpose between genius and its affections. The love of Man to Woman is less irresistible than the love that binds Intellect to Knowledge. Schiller stole, but, with the greater ardour for the secrecy, to the embraces of his mistress—Poetry. Klopstock still charmed him, but newer and truer perceptions of the elements of Poetry came to him in the ‘ Goetz von Berlichingen” of Goethe, with which, indeed, commenced the great Literary
* Tiofimeister, Schwab, &e.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 7
Revolution of Europe—by teaching to each nation that the true classical spirit of each, must be found in the genius of its own Romance. He who would really imitate Homer, must, in the Chronicles of his native Land, find out the Heroic Age.
Schiller obeyed the impulse of ,his own frank and courage- ous mind in an attempt to regain his freedom. A strange custom at the Academy enjoined each pupil, once a year, to draw up and read aloud an analysis of his own character. Schiller seized the first opportunity thus presented to him, to state that his character was not formed to 1774. excel in jurisprudence, but to serve God as a preacher.
The confession failed to amend the vocation; but finally he obtained permission to exchange Law for Medicine,—a class for which was superadded to the other academical instruc- tions. The studies for this latter profession were no doubt more congenial to him than those of Law, and served, in- directly and collaterally, to enrich the stores of a mind so inquisitive into the operations of Nature. But the dis- cipline in all studies was the same. Had they sought to cure him of Poetry, they would have had but to drill him into being a poet! Meanwhile, he was fast fitting himself for the great destiny to which he was reserved. He devoured the writings of those who were his precursors in German literature. Wieland’s translation of Shakespeare fell into his hands. Nothing more strongly marks the peculiar earnest- ness of his character—the emphatic distinction between Shakespeare and himself—than the effect which he tells us, in one of his own compositions, the great Englishman pro- duced on him:—‘“When at a very early age I first grew acquainted with this poet, I was indignant with his coldness —indignant with the insensibility which allowed him to jest and sport amidst the highest pathos. Led, by my knowledge with more modern poets, to seek the poet in his works; to meet and sympathise with his heart ; to reflect with him over his object; it was insufferable to me that this poet gave me nothing of himself. Many years had he my entire reverence —certainly my earnest study—hefore I could comprehend, as it were, his individuality. I was not yet fit to comprehend Nature at first hand!” Nor indeed was Schiller ever able,
8. LIFE OF SCHILLER.
as Shakespeare, thoroughly to separate himself from his creations. The peculiarities of his mind inclined, if they did not limit, him to the delineation of grave and elevated characters, and his heart, always in unison with his mind, led him to sympathise entirely, to be as one, with the beings he invoked—serious with his intellect, or ardent with his emotions.
His friends were few, but they were well selected, and they shared his inclinations if they had not his genius, for literature. They formed a sort of intellectual fraternity.
Each was to compose something, for which all dreamed of publication and fame—one a romance after ‘“ Werter ;” one a pathetic drama; one a chivalrous imitation of “ Goetz yon Berlichingen ;” Schiller himself (fired by Gerstenberg’s “Ugolino,”) a tragedy, called “The Student of Nassau.” This he abandoned afterwards for one of which he composed several scenes, and of which a part yet lives transferred to “The Robbers,” viz., ‘Cosmo de Medicis.”
Meanwhile his poetical talent found its first (and the usual) vent in the corners of a periodical Magazine.
At the age of sixteen and seventeen appeared in the 1776-7, Saubian Magazine some small poems (very judiciously omitted from the collected editions of Schiller’s works), in which the imitation of Klopstock is sufficiently visible. - “O, then was I still,” he exclaimed later, “ but the slave of Klopstock !” Nevertheless, the Editor of the Magazine, Balthasar Haug, found promise in the midst of extravagance and bombast, and prophesied that the young poet “ would one day do honour to his father-land.” *
The more his inclinations grew confirmed, the more sen- sibly he became alive to the formal tyranny by which they were opposed. No youth was less likely to be corrupted by Voltaire; but bitter was his resentment at the disgrace he incurred, when discovered reading one of Voltaire’s works. “O, Karl,” he exclaims in his correspondence with young Moser, “so long as my spirit can raise itself to be free, it shall bow to no yoke!” In fact, the Man’s mind was ripened long before the Poet’s genius, Crude, hard, laboured,
* Schwab. Hoffmeister.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. )
and extravagant were Schiller’s earliest efforts; but the soul from which Poetry springs as a well, clearing itself the more, the farther it advances from its source; a soul ever observant of beauty ; ever on the search for truth ; ever brave in diffi- culties ; ever fierce against restraint ; that was the same in its large elements, w hen the Boy, in vehement bombast, de- claimed against the blood-stained laurels of a conqueror, as when the Man planted the robust step of Tell on the soil of Switzerland, and drew from the obloquy of ages the virgin glory of the Maid of Orleans.
At last this long and terrible conflict between Genius and Circumstance became decisive. The cry of the strong man went forth. The Titan moved beneath the mountain!
.
CHAPTER II.
BRIEF REVIEW OF SOME PORTION OF GERMAN LITERATURE IMMEDIATELY PREVIOUS TO THE APPEARANCE OF SCHILLER’s ‘ ROBBERS.”
Ir was precisely that time in Germany, when an author, whatever his defects, might hope for a favourable hearing. provided his genius carried onward the revolution that had already taken place in literature, and sympathised with that more dangerous movement which had begun to disturb society and agitate opinion.
In literature the old Gallomania, which for half a century had been vigorously opposed by sincere Poets and sturdy critics,* had become almost extinct, except in the small royal circles where “Seigneur Oreste” and “ Madame Hermione ”} still maintained their ground. The German genius had already arrogated a dynasty, and found in Klop- stock an altar and a ‘throne, What Klopstock{ wrote is
* Among critics, Bodmer and Breitinger ; among poets, yon Haller, and especially Gellert. t Macaulay. t Born 1724.
10 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
comparatively “unimportant ; what Klopstock did is sublime. No matter that his “‘ Messiah” was overrated,—that even his Odes are more tumid with cloud than instinct with fire. Rather a verbal musician than a poet,* his poetical imagi- nation is doubtless frigid, and the weakness of his thoughts in vain disguises itself in redundant epithets and syllabic pomp; but he had two other imaginations besides the poetical,— the imagination of the heart, the imagination of the con- science. He was an enthusiast for his country and his religion, He felt like an honest man, and he wrote like a man in.earnest. It has been truly observed, that, after Klopstock, ‘‘ Germans were no longer ashamed to be German.” If-he was not the first absolutely to awaken the national spirit, he made it popular with the people, fashionable with the great, ardent in the young, solemn in the pious. There is not a German poet who came after Klopstock, who is not indebted to him; indebted to him for a German audience— for that prevalent sentiment of patriotism and devotion in the public without which the poet sings to lay-figures, not to men. What was begun by Klopstock, was continued with profounder views and on a grander scale by the illustrious Lessing.t Well does Heinet exclaim, that ‘ Lessing was the literary Arminius, who freed the German Theatre from every foreign domination.” Nor the Theatre alone—all German Art was embraced by his vast criticism and his vigorous genius. It is impossible to overrate the excellence of Lessing’s intellectual nature, and the noble tendencies of his ambition. Though he modestly denied to himself the qualities of the poet, and though some shallow depreciators have echoed his own assertion, he enters even into prose with the majesty none but poets canassume. In his “ Emilia Galotti,” domestic relations are elevated into the sublimest tragic passion. This drama is the German Virginius. No man has ever so happily effected the difficult union of heroic sentiment with modern manners. . ... Greater even as a
* One of the greatest of the German critics has observed that Klopstock’s odes, to be appreciated, should be accompanied with music —that he wrote, as it were, to tunes and airs.
+ Born 1729.
} “Zur Geschichte der neuern schoenen Literatur in Deutschland.”
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 11
critic than a creator (and in the former character far more popularly renowned), he served both to place Art in its true sphere, and to enlarge its domain. Manliness was his characteristic in life and in tastes. Like Schiller, he loved to delineate human nature in its nobler qualities, and sympa- thise with its graver ends, rather than, like Goethe, to dissect its infirmities, or, like Wieland, to trifle with its interests ;— the ‘*Werter” of the first disgusted him—the “ Agathon” of the last enraged. Lessing had the nationality of Klopstock without his prejudice... .. If Klopstock were. the first national poet for the public, Lessing was the great national writer for the writers. That a taste for German poetry should exist, Klopstock was necessary. . . That Herder, Schiller, and even Goethe, should have been what they were, Lessing must have lived.
But though the influence of Lessing was so profound, it was not of a nature to be widely popular, nor to be clearly comprehended, save by its after-results: and his great career was now approaching to its close. He died in February, 1781, leaving a public prepared for manly senti- ments, for energetic purpose, for genial humanity, in those writers whom his mind had formed.
At the period we enter (about 1780-1), Wieland* stood next to Klopstock in popular opinion. . . Amiable both in manners and in tastes, of mature years and established fame, if he was less decidedly national than Klopstock and Lessing, _ he was yet highly influential in the formation of the national literature. He also was a First, an originator—the First who taught the delicacies of taste to German strength—the first who taught the various imitators of the Gallic or Grecian Muse how, without imitating, to appropriate—the first in whom learning seemed airy as intuitive observation ; and in whom the fancy of a genuine poet, and the fluency of a charming novelist, were blended with the erudition of a scholar, and the elegance of a man who has known the world. Partly French, partly Greek, he is German through all; a German who commenced his education at Paris, and finished it at Athens. We enter not into a discussion of the precise
* Born 1733,
12 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
rank Wieland should assume,—a rank too readily conceded at one time, too harshly questioned now. . . But his influence limited itself to the fancy and the taste—it did not extend to opinions—it did not root itself in passions. His great defect was his want of earnestness and purpose. He may charm and he may refine; but he does not brace the intellect to masculine exertion, nor elevate the imagination to lofty objects. . . At this time he sate on his careless throne at Weimar, rather to receive homage than to govern. But there were now already labouring into fame three young men; two of whom, at least, were destined not only to wear the robes of sovereignty, but to wield the sceptre—Herder, Goethe, and Johann Heinrich Voss.
The minds of these three men had been formed under the most powerful influence which a Frenchman had ever yet exercised in Germany. Always prone to imitate (as a learned people necessarily must be), the Germans had escaped from the old Gallomania to fall into Grecomania and Anglomania —while one was imitating Theocritus, another was imitating Pope. The English Richardson, who, though less popular in Germany than Fielding, produced a far more profound im- pression, as, indeed, that greater Genius must do wherever the two can penetrate,* may be seen overshadowing the large mind of Lessing himself. The sublime Clarissa, whom Dis- honour so noiselessly slays, is the original of the no less sublime Emilia Galotti, who flies to Death from even a senti- ment that dishonours. But in vain Klopstock and Lessing had thrown from their pedestals Racine and Corneille—in vain Wieland had given to the Germans a more kindly, if a feebler Voltaire of their own—a new Gallomania had seized
* The influence of Richardson upon the fiction and poetry of Europe . was not only vast at the time, but, enduring still, it must endure for ever. In vain his language grows obsolete, in vain his minuteness has become wearisome, in vain the young race of novel-readers leave him on the shelf—to those somewhat tedious pages turns every genius who aspires to rise in fiction; from them can, though with toil and study,. be best learned the art of extracting from the homeliest details the noblest pathos. In “Clarissa” is beheld that true spirit of tragedy. which first dispensed with kings and heroes and the paraphernalia of- the outward stage—teaching how the compass of all grandeur in fiction can be attained by him who can describe the affection, and comprehend the virtue, of one human being.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 13
the heart, and fevered the brain of the People: Greek and Briton, all gave way to the influence of Rousseau. Nothing is more interesting to one who seeks with Helvetius to trace the connection and sympathy between social influences and literary tastes, than to contrast the nugatory effect produced in England, with the prodigious effect produced in Germany, by this unhealthy Genius. Though at two great periods in the History of our Literature—that of Elizabeth and that of Anne—the Italian and the French writers have influenced our ‘own, our more illustrious authors have rather reproduced than imitated ; and with the single exception of the Sterne-fever, the Literature of Sentiment has never been widely successful with our practical and busy population. But in Germany, always, as we have said, prone to imitate, no imitation was likely to be so contagious as that which combined sentiment with thought. The peculiar habits of life amongst the Ger- mans—the absence for the most part of that active constitu- tional liberty which, when accompanied with commercial pursuits, always tends, overmuch perhaps, to harden and materialise the national mind—do not present to domestic life the counterpoise which the life of the Mart and the Agora effects in England. Books have a greater influence over them, especially books of reverie; the more theories are detached from real life, the more seductive they appear. Hither wholly contented with the existing state of things, or wholly amongst the clouds of Utopia, they want that intermediate standard to which the mass of Englishmen unconsciously refer every suggestion of change or project of reform. The love of liberty, instinctive to all, and especially to nations at once so brave. and so lettered as the Germans, finds that vent in the ideal ‘from which it is precluded by the actual. Hence, while practical liberty amongst the Germans is so confined when compared with ours, their theoretical liberty—liberty of thought, opinion, and speculation—is infinitely greater. The most religious German will start inquiries which an irre- ligious Englishman would be afraid to suggest: and the Politician who would shrink from arguing for a Representa- tive Constitution, will luxuriate in the dreams of Republican Fraternity.* Precisely the reasons that deadened the influence
* Our readers must remember that this was written before 1848.
14 LIFE OF SCHILLER,
of Rousseau in England, gave it vitality in Germany, viz. impracticability in polities, and unwholesomeness in romance, Our own active life, that. rude common sense which is ac- quired with our mother’s milk, amidst our world-awake popu- lation, would teach even an ordinary Englishman the untruth that forms the ground-work of ‘The Social Contract,” and shocks our sense of nature in the eloquence of St. Preux. We know, without reasoning about it, that no social contract ever. existed, and that no lover, worthy the name, could sit down to make an inventory of furniture five minutes before his first appointment with the woman he professes to adore. But with the Germans the novelty of the political theory con- cealed its falsehood; the sentiment of the fiction concealed its want of nature. There was much in Rousseau that could not fail to charm and to dazzle the German mind, which from its own deficient experience of agitated and various life, per- ceived not his ignorance or perversion of nature in character and passion. The Germans could fully comprehend his love and his knowledge of tnanimate nature; his enjoyment of scenery ; his passion for solitude ; his power of associating the landscape around with emotions within. Their own fondness for domestic and rural life, made them charmed with the primitive simplicity which he held up to admiration. The vast mass of disappointed ambition, which amongst an intel- lectual population, without the multiform vents of a free constitution, must necessarily be engendered, found a voice and a sickly comfort in Rousseau’s disgust of the active world. The ardour for liberty—the revolutionary spirit, awakened in Germany as in France—obtained in the Dreamer of Geneya. a representative nearly akin to the amiable and tender cha- racter of the Germans. The biting mockery of Voltaire might delight a court and charm a scholar; but the earnest and pious heart of the multitude recoiled from a spirit that dese-. crated what it attacked, to open itself with dangerous emotion: to a spirit that sought to sanctify what it embraced. The: laughing philosopher never makes disciples so devoted as the weeping one. With Rousseau rose the great sect of HUMANITY : the school which seeks to lift human nature above conven- tion ; which would extract from social life all that is harsh, and tyrannous; which would fraternise mankind; which
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 15
places the dignity of man above all the shows and pomps by which, like Tarpeia, the man himself is crushed beneath the ornaments heaped upon him,
Upon Herder, Goethe, and Voss, the influence of Rousseau produced results marvellously distinct. Herder* rejected all that in the Genevese was effeminate and egotistical, to seize upon all that was genial and philanthropic. In him arose the true Preacher of Humanity; with Roussean Humanity Was a sentiment; with Herder it became a science. Of a mind thoroughly sound and healthy—of a cultivation vast and various—of a broad common sense which gave life and substance to the boldest speculations, Herder snatched from the weak hands of the French Socialists the great cause which they profaned—viz. the Principle of Human Progress, re- cognised through History, illustrated through Poetry, and reconciled it to Religion as the law of God. . . For Herder the noblest destinies were reserved. . . By profession a preacher—by energy a citizen—hy genius a poet—by piety and wisdom a philosopher and cosmopolite—all that is in- tellectual in man may be said to have flowered in him. . . With a great inclination towards what is practical in life, which he sometimes regretted he had not more diligently studied in its minutiz,t he combined an innocence of heart in which lay half his strength. ‘My whole life,” he said once, ‘‘is the interpretation of the oracles of my childhood.” . . He loved to glean thoughts from the conjectures of the infant—from the wonder of the uneducated. Hence he saw in the infancy and youth of nations the beauty and the - promise which historians have overlooked. Thus he was the first who gave to Poetry its proper place in the grave and solemn dispensations of.the world :—regarding it as the ab- solute voice that spoke the time and character of a race, he brought into one vast compendium, entitled “The Voices of the Nations,” the popular songs of all countries... . Amongst the many influcnces he lived to effect upon his age, is the impetus he gave to that tendency in the German genius, which is called “ Universalism.” For, as Humanity is to Politics, Charity to Virtue, Christianity to Man, so is Universalism to
* Born 1744. t See Gervinus.
16 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
Letters.* That separation between the faculties—that divi- sion of mental labour so general elsewhere—in Germany was broken down. The Poet studied Philosophy—the Philosopher Poetry. But most of what Herder lived to effect, was as yet unfulfilled. . . He was already known asa scholar, an essayist, a victorious prizeman, an eloquent preacher—and in high station and repute at the Court of Weimar. But still he stood somewhat apart from the popular literature of the time; and had rather served to indicate the great change destined to take place in public taste and feeling, than to dispirit, by his own renown, the ambition of another.
While Rousseau had thus influenced Herder only to grand results, the primitive simplicity, the pastoral family life which Rousseau had held up to admiration amongst the homely Germans, had sunk deep into the mind of a rude young Saxon—Johann Heinrich Voss,} not worthy, indeed, from his mere genius, to be named in the same breath with Herder and Goethe, but still, for many reasons, not meriting the depreciation of Schlegel, and the disdain of Menzel. Low-born, self educated, a rigid Protestant sectarian, driven for bread to the drudgery of a schoolmaster, Voss is often vulgar in his taste, pedantic in his compositions, prejudiced and intolerant in his polemics. But with all, he is a true German, and a strong man. His services to. his language were immense. He enriched it with the wealth of the foreigner ; he strengthened it with the cultivation of its own national resources ; he revived the old words of Luther on
* Herder is a very voluminous writer, but the epitome of his mind and his views is to be found in his work on the ‘‘ Philosophy of the History of Mankind.” The work is not without grave faults. It is often incorrect in detail; it too much follows Helvetius in founding authority on the imperfect accounts of travellers and voyagers; itis ~ often displeasingly declamatory in its tone. But its power of generali- sation is astonishing. It seizes, as with the grasp of a giant, the immensity of the subjects it embraces. Few works deserve so justly the epithets of Zwminouws and comprehensive. Readers well acquainted with this work will find many of its ideas, even some of its images, borrowed by Schiller in his later poems, though it would seem uncon- sciously. Schiller never appears to have been aware of his great obligations to Herder.
t Born 1751, two years after Goethe.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 17
the lips of Homer. It is well said of Voss that his strength is in his war with obstacles. He hewed his way through poverty into learning, and he eut through rough crags* of diction, till he found out a fount of poetry all his own. But, as yet, Voss was young—if not obscure, at least but partially known—and had neither obtained, by harsh and ungrateful controversy, the title of the second Luther (more resembling, perhaps, a learned pedantic German Cobbett)—nor given in his ‘‘ Luise” and his “‘Idyls” (poems most popular in their time, and thoroughly repugnant to English taste) the pas- toral of a Curate’s Parlour, and the model to Goethe's “Hermann and Dorothea.” First, then, already in popular eminence, of the three we have named—first, indeed, of all the younger and rising generation, stood Wolfgang Goethe. + Nor had he then escaped, perhaps he never altogether escaped, from the influence of Rousseau. In fact, it is the merit of this wonderful man that his whole nature was especially plastic and impressionable. Every influence of his time stamped itself on his intellect, to be reproduced in new forms by his genius. Does the age incline to sentiment? he sounds its abysses:—To irony? the sneer of Voltaire seems venomless beside the icy smile of the fiend he calls from hell, to mock at human knowledge and desecrate human love! Does the age yearn for Pastorals and family life? he turns from courts and the seventh heaven of Poetry to borrow from homely Voss, and ruins him by the riches he extracts from the loan. In his “ Werter” he concentrates the history of an epoch in his country—the epoch of the Rousseau Mania. But though the ‘‘ Nouvelle Héloise” is incontestably the origin of “ Werter,” those { who regard it as a mere copy, do it miserable injustice. There is more rhetorical eloquence in one page of the “ Nowvelle Héloise” than in the whole of “ Werter”—but there is more nature in one page of “ Werter” than in the whole of the ‘ Nowvelle Heloise.” In this, the warmest and most actual of all Goethe’s novels —if once overrated, now so unjustly depreciated, which he did right to regret for its moral, which he did wrong to disparage as a proof of his genius—lies the germ of # <Versified marble blocks.” —Hzrnz. ' + Born 1749, five years after Herder. t Such as Menzel. Qa
18 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
much that, in fiction, its author’s riper intellect matured. Here we see that association of homeliness and grandeur which his enemies have called ‘“‘the Adornment of Common- place.” What Englishman, with his fastidious classical taste, has not ridiculed the contrast of the Hero in the clouds, and the Heroine cutting bread and butter—of the solemnity of deliberate suicide, and the exact description of the top-boots and blue coat in which the unhappy man rushed to the dread unknown? But considered by a higher art than _ we learn at college, it is this very homeliness of detail that gives.truth to romance, in proportion to its extravagance. And this peculiarity Goethe continued, as he advanced in his luminous career, to invest with an unspeakable beauty. It is, in truth, to a very early study of what, while subtlest in the essence, is simplest in the form, that Goethe owes the lucid ease of his after style, and the popularity he secured to flights of imagination which, in a less artful writer, would have left the multitude far behind. Here, too, we see a yet more distinguishing attribute of Goethe, to which we have before alluded—viz. the inclination to describe, not so much the healthful nobleness, as the diseased infirmity of an intel- lectual character. What he here does in “ Werter” he did afterwards in ‘‘Clavigo,” in the ‘Elective Affinities,” in “Faust,” and in ‘‘ Tasso.” Menzel, who, whatever may be thought of his injustice to Goethe, demands the greatest respect for his honest passion for what is sincere and noble —for his vigorous sense—for his daring courage falls into a cant unworthy of so great a critic, when he accuses Goethe of confounding vice and virtue, by depicting weak or dis- honourable characters as interesting and amiable. It is among the most legitimate, and among the highest provinces of the Poet, to depict those contrasts which subject him to this charge - —to show vice in the virtuous and virtue in the wicked ; and this unquestionable truth in art once granted, it follows as the very condition of fiction, that to a hero thus selected human in- terest must be given. You cannot blame a Poet for making a faulty hero interesting unless you contend that heroes of fiction must be perfect *—by which dogma you would at once
* Or unless you contend that if a hero is faulty, the author must not make him interesting ; but whatever an author does, he must give it
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 19
cut off from the Poet the whole realm of the Human Heart, and separate his ethics from the representation of Truth and Nature. This love, indeed, of probing the sores of character —of representing the infirmities of intellectual man—was not more remarkable in Goethe than in Shakespeare, who, in the whole range of his Dramas, has never presented to us a single male image of perfect virtue ; who, in Macbeth, in Othello, in Angelo, in Shylock, in Hamlet (the last is so Goethe-like, that if Shakespeare had never created it one might predict that Goethe would have done so), lays bare, with fearful pre- cision, the weakness of the wise—the crime of the virtuous. It is in vain to deny that our paramount interest in all these plays is with the erring or the infirm. But who shall say that Shakespeare, while interesting us in the hero, sought to pervert our conscience into admiring the defect : that it was his object to decorate ambitious murder, or jealous ferocity, licentious hypocrisy, or implacable revenge, or to womanize the intellect, and emasculate the will by all the doubts and scruples which make up the philosophy of Hamlet ?—Hamlet, that great fountain-head of modern sentiment, from which haye gushed a thousand rivulets of melancholy and scep- ticism ; Hamlet, that perpetual mirror to minds fluctuating between the Visible and the Unseen, the Actual and the Ideal, the stern demands of uncomprehended duty, and the desire to escape from practical action into visionary self- commune ; Hamlet, in which is shown the mysterious pro- totype of what man would be with virtue and with wisdom, but without—Wi1u?
But though Goethe does not seem to us to be blamed for following the tendency of his genius, into directions in which the peculiar delicacy and subtlety of his intellect ensured him such success ; and though a hundred years hence, we believe that what Menzel and other depreciators consider immoral, will not mislead a single imitator, or corrupt a single youth ; yet it must be conceded that the direct object of his works was not to make Man more manly, and his desires more
interest. No author is obliged to be dull. A masterly estimate of Goethe, morally and intellectually, may be found in an article in the British and Foreign Review, No. xxvii., the authorship of which has been acknowledged by Mr. Lewis.
c2
20 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
elevated. We say the direct object, for indirectly, and sooner or later, whatever makes man wiser, nerves his mind, and purifies his emotions ; and there may be truth in the theory, that Art is to be cultivated as Art; that the Beautiful must reflect indifferently on its tranquil mirror whatever Conven- tion deems moral or immoral: for to whatever is really and essentially vicious, the Beautiful itself is opposed—Conven- tion revolts at the exhibition of the naked form, but foul must be the imagination that finds immorality in the Venus | of the sculptor.
At this date, however, Goethe was still scarcely out of his apprenticeship. His greatest works had not been produced. On his ‘Goetz von Berlichingin” his “ Werter,” and his “ Clavigo,” rested the principal columns of the renown he had acquired. These, indeed, had unsettled the public taste, and prepared it for bold innovations; but Goethe had not, like our Byron in a later day, engrossed the general interest in himself, and become the sole representative of a common sentiment. In that crisis of opinion and of passion preceding the outbreak of the French Revolution, and contemporaneous with the rise of daring speculators and profound inquirers, men required something more than the child-like pietism of Klopstock, the airy elegance of Wieland, or that philosophy of sentiment—that analysis of man’s weakness—so apart from sympathy with men’s interests, which Goethe had ex- hibited in “ Werter” and ‘‘Clavigo.” Something indeed was wanting still; something, it is true, which in order to be popular must necessarily partake of the morbid craving, the unsettled spirit, the revolutionary tendency of the time, but which, in order to outlast the hour, must also develop into fuller force, and diffuse through a wider public whatever in Lessing had been earnest, whatever in Herder promised to be’ humane. There was a great multitude which as yet in Germany had found no voice ; which desired to hear its own discontented heart beat in the pulse of some passionate Author, indignant with what was false, and sympathising with what was free. Never, in Germany, had there been a time more favourable to a writer (no matter what his other defects) who, shouldering aside courts and schoolmen, should address himself manfully to men.
LIFE OF SCHILLER, 21
CHAPTER III,
THE PUBLICATION OF “‘ THE ROBBERS,”—SCHILLER’S LIFE AT STUTTGARD,—HIS LOVE FOR LAURA—AND POEMS IN THE ANTHOLOGY.—“ THE ROBBERS” BROUGHT OUT ON THE STAGE.—SCHILLER’S ARREST.—FEARS, AND DETER- MINATION TO ESCAPE FROM WURTEMBERG,
Ar this time there was published at Mannheim, a strange, rugged, fiery melodrame, in which, amidst uncouth masses of extravagant diction,—flashed a spirit true to all the turbulent and unsettled philosophy of the Hour—and which seemed destined to announce and to animate the Revolution of a World :—“ Tur Rogppers” appeared, and the sensation it excited spread through the mind of Germany like fire through flax ;—nor through Germany alone—it produced in France the liveliest enthusiasm ; it even stirred to its depths the calm intellect of England. It was, in fact, the most earnest Revolutionary fiction, that had yet revealed what lay hid in the History of the Age.—What the irruption of the old Germans was in the midst of the smooth and decrepit civilization of Rome,—was the burst of this new German amidst the hollow conventions which under the Ancien Régime less guarded the life of Virtue than entombed its corpse.
‘¢The Robbers” is one sweeping uncompromising defiance of the sober propricties in which the mature see decorum and the young dissimulation. It is the baseness of the World that makes Karl Moor a criminal. It is in proportion to his exaggerated nobleness that he is unfitted for Society. It is because he is a giant that he cannot live amongst the dwarfs, He commences life with many Virtues, and it is the medio- erity of life that turns every Virtue into Sin. It is his sympathy with poverty and suffering, with the virtuous and oppressed, that has banished the Demigod to the Rock—and afflicted him with the ever-gnawing Vulture,
That a work like this, so conceived, and executed with ail the power which can whirl along the passions of the crowd, must have produced a great deal of mischief at the time, may
22 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
be readily allowed. No man can disturb the settled course of opinion, right or wrong, without doing evil as well as good.— Whether Genius innovates in a poem, or Science in a manufacture, some minds in the one case must be thrown into disorder, some hands in the other thrown out of employ. But Genius and Science must still obey the great instincts of their being—-the one still innovate, the other still invent. In the moral Constitution of Nature, they are the great alteratives, the ‘Sturm-Bad,”—(the Storm-Bath action,) which first fevers and convulses, then purifies and strengthens. But nothing could be farther from the mind of the Boy from whose unpractised hand came this rough Titan sketch, than to unsettle Virtue, in his delineations of Crime. Virtue was then, as it continued to the last, his Ideal—and if at the first he shook the statue on its pedestal, it was but from the rude- ness of the caress that sought to warm it into life.*
The original sketch of this Drama Schiller had completed two years before the Publication. But he kept it by him till he had completed his medical studies, towards the end of 1780, and been appointed by the Duke to the office of Surgeon toa Regiment. He then considered himself a free agent, and
after searching in vain for a bookseller to hazard the is necessary expenses, he published “'The Robbers” at “his own cost.
If the popularity of the work was dazzling, the aversion it excited in some was as intense as the admiration it called forth in others, But the most formidable critic was the Grand Duke himself. This uncouth Drama displeased his taste no less than it revolted his opinion. He sent for the author, and bade him in future eschew poetry, and stick to medicine ; or, if he needs must write, submit his productions to the revision of his Prince. It is easy to sneer at the conduct of the man of power to the man of genius; but
* Goethe himself has somewhere said, that the most universal effect of the highest Genius is to wnsetéle; and certainly it has ever been so where its effect upon its age could be traced—witness Cervantes— Bacon—Luther—Milton (especially in his prose works), Shakespeare, not studied in his own time, has influenced, by unsettling, the literary mind of three Nations at the least: in our own day, Byron and Words- worth are, in their several ways, equal Innovators,
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 23
the Grand Duke was scarcely to blame, for there are few individuals now-a-days whose taste “ The Robbers” will not offend, and we may judge of the abhorrence it excited at that time in others, besides the Grand Duke, by the words addressed by some illustrious personage to Goethe, “If I were a God, and deliberating whether I should create the world, and foresaw that in that- world Schiller’s ‘ Robbers’ would appear, I would not create it.” Meanwhile, however, the young Poet had commenced a correspondence with the Freiherr von Dalberg, a nobleman, entrusted with the superintendence of the Theatre at Mannheim, and the play was to be remodelled for the stage. Simultaneously appeared many lyrics and minor poems of the J@¥ary, Author, contributions to a miscellany entitled ‘“‘ The Anthology,” and set up in concert with some of his friends. A large portion of these performances, characterised, it is true, by power, though distorted, and originality, though uncouth, still belonged to a very inferior and coarse school of poetry, known in Germany by the significant title of the “Storm and Stress”*—a school of which some notion may be gleaned by those who turn to that later era in our own literature, when the servile herd of imitators mixed up, on their staring canvas, the sepia of Mathew Lewis with the gamboge and vermilion of Lord Byron. Most of these Schiller rejected from the collected edition of his works; some of those retained have been wisely corrected and compressed. Such as they were, however, they added to the sudden celebrity of the writer. And now, while Germany began to ring with the name of the young Poet, what was his life? He lodgedina 1721. small apartment, which he shared with a young officer named Kapff, who had quitted the academy at the same time. Kapff is said to have been of dissolute habits,t and to have occasionally misled his wild and impetuous companion into some irregularities ; favoured the more by the general license of a town to which the earlier example of the reigning Duke
* The German phrase is thus happily translated by Mr. Carlyle, in one of his Miscellaneous Writings.
+ Schwab—who rests this assertion against Kapff upon _wnprinted, and, therefore, very suspicious testimony. Probably poor Kapff lived like most young soldiers, neither worse nor better,
24 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
had given a tone of manners the reverse of austere.* Still such irregularities never degenerated into habit, and were counteracted in their effects upon the mind by Schiller’s frequent visits to his excellent family, the tender warnings of his mother, the fortunate narrowness of his finances, the professional demands upon his time, and that passion for literature, with which systematic indulgence in dissipation and disorder is, it is true, not always incompatible, but to which it is certainly opposed. Above all, perhaps, we must be permitted to believe that the young poet was saved from more vagrant and unworthy excesses, by that great purifier of youth—First Love. In the same house lodged the widow of a captain, who appears, by all probable accounts, to have been the original of the “ Laura,” to whom the most - impassioned of all his love-verses are addressed. A humorous, but somewhat flippant, friend of Schiller’s—Scharffenstein—. has described this lady in the same spirit of caxicature with wuich he has treated of the noble image of Schiller himself, He says, ‘“‘she was not pretty, nor clever; but had some- | thing about her, good-natured, piquant, and attractive.” One of Schiller’s biographers hints at unpublished accounts, less flattering ; but what is unpublished is necessarily unsifted and unsupported ; and we have no evidence whatsoever to ~ invalidate that on which the poet himself commands our interest for one who could make so vivid an impression. Schiller was, no doubt, at least as good a judge of beauty and. of sense as his friend Scharffenstein. It would be impossible for a critic of common sense to suppose, with certain metaphysical commentators, that this - love was merely Platonic. Platonic love, indeed, seems to us to be always the sickly and disagreeable sentiment of an unmanly nature. But Platonic love, in the flush of youth, is either a loathsome affectation, or the chimera of a frigid heart and a diseased fancy. Least of all men can the earnest, fervid, honest, impetuous youth of Schiller be drivelled and dwindled down into the emasculate languor of make-believe emotion! Platonic love in Schiller! As well talk of Platonic love in Burns! The poems themselves, in their ©
* Hoffmeister. t Madame yon Wolzogen.
LIFE OF SCHILLER, 25
very faults, bear internal evidence of the healthful and natural passion of the man, which takes poetry for its vent— not the vanity of the poetaster who would simulate the great passion of man, in order to obtain a vent for his verses,
But whatever this affection, it seems to have burned out from its very fierceness, and (though, years afterwards, the Poet speaks of the resignation of -Laura as the great. sacri- fice of youth), it was obviously very different from that steady, pure, and permanent attachment which ultimately made the happiness of his manhood.
At last, on the 13th of January, 1782, “‘ The Robbers” appeared on the stage at Mannheim. The sensation the printed play had produced served to crowd the theatre. Near and far, from Heidelberg and Darmstadt, from Frank- fort, Mayence, and Worms, gathered the audience. The play lasted five hours. The success in print was trivial to that upon the stage. The fiery rebellion of thought which it embodied became more startling when animated by the art of the greatest actors of the time,* and hailed by the enthusiasm of spectators, in whom, as everywhere in 1782, the spirit of Revolution was astir.
We can easily imagine the impatient desire of Schiller to witness his own triumph. He went by stealth to Mannheim. In an obscure corner of the crowded house, the author beheld the living embodiment of his own thoughts and passions. He saw himself raised at once into that mighty power—the mover of the hearts of men. He returned to Stuttgard confirmed for life in the vocation his genius had adopted. “If Germany,” he wrote to Dalberg on __ his return, “shall one day recognise in me a heh Dramatic Poet, I must date the epoch from the last : week,”
* Bok acted Karl Moor with prodigious effect ; but that is a part which almost plays itself. Iffland, a man of real genius, elevated the disagreeable catashes of Franz Moor into the dignity of an Iago, His representation of this part seems to have been one of the most perfect as well as one of the most popular triumphs of the stage. His thin figure and meagre countenance suiting well with the ideal of a formal hypocrite, served to increase the actuality of the personation. Iffland, like Schiller, was commencing his career ; he was then about six-and-twenty, according to Schiller’s Biographers..... . - three-
26 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
But in proportion to the ardour of his inclinations, was the restraint of Schiller’s actual life. At Mannheim, he was the Freeman, the Poet; he returned to Stuttgard to sink again into the Subaltern and the Subject. Some expressions in the third act of “The Robbers,” reflecting upon the national character of the Grisons, gave such offence to the objects of the rude and boyish satire, that their complaint was published in “The Hamburg Correspondent,” and, by the mediation of aman named Walter, who bore some personal grudge to Schiller, laid before the Grand Duke . . . The result seems to have been a very severe reprimand on the part of the Duke, and a peremptory injunction to Schiller to confine his studies to medicine—his publications to such as befitted his profession—to ahandon all connexion with States under other jurisdiction (meaning Mannheim) . . . . limiting his ambition to his calling, and his connexions to his country.* Such a command it was impossible for a man instigated by the stronger despotism of his own genius to obey. “Already new and vast designs were opening to Schiller’s intellectual ambition ; already he had commenced and proceeded far in the tragedy of ‘“‘ Fiesco ;” already meditated a drama on the fate of Don Carlos of Spain. The Future urged him on to glory ;—could a mere man chain him to an hospital? His first visit to the Mannheim theatre had been undetected or overlooked ; he went again in the following May, and was put for fourteen days under arrest. Dangers now beset him ; dark and sinister menaces were repeated to him by officious friends, and exaggerated perhaps in their import by the gloom of his imagination. But the dangers in themselves were real and imminent, Before his eyes was the fate of the poet Schubart,} eight years imprisoned for displeasing the jealousies of Power. What fate could seem more terrible to one drunk with the desire of liberty, and eager to spread the wings of his genius? Stuttgard, nay, all Suabian scenes, as he himself complains, in a letter to Dalberg, “ became intolerable and
ee. according bo other authorities, who state his birth to have been in April, 1759.
* Schwab, &e.
+ An Appendix to Mr. Carlyle’s ‘* Life of Schiller” contains an interesting account of this unfortunate poet.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 27
loathed.” He could have had but small comfort from his family. His father as yet regarded his notoriety with dislike and fear. He was not a prophet in his own country ; nor an honour to his own hearth ;—with discust he saw all around him ;—with sanguine self-confidence he cast his eyes beyond. He formed the only resolution natural to his circumstances, and worthy of his independence: he resolved to emancipate body and soul both; to fly from Stuttgard, and throw himself on the world.
CHAPTER IY.
FLIGHT FROM STUTTGARD—‘“ FIESCO” READ TO THE ACTORS —ADVENTURES AND WANDERINGS—SCHILLER FINDS REFUGE AT BAUERBACH—COMMENCEMENT OF ‘‘ CABAL AND LOVE.”
Amonest Schiller’s companions was a warm-hearted enthusiastic musician, two years younger than himself, named Andrew Streicher, This youth 1782. became his confidant. Together they brooded over the future—together they conceived and nursed the project of escape. It had been intended that Streicher should proceed to Hamburg in the spring of the next year, to take lessons in his art, from the celebrated Bach.* He persuaded his mother to consent that the date of this journey should be advanced, and the friends settled that Schiller should bear him company. But Schiller, with all his inexperience, and all his fiery ardour, had that strong sense with which true genius prepares for the fulfilment, even of its wildest schemes. He felt the necessity of providing, from his own talents, the materials for their support. He would not leave Stuttgard till his tragedy of “ Fiesco” was nearly completed. In that tragedy lay his fortune and his future. He worked at it night and day—illness seized him, but the work went on,
* Not the great Sebastian Bach, who died in 1750.
28 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
At length it was sufficiently advanced for presentation to the Mannheim Theatre, and the opportunity now offered itself for escape.
The city and its neighbourhocd were astir with the visit of the Grand Duke Paul of Russia, and his young Princess, niece to the Duke of Wirtemberg. In the midst of these festivities the flight was planned.
It was obviously necessary to conceal from the elder Schiller the designs of the Son; the military notions and military duty of the former might not only lead him to for- bid, but to disclose them. And the young Poet was moreover anxious, that whatever the displeasure of his Sovereign, it might fall on himself alone—not involve his Father. But his eldest and favourite Sister was admitted to his confidence ; —the little girl who had wandered with the dreaming boy through the ruins of Hohenstaufen, and amidst the pines of Lorch, was become a woman, capable of sympathising with the lofty hopes of the adventurous man: And at last, a day or two before the meditated departure, the truth was broken to Schiller’s mother. With his friend Streicher, and the wife of the Stage-Manager at Mannheim, Madame Meier (whom, ‘as well as the Director Dalberg, the royal festivities had drawn to Stuttgard, bnt from whom the secret was carefully kept,) Schiller for the last time visited his family at ‘‘ Solitude.” He took the opportunity, which his father’s absorption in his own account of the royal preparations afforded, to steal with his mother unobserved from the room. After an hour’s absence, he returned—alone. The affectionate gaze of Streicher saw what he had suffered in that parting interview, by the redness of hiseyes. The important day was now fixed—the 17th of September.
Streicher removed from Schiller’s lodging a bundle, con- taining the dress which was to be substituted for the uniform of the Regimental Surgeon—some linen, and a few books— among which were the works of Haller and Shakespeare. But when Streicher came to fetch Schiller himself—after the return of the latter from his final visit to the Hospital—he found the young Enthusiast with Klopstock’s Odes in his hands, A favourite Ode had given unseasonable inspiration to his own muse, and the impatient musician was forced to
LIFE OF SCHILLER, 29
wait and hear, not only the seductive Ode, but the poem it had called forth. At last all was ready—day passed—night came—Schiller had assumed his disguise—three-and-twenty florins constituted the Poet’s wealth—eight-and-twenty the Musician’s—two trunks, containing books and apparel—a brace of pistols—and a small clavier (clavichord), summed up the effects of the fugitives. At ten o’clock, the vehicle which contained the adventurers rolled from Streicher’s lodging to the Esslingen Gate, (the darkest of all the City Gates), at which the Lieutenant of the Watch was a firm friend of the Poet’s. ‘ Halt! who goes there?” ‘Dr. Ritter and Dr. Wolf, both bound to Esslingen.” ‘‘ Pass.”
The escape is made. At midnight they beheld, at the left, the illuminated Ludwigsburg, like a mount of fire ; further on, and at the distance of a mile from their road, they saw the castle of “Solitude,” and all the neighbouring buildings, lighted up in honour of the Royal visitor. In the clear air, all was so distinctly outlined, that the poet could point out to his companion his parent’s home: and a suppressed sigh—a soft “‘O meine Mutter,” escaped him! So fled from the capital of Wiirtemberg, Friedrich Schiller, ‘empty ”—as, with little exaggeration, he himself has said, ‘‘of purse and hope ;” esteemed as a rebel by his Sovereign ; condemned as a scapegrace by his father; regarded but as an imprudent reckléss scribbler, marring his own fair prospects for a vain ambition, by his associates !—He who now visits that capital finds little to arrest his interest—except one Colossal Statue, in a broad space near the Royal palace ; before which his guide will bid him halt to contemplate Friedrich Schiller-— the pride of his Fatherland !
} The travellers reached Mannheim in safety. They un- . packed their boxes, and put on their best clothes ; it was a holiday—they were out of the Grand Duke’s dominions— they were free! Schiller’s hope was in his “ Fiesco,” Jn a few sheets of paper lay all that was to give bread to existence, independence to labour, and glory to ambition. Dalberg was at Stuttgard; but Meier, the manager, received them with kindness. When he heard, with astonishment, the bold step Schiller had taken, he urged the expediency of an immediate letter to the Grand Duke. This, indeed, Schiller had already
30 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
resolved upon. In the small German States, the relation between prince and subject is more parental and patriarchal, than in the larger Monarchies of Europe: if the prince be more despotic, the subject can be more familiar. After dinner, to which the young friends were invited by Meier, Schiller withdrew into another apartment, and wrote frankly to his Sovereign ; it was a letter at once manly and respectful. He represented how impossible he found it to live upon his pro- fessional gains 4s a surgeon ;—his income could only be made sufficient by his literary labours. He prayed for permission to try his fortune fora short time out of the Duke’s dominions, and declared his willingness ultimately to return on receiving his Sovereign’s pardon. The letter was enclosed to the chief of Schiller’s regiment, General Auge, with a petition to pre- sent, and to support it. The next day Madame Meier returned from Stuttgard, with the news that Schiller’s flight was already notorious; and that it was expected that the Grand Duke would demand the delivery of his person. As Schiller, however, was not a soldier, he could not be treated and reclaimed as a deserter; still it was deemed advisable that he should not show himself till the Grand Duke’s answer was received. A letter from General Auge came at last; it preserved perfect silence as to the request Schiller had pre- ferred, and only announced to him the permission, or implied the order, immediately to return. Schiller hastened to reply to the General, that he could not regard the Grand Duke’s message as a compliance with his request, which he again re- spectfully urged. A second letter from the General only laconically repeated the purport of the formerone. Schiller’s pride, his spirit of independence, and his honour became engaged. He could not recall the step which had delivered him from an intolerable bondage : the die was cast, and he resolved, as he himself has expressed it, “to exchange the citizenship of his country for that of the world.”
Meanwhile Streicher had fired the manager with his accounts of “ Fiesco ;” a day and hour were fixed for Schiller to read his new performance to the more distinguished actors, among whom was Iffland. The young poet commenced his reading,—all listened in silence,—not a word of approbation. At the end of the first act some slipped away ; at the end of
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 31
the second, the disappointment grew more unequivocal ; and a quarter of an hour afterwards, the poet had lost all his listeners except Iffland. Meier now took aside Streicher, and asked him seriously, ‘if Schiller really were the author of the ‘ Robbers ?’”—‘‘ Certainly,” said the astonished friend. “Then,” answered Meier, “he has exhausted his strength in his first performance.” But the manuscript was left with the experienced manager, and the next morning, when Streicher repaired, full of painful anxiety, to Meier, he was accosted with “You are right; ‘ Fiesco’ is a masterpiece !—hetter fitted for the stage than the ‘ Robbers.’” It was Schiller’s Suabian dialect, and his high-pitched monotonous mode of declamation, that had done such injustice to his genius—a perusal of the play excited Meier’s warmest admiration, and Streicher went back to his friend with the welcome news, that arrangements would be made to produce “ Fiesco” on the stage. Alterations requiring some time were nevertheless indispensable, and it became necessary to remove farther from the power of his offended prince. Warned by letters from Stuttgard, it was resolved to pass to Darmstadt, near Frank- fort. The money of the young friends was nearly gone. Sorely pressed as he was, Schiller had so tender a considera- tion for his parents, that he would not apply to them, lest he might bring upon his father the suspicion of conniving at his flight. With enough barely to defray the expenses of their pilgrimage on foot, the two friends set off one day at noon ; rested at night in a village; resumed their way the next morning over one of the most striking roads in Europe (the Bergstrasse) ; continued their journey for twelve hours; rested from six in the evening till midnight, when they were awakened and alarmed by the drums of a reveille. Notwith- standing Schiller felt himself unwell, with the early morning, the journey was resumed; the day was serene and clear, but Schiller’s strength failed his spirit; his step grew every moment more weary, his cheek more pale; at Jast, on enter- ing a wood, he was unable to proceed further; he laid - himself down for an hour’s rest upon the grass ; and Streicher, seated on the trunk of a tree, anxious and sorrowful, watched beside him. The young man, struggling with his destiny, may take heart for the future when he contemplates the
32 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
picture of that wearied sleeper, homeless and penniless, but already on his path to the conquest of Destiny itself, and the only throne which no revolution shakes, and no time decays —in the hearts of men.
They reached Frankfort at last, and Schiller addressed a letter to Dalberg :—‘‘ When I tell you,” he says, ‘‘ that I am flying my country, I describe to you my whole fate. My safety obliged me to withdraw in haste from Stuttgard. My sole hopes rested on a removal to Mannheim ; there, I trusted, by your Excellency’s assistance, that my new drama might enable me to clear myself from debt, and better permanently my condition. This was frustrated through the hasty departure to which I was compelled. I might blush to make such disclosures to you, but I know they do not debase me. If my former conduct—if all that your Excellency knows of my character—can induce confidence in my honour, let me frankly ask your assistance. Greatly as I need the anticipated profit from ‘ Fiesco,’ the play cannot be ready for the theatre in less than five weeks. My heart was oppressed —my poetic dreams fled before the sense of my condition. But if at the time specified the play could be ready, and, I trust, worthy,—from that belief I take the courage to ask the advance of what would then be due. I need it, perhaps, more now than I may ever do hereafter. I owed nearly 200 florins when I left Stuttgard. This gives me, I own, more uneasiness than all the care for my future fate. I shall have no rest till in that quarter I am free.”
After this letter he was more relieved; and yet, on returning from the post-oflice to which he took it, he paused on the bridge, beneath which flows the Maine: he gazed long in silence on the river, and said at last, ‘‘ Which is the deeper, that water or my sufferings?” But no brave man, and no true poet, can remain long despondent in the midst of a world enriched by the activity of his kind, and upheld by the goodness of his Maker. The very sight of that bustling scene ; the vessels sailing to and fro; the river gilded by the setting sun; the clear evening air; the fresh and cheerful wave ; amidst the smiles of Nature, the evidences of that Nature’s subjugation to the will and the power of man— these gradually drew him from his sadness, and reanimated,
LIFE OF .SCHILLER, 33
his soul. His very misfortunes, throwing him so wholly on his own resources, quickened his invention, and the next evening he announced to his friend, that he had conceived the plan of a domestic play, entitled* “ Louise Miller,” which was afterwards completed, and finally became famous under the title of “Cabal and Love.”
A letter from Meier arrived at last, to say, that while “ Fiesco” remained unfit for the stage, Dalberg could not make the proposed advance; that the work must be com: pleted before he could say more. No disappointment could be more cruel, But Schiller bore it undauntedly. He uttered no complaint ; not one harsh, one indignant word passed his lips. He prepared only to comply with the con- dition that was imposed. The friends were reduced to a few small coins, when Streicher received thirty florins, for which he had written to his mother; and with this aid they left Frankfort. A line was, however, first despatched to Meier, requesting him to mect and agree upon some place in which “ Fiesco” might be completed with safety and in repose.
Finally,-it was settled that Schiller should take up his residence in an inn at Oggersheim, once more changing his name from Ritter to Schmidt ;-and here, still accompanied by the devoted Streicher, he shut himself up to compose his glorious taskwork. But so much, while most occupied, did his mind shrink from what was ordained to it, that, instead of completing “Fiesco,” his domestic drama of *€Cabal and Love” engrossed all his thoughts and labours. Perhaps in a play which sought to prove the tyranny and the prejudice of conventional rank, he found something more congenial to his peculiar condition than the more elevated but less familiar conception of the conspirator of Genoa. The two friends shared one chamber, one bed ; the Poet had his play—the Musician his instrument. And Streicher, whom we love no less for his self-devotion than Schiller for his indomitable courage, soothed the labours of his friend with the notes of his clavier. Again their resources were ex- hausted ; again poor Streicher applied to his mother for the
* According to Madame von Wolzogen (Schiller’s sister-in-law) he had, however, first thought of the subject of this play during his
military arrest at Stuttgard, =
34 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
money intended for his professional journey to Hamburg. Necessity then tore Schiller from the new w onl and restored him to the old. Early in November ‘ Fiesco” was completed.
But fresh disappointments awaited Schiller. After the suspense of a weck, Dalberg reported of “ Fiesco” that a part of it was not yet fitted for the stage, and that it must either be rejected or improved. Nothing could be more chilling, more laconic, more heartless, to all appearance, than the reply of this literary courtier. Schiller had been greatly instigated in his flight from Stuttgard, by his reliance on Dalberg’s professions of esteem and friendship. And now not a word to comfort, much less a florin to support! Before the laborious student rose the sense of a condition thoroughly desolate and alarming—the recollection of his debts at Stutt- gard ; more than all, the remorse of having implicated his faithful friend in his own ruin. It was evident that Dalberg, with that sympathy which all courtiers have for the griey- ances of all courts, regarded Schiller as a political offender, and feared to befriend one with whom a Prince was displeased.
Two resources were left: first, to find for the two plays a publisher who would advance some money upon their probable profits; and secondly, to take advantage of a generous offer—an invitation which might well put to the blush the niggard heartlessness of Dalberg.
At the Stuttgard Academy, three young men of good birth, named yon Wolzogen, had been educated contem- poraneously with Schiller. The eldest of these, Wilhelm, was afterwards amongst his most intimate friends their mother, a widow, in straitened circumstances, had known and admired the Poet at Stuttgard; she offered him an - asylum in a small house she possessed at Bauerbach, about two miles from Meiningen. The advancement of her own sons was in the hands of the Duke of Wiirtemberg. She hazarded much by receiving into her house the persecuted fugitive ; but the magnanimity of her friendship would not take the peu of a good action into account. Thither, then, Schiller resolved to fly. A Mannheim bookseller, narhed Schwan, advanced upon “ Fiesco” “flicient to discharge the
LIFE OF SCHILLER, 35
debt incurred at Oggersheim, and defray the expenses of the Journey to Bauerbach. In a winter’s night—the snow deep upon the ground—the generous Streicher bade him fare- well ; or rather, no word was spoken, no embrace exchanged -—a long and silent clasp of the hand was the only token of an affection which had endured so much hardship, and consoled through so much sorrow.‘ But yet,” says Schiller’s German biographer, with simple eloquence, “the Musician, after fifty years, was filled with grief when he recalled the moment in which he had left a truly kingly heart—the noblest of the German Poets—alone, and in misfortune,”
CHAPTER V.
RESIDENCE AT BAUERBACH,
As on a December evening 1782, the wanderer beheld, beneath the old ruins of the Castle of Henneberg, the lights of the scattered houses of the village of Bauerbach gleaming through the deep snow, he felt, as he himself says, “like a shipwrecked man, who struggles at last from the waves.” Here, though the family themselves were absent, everything that could comfort and welcome him, awaited. He remained unknown and secure; a bookseller of eminence at Meiningen (Reinwald), who afterwards married his sister, was admitted to his secret, and cheered his solitude with books and his own society. Sometimes he made a companion of the ‘steward of the property, played at chess, or wandered, with him, through the wild woods that surround that country.* The calm, the security and the solitude were, at first, bene- ficial to his mind and to his labours. The two plays were completed, and despatched to the bookseller, Schwan, But
* A singular anecdote is related by Madame von Wolzogen. One day, in his walk with the Steward, Schiller paused in a lonely spot between wild rocks, and was seized with a notion that a dead body lay below. In fact, a poor carrier had been murdered there, and his corpse had been buried in the very place.
D2
36 LIFE OF SCHILLER,
now, his ardent imagination, having thrown off its task, began to prey upon itself. He passed, though for a short time, and with reluctance, into that state common to all good men, in proportion to their original affection for their species— misanthropy. No man ever was, in reality, a misan- thrope, but from too high an opinion of mankind, and too keen a perception of ideal virtue. “I had embraced,” com- plains Schiller, “half the world, with feelings the most glowing, to find a lump of ice within my arms.”* The wild and desolate scenery around him—the dreariness of winter— served to increase the gloom that seized him. His prospects were, in reality, such as might render the hardest sensitive, and the boldest anxious. The present might he safe, but at any moment he might be cast again upon the world. Ilis gratitude to his friends made him feel that his asylum must be resigned the moment the Grand. Duke discovered it, And, even as it was, tould his spirit long bear the thought of dependence, obscurity, and disguise? Still, he was without a country, still without a career, He seriously thought of abandoning poetry, and returning to the medical profession ; sometimes the wilder notion of exile to England—to America —possessed him. This state of mind was, perhaps, fortu- nately invaded by a romantic and hopeless fancy, rather than the love for which he mistook it,
Madame yon Wolzogen visited Bauerbach.
In Charlotte, the youngest daughter of his benefactress, Schiller found an image to replace his Laura. He could not expect encouragement from the mother, nor does it appear that his attachment was returned by Charlotte ; but he was at that age when feeling is easily awakened, and as easily misunderstood. by the heart which feels it. The love of youth, before it séttles for life, hovers over all to whom the fancy allures it. The Cupid, with the expanded wings, and the arrow on the string, is but the false Anteros :—IJn the true Eros, the wings are folded, and the bow is broken,
* Shortly after this period, on his settlement at Mannheim, he announced his intention of translating Shakspeare’s ‘‘ Timon,” and says, “ In all Shakspeare, there is no piece in which he more loudly and eloquently speaks to my heart—or in which I have learned more of the Science of Life.’— Ruzin. Tuat., Heft 1, s, 13.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 37
Certainly this was the most critical: period in the life of Schiller, moral and intellectual. If mew persecutions, whether of power or of opinion, had now befallen him, it is at least doubtful whether he would have ever attained to a name at once so revered and so beloved—whether indignation and disgust might not, in a spirit se proud and so impetuous, have ripened into permanent defiance of the world, and its existing orders and forms.* Who shall say whether it would have been in the power of Schiller, in the nature of man, to have preserved the genial purity and kindliness which had been the early concomitants and softeners of his restless and fiery genius, if, at this moment, he had undergone from the public of his fatherland, the same horrible calumny and in- justice which, in the anguish and the trial of existence, hooted Byron into exile? None of the earlier writings of Byron can be compared for a moment, in their offences against settled opinions, to those which the youth of Schiller sent forth, to agitate society and inflame the mind. ‘The Robbers,” ‘ Fiesco,” ‘Cabal and Love,” are, one and all, defiances of Prescription. The revolutionary stamp is upon each. To ordinary observers, they might well appear the more dangerous, from the systematic purpose which seemed to pervade them all. In England, such works would have given impunity to the slander of literary envy, and the bigotry of political hate. But there was a nobler temper in the German public ;—there was granted to Schiller what, despite the greater temptations of birth, and beauty, and prevalent example, was never conceded to our immortal countryman—the allowance for unsettled youth and im- perfect education ;—and the result should be a lesson to the public in all lands: His manhood was the splendid redeemer of his youth.
Suddenly, in the midst of Schiller’s anxious gloom and conflicting cmotions—at the very moment when hypo- chondria was fast darkening over his heart and unnerving his intellect—the sun broke out upon him. The Duke of Wiirtemberg, whose resentment never seems to have been ungenerous or vindictive, tacitly relinquished all thoughts of
— * « Oh!” he exclaims, in a letter to Madame yon Wolzogen, ‘‘ you cannot believe how necessary it is to me to find ob/e human natures |””
38 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
persecuting a man in whom the whole of Germany began to feel a romantic interest. The courtier Dalberg perceived that the time was come when, without imprudence, he might bring to the aid of his theatre the author of the most popular drama of the time. He invited Schiller to Mannheim. The young Poet’s plays were to be produced upon the stage—the object of an ambition, modest as to temporal means, vast as to intellectual empire; was attained. He was appointed, with a fixed, though very limited salary, Poet to the Theatre at Mannheim, then the first in Germany. On the evening of the 22nd July, 1783, he arrived at the town in which the foundations of his dramatic glory had been laid, and, at the house of Meier, he was once more beheld—but, this time, with a cheerful and radiant countenance—by his faithful Streicher,
CHAPTER VI.
RESIDENCE AT MANNHEIM.
Bur it is one thing to print a drama—another to represent it. ‘“Fiesco” still required great alterations to adapt it to the stage. One essential cause of the theatrical success of Schiller, was the earnest readiness with which he lent him- self to the suggestions of practical criticism. He was not like many of our young authors who write for the stage, and will not sacrifice a passage to what they call the arrogant ignorance of managers and actors. Unless the Poet obtains and follows the advice of manager and actor, he may depend » upon it that he will never command an audience. While employed upon the task of revising “ Fiesco,” and its com- panion Drama, Schiller was seized with fever, which ex- hausted his strength and protracted his labours. But, in nothing is Schiller more an example to us than in his iron perseverance and diligent industry. These were the very elements of his genius. Perhaps they are so of all genius that accomplishes what is great and lasting. Throngh weak- ness and through sickness he toiled on.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 39
*Fiesco” was not so successful at Mannheim as had been anticipated. Schiller complained that the public of the Palatine could not understand it; that with them Republi- can Liberty was an empty sound. But, in Berlin and Frankfort, it produced a considerable sensation, which re- acted on the Mannheim audiences, and soon secured its fame, Tt was followed, in March or April,* by “Cabal and Love,” which obtained the most brilliant reception.
On the first representation of this drama Streicher found his reward for all his friendship. He sate by the side of Schiller; he heard the rapturous applauses it excited; he saw all eyes turn to the Poet; he had shared the adversity— he participated in the triumph.t  Schiller’s existence was now assured. He had found a country, as well as confirmed his fame. He was acknow- ledged a subject of the Elector Palatine. He had no longer any cause of apprehension from the Duke of Wirtemberg. He was elected a member of the German Literary Society established at Mannheim. The circle of his intimates was thus enlurged amongst men of the same pursuits, and his ambition corrected and guided, by comparison between him- self and others. New resources were opened to him; and his ambition could not readily settle upon any one of the numerous objects by which it was allured. He proposed at first to translate “Timon of Athens,” and “ Macbeth,” but ultimately returned to ‘Don Carlos.” ‘This was the first drama, commenced in the retirement of Bauerbach, which he had attempted in verse ; and herein he first ascended, though with an uncertain step, towards the higher and purer realm of Ideal Fiction, in which his genius finally fixed its home, A marked change, indeed, was now visible in his modes of thought. He took loftier conceptions of the aims and duties of the Poet. He became aware of the moral deficiencies of “The Robbers ;” he meditated a sequel to that play, which should be an ample apology for its predecessor, and in which
* On the 9th of March, according to Schwab ; somewhere in April, according to Hoffmeister.
+ Atthe end of the second act the audience shouted applause, so much more emphatically than usual, that Schiller, taken by surprise, rose, and bowed.
~
40 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
al] immorality should be tesolved into the highest moral.”* He reassumed his early instincts of the preacher ; not indeed as from the pulpit, but from the boards. He laid down to others and to himself the principle, that the Stage should take its rank with the Church and the School amongst the primary institutions of a State. In proportion as representa- tion must be more vivid than dead book-lore and cold nar- ration, so assuredly might he think that the stage should work deeper lessons and more lasting, than mere moralising systems.t Whether he did not overestimate the possible in- fluence of the theatre in modern times, may be reasonably doubted. But that very exaggeration could only serve to purify his ambition and elevate his aims.
Meanwhile, his pecuniary circumstances, though improved, and though, perhaps, sufficient for a strict economist, were not adequate to the wants of a man so liberal, so charitable, and so careless of detail and method. Wrapt in his Ideal realm, he forgot the exigences of Practical life. ‘‘ Hogarth,” says his biographer, ‘‘ might have been inspired by the dis- order of the young Poet’s chamber.” His debt at Stuttgard still weighed upon him, till at length his landlord lent him the money to defray it. He resolved upon new efforts to emancipate himself from all difficulties. He undertook a periodical called the ‘‘ Rhenish Thalia,” from which he anti- cipated to reap an independence, In the announcement of this work he speaks thus of his own views and hopes: ‘I
Dec write as a Citizen of the World who serves no prince.
1784. Early I left my fatherland, exchanging it for the
great world, that I only beheld at a distance, and through a glass.” He proceeds to speak of his education ; his poetic enthusiasm ; his ‘ Robbers ;” his flight from Wiir- temberg ; and thus continues :—‘“ All my former connexions - are dissolved.. The Public has become my all, my study, my sovereign, and my confidant. To the Public alone henceforth I belong. Before this tribunal, and this tribunal only, I take my stand. Something of greatness hovers over me as I resolve to know no restraint’ but the sentence of the world— appeal to no throne but the soul of Man!”
* Schiller’s Briefe an Dalberg, s. a &e. T Ilofimeister,
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 41
This frank and stately egotism was thoroughly charac- teristic of Schiller. And the reader will readily understand how much, as in the case of Byron, the admiration for the Poet became associated with interest in the Man. Grave men, whom he knew not, wrote to offer him their homage; fair maidens, whom. he had seen not, transmitted to him their miniatures. But in the midst of his labours and his increas- ing fame, his heart was lonely. He pined for love and for female society. In the bustle of the town he recalled with a sigh the retirement of Bauerbach. Forgetful of the gloom which had, there, so often overshadowed his solitude, he looked self-deludingly back to the winter months he had spent amidst its gloomy pines, as amongst the happiest of his life. The image of Charlotte von Wolzogen haunted him; but it was rather as the ideal Egeria of the Nympholept than as the one living woman who renders all others charmless and indifferent. “To be linked to one,” he says, ‘who shares with us joy and sorrow; who meets us in our emotions, and supples to our humours; at her breast to release our souls from the thousand distractions, the thousand wild wishes and unruly passions; and drown all the bitterness of Fortune in the enjoyment of domestic calm ;—ah! such were the true delight of life.” He proposed openly to Madame von Wol- zogen for her daughter Charlotte; but, thoroughly convinced at last of the hopelessness of that pursuit, his desire for love in the abstract soon found its object elsewhere. Margaret, the daughter of Schwan the bookseller, was one in whom he might woo an equal, and reasonably hope to find a return for his affection. She possessed great personal beauty, and a lively turn of mind; “rather devoted,” say, with some malice, the good German biographers, “to the world, to literature, and to art, than to the tranquil domestic duties.” She was then nineteen years old, and the death of her mother had placed her at the head of the household. Schiller’s lite- rary intercourse with her father necessarily drew him much into her society; and about the autumn of 1784, the fair Margaret: gained possession of a heart still somewhat too in- flammable for constancy.*
_ * Tt appears, indeed, that in the interval Schiller had admitted the influence of some wilder and less refined passion than either Margaret
49 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
With the new love he resumed the new drama; and thie passion for Margaret burns in many a line which proclaims the affection of the ill-fated Carlos. But new circumstances began to conspire against the repose of Schiller, and his con-
tinuance at Mannheim. The periodical he had com- 1785. menced, without greatly increasing his resources, embroiled him with the actors, Those worthy per- sonages were mightily concerned at the freedom of his criti- cisms; he in turn was no less aggrieved by their slovenly repetition of his verses, and their irreverent treatment of himself. His ambition had been diverted into new paths, by the dignity of Councillor* of the Duchy of Weimar, conferred upon him by the Duke, who in a visit to Mannheim had granted him an audience. The honour in which literary men were held in the court of Weimar inflamed his imagination. He had not yet entirely resigned the practical world for the ideal; and in Schiller, despite his want of economy and method, there were talents and capacities which were not restricted solely to the pen. One of those who knew him best says of him, no doubt with truth, “that if he had been withheld from the destiny of a great poet, he could not have failed, perforce, to have become a remarkable man of action.” t For action Schiller certainly possessed those peculiar qualities which usually ensure success in a career once fairly opened — qualities rather moral than intellectual ;—indomitable will —the power of earnest application—inflexible honour—and a strong sense of justice.
The rank of Councillor to the Duchy of Weimar thus opened to him a path more alluring than that in which he passed, not over the flowers his youth had fancied, as Poet to a Theatre. Atter much consultation with some friends at Leipsic, and with Schwan, and in the midst of all kinds of
Schwan or Charlotte von Wolzogen had inspired, and to which he alludes with frank regret, in a letter some years afterwards to the lady whom he married. The object of this passing fancy has apparently bafiled the research of his biographers. :
* A merely nominal dignity—but it is difficult for an Englishman to comprehend the eagerness with which these petty distinctions are sought forin Germany. ;
t Scharffenstei, At a later period, Goethe expressed the same opinion.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 43
disgusts and difficulties in his residence at Mannheim, it was determined that he should remove to Leipsic. He resolved . there to devote himself to Jurisprudence, and to use Poetry, if we may borrow the admirable saying of Sir Walter Scott, “as his staff, not his crutch.” He communicated these in- tentions to Streicher, who shared his new enthusiasm, What might not so much industry, in a mind already exercised in severe thought and arduous studies, accomplish in a few years? Some honourable appointment at the least in one of the small Saxon Courts. The friends grew warm over their hopes, and agreed at last to suspend all correspondence till the Poet was Minister, and the Musician Chapel Master! Thus ends—amidst new projects, and on the eve of a new flight—the First Period in the life and career of Friedrich _ Schiller, He was only in his twenty-sixth year—and how much had he effected! His name was already a household word in Europe. His genius had not been stationary ; the 1785. most marked improvement in taste, in thought, in self-cultivation distinguished his more recent from his earlier compositions. Even at this time, the genial and gentle Wieland had prophesied that Friedrich Schiller would be the first man of his age. The very misfortunes, the very errors of his life, had served to augment the true knowledge of genius—viz., experience of the heart—its sufferings—its passions—its infirmities. In ‘ Fiesco,” as in “The Robbers,” there is much that is distorted and exaggerated, but the cha- racters move in a far higher atmosphere—the language is chaster and more severe-—the descriptive passages want nothing but rhythm to have the beauty and the charm of Poetry. All the men are drawn on the large scale of Heroes. The magnificence of Fiesco, and the austerity of Verrina, are no doubt contrasted with too distinct a force for the delicacy of Art; but the fault is that of a Giant, who has not yet learned to subdue and regulate his strength. Still more pro- mise of real and permanent excellence is to be found in “Cabal and Love ;” for, to idealise common life is impos- sible, but to those who have already perceived the great truths in which high Poetry moves and breathes. In these plays, the influences which we have noticed in our brief
44 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
sketch of the state of German Literature are visible. Through the lurid and stormy phantasies of French republicanism— through the hazy mists of Rousseau’s passionate sentiment— may yet be discovered glimpses of the robust Humanity of Herder—the noble earnestness of Lessing—the last especially. “Emilia Galotti” speaks in the Domestic Tragedy of ‘¢ Cabal and Love,” and its Odoardo transfuses something of his high spirit into the Verrina of “Fiesco.” Yet finer influences than even these were now at work upon a mind ever shooting onward, or mounting upward. ‘The study of Shakspeare— necessarily intense to one meditating the translation of “Timon” and “ Macbeth ”—led Schiller, not indeed to imitate a genius wholly dissimilar to his own, but to ponder upon those attributes within his reach. He began the transi- tion from what may be called the passionate and declama- tory drama* to the intellectual and analytical. He says of the Hero of the Tragedy on which he was now employed, “Carlos has the soul from Shakspeare’s Hamlet—the pulse from me.” There is little in common, it is true, between Carlos and Hamlet ; but Schiller had made a great progress in his conceptions of Art, when he studicd a Ilamlet, to create a Carlos.
But in this, as in the several periods of his life, the mirror of his heart and his genius is to be found in his minor poems. In their fervour and exaggeration—their beauties and defects —lives immortally the youth of Schiller.
CHAPTER VII. SECOND PERIOD.
SCHILLER’S ARRIVAL AT LEIPSIC—PROPOSES FOR MARGARET SCHWAN—-REMOVES TO DRESDEN—HIS HABITS, STUDIES, ETC.—HIS INFATUATION, AND DEPARTURE FOR WEIMAR.
ScHILLER arrived at Leipsic in the midst of its famous Fair, His name was soon bruited abroad, and the throng
* In which our English ‘Venice Preserved ’’ is almost unsurpassed.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 45
pressed to see him. But though Schiller was not without that noble vanity which pants for applause, and takes enjoy- ‘ ment in renown, the curiosity of idlers could only offend his taste, and wound his pride. “It is a peculiar thing,” he says, writing to Schwan, “to have an Author’s name.- The few men of worth and mark who on this account offer their acquaintance, and whose ‘esteem confers pleasure, are too greatly outweighed by the swarm who, like flesh-flies, buzz around the Author as a monster, and claim him as a colleague on the strength of a few sheets of blotted paper. Many can- not get it into their heads that the Author of ‘The Robbers’ should be like any other mother’s son. They expected at least a crop, the boots of a postillion, and a hunting-whip !” —If they did not expect more than that, Schiller was better off than most Authors—from whom the usual demands of the public are the beanty of Antinous, the manners of Chesterfield, the spirit of Lauzun, the virtue of Zeno, the gallantry of Grammont, and the small accomplishments of Crichton !
Meanwhile Schiller continued his contributions to “The Thalia,” in which a considerable portion of “Carlos” ap- peared ; laboured with assiduity at the completion of that Drama; and composed, in a happy moment, “ The Hymn to Joy,” by far the noblest poem he had yet achieved. Insen- sibly the more worldly ambition with which he had quitted Mannheim dicd away. The profession of Jurisprudence was not adopted ; but, still anxious to found a livelihood upon some basis more stable than Literature, he meditated a return to Medicine ; and encouraged, perhaps, by the attention and respect he received at Leipsic, he ventured now to demand the hand of Margaret Schwan. After a preface at once modest and manly, he thus opened himself to her father: ‘ My free and unconstrained access to your house, afforded me the opportunity of intimate acquaintance with your amiable daughter ; and the frank kind treatment with which both you and she honoured me, tempted my heart to entertain the bold wish of becoming yourson. My prospects have hitherto been dim and vague ; they begin now to alter in my favour. I will strive with more continuous vigour when the goal is clear. Do you decide whether I can reach it, when the dearest wish
46 LIFE OF SCHILLER,
of my heart supports my zeal. Yet two short years, and my whole fortune will be determined. . . . « The Duke of Weimar was the first person to whom I disclosed myself; his anticipating goodness, and the declaration that he took an interest in my happiness, induced me to confess that that happiness depended on a union with your noble daughter. He expressed satisfaction at my choice. I have reason to hope he will do more, should it come to the point of completing my happiness by this union, I shall add nothing further. I know well that hundreds of others might offer your daughter a more splendid fate than I at this moment can promise her ; but that any other heart can be more worthy of her, I venture to deny.” *
A bookseller is generally the last person to choose, as his son-in-law, an Author. He has seen too much of the vicissi- tudes of an Authovr’s life, and of the airy basis of an Author’s hopes in the future, to be flattered by the proposals of a suitor, who finds it easier to charm the world than to pay the butcher. He wrote to Schiller a refusal, implying that his daughter’s character was not in unison with her wooer’s. Till then, a correspondence had heen carried on between the young persons ; this, Schiller properly and honourably now broke off, to Margaret’s surprise, and apparently to her grief, for her father had not communicated to her Schiller’s proposal,—a discreet reserve which seems to prove that he did not reckon on her free acquiescence in his reply. The friendship between Schiller and Schwan, however, still continued, and the re- membrance of Margaret never wholly faded from Schiller’s heart. ‘Like all noble and manly natures,” says Madame von Wolzogen, ‘Schiller ever retained an affectionate remem- brance of the woman who had inspired him with tender emotion. These recollections moved him always, but he rarely spoke of them; for love with him was always earnest and solemn ; not the sensual and fickle boy, but the young Divinity,—who unites himself with the Psyche.”
Perhaps, to dissipate his disappointment by new change, Schiller yielded to the invitation of friends he had secured at Dresden, and at the end of the summer he repaired to that
* We have borrowed the translation of this extract from Carlyle’s ‘Life of Schiller; ””—the Boston edition, 1833,
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 47
city, and made a home in the house of Kémer, lately appointed Councillor of Appeals* (Appellations Rath), and newly married to Minna Stock, an enthusiastic admirer of Schiller.t
Kérnev’s house was placed on the banks of the Elbe, near Loschwitz, A summer-house in the garden, surrounded by vineyards and pine-woods, was soon surrendered to the Poet, and became his favourite retreat. Here “Don Carlos” made effective, though not rapid, progress. This Tragedy, the first (as we have before observed) in which Schiller superadded the purer form and the more refined delineations of Poetry to the vigour and effect of the Drama, put the seal upon his fame, Hitherto, with all the admiration of the many, he had not won to himself that more durable, that more enviable reputation, which is maintained and confirmed by the graver few. But judges, the most critical and refined, shared for ‘ Don Carlos,” in the closet, the enthusiasm it excited on the stage.
But, while engaged in the completion of this Drama, Schiller’s prodigious activity had already extended the realm his genius was destined to subdue and overspread. Besides the sketch of a Play—‘ The Misanthrope ”—never finished, he conceived the idea of his Romance, called “The Ghost Seer,” and collected materials for the historical works he began to meditate. For History, indeed, his mind was already pre- pared by the earnest and thoughtful study of character, and of the philosophy of events, which had been brought to bear on “ Don Carlos.” And now this restless and ever-inquiring mind arrived at that stage in which, between the enthusiasm of youth, and the wisdom of manhood, is so often placed the transition-interval of Doubt. That intensity of religious faith and conviction which had characterised his boyhood, had, perhaps, been somewhat roughly shaken by the hard bigotry of his teachers at the Stuttgard Academy; but there is evidence to show that it existed during the composition of “The Robbers.” Amongst his earlier Poems is one called ‘Letter from Julius to Raphael, from an unpublished Romance.” This Romance afterwards took the shape and
* Father to the poet, Theodore Korner. + Minna Stock was one of the young ladies who had honoured Schiller with their miniatures,
48 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
title of “ Philosophical Letters between Julius and Raphael,” of which only a fragment was printed, but in which the scep- ticism of the Author is first apparent. -There is no doubt that this work was remodelled and rewritten during Schiller’s sojourn at Dresden, and no reason to suppose that, in its earlier form, it contained the matter for just offence, subse- quently admitted.
In these letters appears a crude and wavering conflict between Spinozism and Kantism. With Kant’s great work on “Pure Reason,” Schiller seems to have been first acquainted, but only by hearsay, at Leipsic or Dresden, between 1785-87. It was not till some years afterwards, in 1791, that he studied Kant at the fountain-head, and learned from him, if not a precisely orthodox Christianity, at least that ideal and spiritual Christianity, to which the great Ger- man has led so many, who would otherwise have been lost in the pathless wilds of Infidelity. But now, much that Schiller composed, shows the doubt and conflict of his mind —a state, to one so constitutionally devout, of great anguish and despondency, and to which, in his later writings, he has many solemn and pathetic allusions. In the ‘ Philosophical Letters ” is to be found the illogical yet brilliant Fallacy of Pantheism, which bewildered hopelessly the far smaller and more erratic intellect of Shelley, but which did not long delude the robust understanding of Schiller. In the Poems which the reader will find translated and classed under the head of The Second Period, the conflict is visible, though subdued. It was in conformity with this state of mind, that Schiller—in whom the intellect was no less strong than the imagination—should turn to that positive and actual Some- thing which is found in the external history of man. Plans too large for one writer to accomplish, hovered before his ambition—some history that might be to Practical Narrative what the vast conception of Herder suggested to the theory it in which History shouldbe told.
He meditated, and, in part, undertook, what, indeed, if ever Reconiplished suitably, would be one of the greatest Records in the world—* A History of all the more remarkable Conspiracies and Revolutions of Modern Times.” Meane while, his private life had at once its charms and its sorrows,
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 49
The love of solitude still clung to him. He was seen in the morning, wandering along the banks of the Elbe, thoughtful and alone ; + OF like Byron at Venice, when the lightning
flashed and the storm burst, tossed in his gondola upon the waves. He disliked, and sought to shun, mniseélinneoua, and especially what is called fashionable society ; he carried his earnest mind, and his love of freedom, into all circles,;—im- patient of the talk that was frivolous, and the etiquette that was restrained. But he generally devoted some portion of the day to the interchange of mind with the congenial ;— artists, men of letters, or even those who, simple and un- affected, interested his heart, if they could not appeal to his intellect.
Shy and silent in the crowd, he was eloquent with those familiar to him, and his conversation was yet more charming from his simple kindliness, than from the stores which it dis- played: this was the bright side of his private life—the reverse of the medal is only darkly shadowed out. Before his visit to Dresden, Schiller had formed an acquaintance with a young woman named Sophy Albrecht, intended for the stage; he had taken a strong interest in her professional career, and he met her again at Dresden, as one of the most celebrated actresses of the day. He visited at her house on familiar terms, and there, one evening, after the play was over, he saw a young, blue-eyed stranger, who made upon him an impression equally deep and sudden. This girl was the eldest daughter of a Saxon widow, who had lived upon a small pension, and whose husband had been an officer in the army. He afterwards encountered the fair Julia—(such was the young lady’s name,) at the ‘ Redoute,” and ventured to accost her. The mother was, by all accounts, an artful and abandoned person, who did not scruple to put to profit the beauty of her daughter. She saw, in the admiration of so distinguished a Poet, the means of widening Julia’s already lucrative notoriety. Schiller was accordingly lured into an intimacy which occasioned the most serious anxiety to his friends.* It seems uncertain whether Julia, who appears to have followed her mother’s depraved counsels with something
_ * Doxing—Madame von Wolzogen, Hoffmeleter, Schwab, ¥
50 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
of reluctant shame, returned the passion she had inspired. There was that in Schiller to have won a worthier affection, despite the unflattering portrait which Sophy Albrecht, in her coarse taste of actress, has drawn of the young Poet.
Schiller, no doubt at that time, and indeed from his entrance into youth, had lost the mere physical beauty which he seemed to have possessed as a child, when his sister com- pared his countenance, shaded with locks of gold, ‘‘to an Angel’s head.” He was tall, extremely thin, though muscular, and large of bone; his neck was long (a noble defect, which is never without dignity), and his dress was rude and neglected. His face was not handsome, perhaps, in the eyes of actresses,—whose profession leads them to admire show and colour in all things,—but so noble a countenance has rarely been given to the sons of Genius; true, the com- plexion was pale, the cheeks somewhat hollow, and the dark auburn hair, though rich and profuse, had a deep tinge of red, but the forehead was lofty and massive, somewhat receding towards the temples when regarded in profile (a peculiarity found in most men of characters brave and deter- mined). His eyes, described variously as blue, brown, and dark gray, and probably shifting in colour with the light,* were, though deep sunken, singularly brilliant and expressive ; and his nose, if too large for perfect symmetry of feature, was finely formed. His personal appearance, in short, harmonised. with his intellectual character ; and, as in Goethe, the pre- eminent attribute both of outward form and mental ac- complishment was beauty ;f so in Schiller, the pre-eminent
* Madame von Wolzogen says, their colour was undecided, between blue and light brown. His sister calls them blue; one of his collece friends dark gray. ;
t Goethe was, perhaps, the handsomest poet of whom we have any — record. With a beauty of face not inferior to that of Milton or Byron, he had advantages of stature denied to either,—and that air of majestic dignity which is beauty in itself. We remember being very much struck with a comparison between two portraits of Byron and Goethe, taken when each was about the same age, viz., twenty-one. There was a strong likeness between the two, though Goethe’s features, not less symmetrical, were larger and more manly ; but the contrast in the expression was startling. The German lady who showed us the por- traits, observed with truth,—‘‘ What dejection, and discontent. with the world is already stamped on Lord Byron’s face !--What calm, yet
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 51
attribute in both was nobleness. If, as one who re- membered him well declares, the colossal bust of Dannecker alone shows him as he really was in life, no one who has ever seen that likeness will deny, that it is a countenance which strikingly arrests the admiration, and deeply engrosses the interest—a certain grandeur, both of outline and expres- sion, dwarfs into effeminacy whatever portraits of more justly proportioned beauty may be placed beside it. But the actress, describing Schiller at this time, could see only, as was natural to such an observer, the gray, threadbare frock—the general disdain of the toilette—the awkwardness given by pride and reserve to the movements of the tall figure—the indulgence of Spanish snuff—and the stoop of the “ ever- thoughtful head.” . . . Whether or not the fair Julia re- garded Schiller with the same eyes as the actress is a matter, however, of very little importance :—not so the love felt by Schiller, since it not only gave rise to some of his poems, but coloured many immortal pages in the ‘ Ghost-seer.”. His friends did their best to dispel his infatuation, and tear him from a connexion which they considered disgraceful to his name, ruinous to his means, and injurious to his prospects ; finally, they succeeded in their appeals. He appears, indeed, to have become aware of the treachery* practised on him ; and, after many a struggle between reason and passion, at last he tore himself away.
He had long meditated a journey to Weimar—then to Germany what Athens, in the time of Pericles, was to Greece ; he now accepted a cordial invitation from a friend of his, Madamef von Kalb; and, in the month of July, 1787, he arrived at the little Court, brightened by a constel- lation of Art and Genius, before which the wealth and
sanguine energy—what hopeful self-confidence in Goethe’s!” The several expression in either countenance seemed almost like a prophecy of either fate. }
* Julia had directed Schiller not to enter the house when a light was to be seen in a certain chamber, upon pretence of being then engaged in the domestic circle, while in truth she was receiving some more favoured admirer. 4
+ We have preferred (in this, and other instances), as more familiar to the English ear, the title of Madame to that of Lraw, which is, of course, more rigidly correct.
B2
52 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
splendour of every capital in Europe was, at that day, but as foil and tinsel.
CHAPTER VIII.
SOCIETY AT WEIMAR—CHARACTER OF THE DUCHESS AMELIA —THE VON LENGEFELDS—SCHILLER IN THE RETIRE- MENT OF RUDOLSTADT—FIRST MEETING WITH GOETHE —STUDY OF GREEK—DEATH OF MADAME VON WOLZOGEN —SCHILLER ACCEPTS THE PROFESSORSHIP OF HISTORY AT JENA—LIFE AT THAT UNIVERSITY—COURTSHIP OF CHARLOTTE VON LENGEFELD—SCHILLER’S MARRIAGE.
GorrHE was absent from Weimar,—in “those fair Auso-
nian climates”—the influence of which so powerfully
1787. affected his plastic genius, and served to give to his
after-creations that severe and statue-like repose which has, with all the beauty, something of the coldness and the terror, of Medusa:—Goethe was absent; but at Weimar were Herder, Wieland, Béttiger, and other eminent men. Schiller was not disappointed in the charm of the place. ‘I think here,” he writes, “ at least, in the territory of Weimar, to end my days—and at last, once more, to find a country.” And yet Schiller was not at first fully appre- ciated at the court to which he was admitted. The Augustan character which Weimar had obtained, originated in the tastes and the talents of Amelia, mother to the reigning Duke. Her especial favourite was the polished and graceful Wieland, whom she had appointed Tutor to her Son, Karl August, She had been left a widow at the age of nineteen; and ~ fulfilled the duties of Regent during the minority of the young Prince.
To considerable talents for public business, and intuitive knowledge of the world, this remarkable woman added a strong affection for art ; and blended a thorough enjoyment of society,—in its best union of aristocracy, elegance, and talent,—with a keen thirst for knowledge. She acquired some acquaintance with the learned languages from Wieland,
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 53
and translated Propertius. The circle of eminent men that she drew around her was attracted no less by her manners than her information and her abilities. But Schiller’s genius, as yet made manifest, was not very congenial to a taste half French and half classical ; and the Duchess-Mother does not seem to have been aware that in the rude strength of the young Suabian lay that which was not to borrow classicality, but to make a land’s language classical.* Of all the literary men then at Weimar, the amiable Wieland was the most cordial to Schiller. Herder welcomed him, “but without warmth.” Not till a much later period does the Duke him- self appear to have taken any very vivid interest in his great visitor. The style of conversation, though intellectual and refined, was not that which Schiller was likely to enjoy—it was too critical, and perhaps too courtly —* more was babbled than was thought.” But nothing is more beneficial to a man of genius, yet young, than to frequent society in which he is not over-estimated ;—nothing more injurious than to be the sole oracle of his circle. From that period we date a purer and more dignified taste in Schiller—the tone of good society henceforth entered into his writings, and improved his manners: without weakening the one, it brought ease ; with- out marring the simplicity of the other, it served to soften and make social.
At the end of October, Schiller made an excursion to Meiningen, on a visit to his eldest sister, who had lately married Reinwald. Madame von Wolzogen was also at Meiningen ; at her house he found his old college friend, Wilhelm; and with this companion he returned towards Weimar. They took the journey on horseback, and proposed by the way to visit some relations of M. von Wolzogen—a memorable visit; for now Schiller approached that bright period of his life when his wanderings and apprenticeship of mind and heart were alike to cease—when his genius settled into Art—when his affections were concentered in a home.
At Rudolstadt, on the banks of “the soft winding Saale,” in a valley bounded by blue mountains and sloping wood- lands, lived a Madame von Lengefeld, with two daughters ;
__* Schiller attributes to the good offices of Goethe (despite his absence), the access to the Duchess Amelia, ©
BA LIFE OF SCHILLER.
the elder, Caroline, married to M. von Beulwitz, Hofrath of Rudolstadt, to whom (more distinguished by the name she acquired in a second marriage, von Wolzogen) we are in- debted for a delightful, though somewhat high-flown Bio- graphy of Schiller; and the younger, Charlotte, unmarried, and then in her twenty-first year. The father had died when the children had severally arrived at the ages of thirteen and ten. Till that time they had been brought up in close retirement, But a situation at the Court of Weimar being destined for Charlotte when she should arrive at a fitting age, Madame von Lengefeld deemed it advisable to remove for a short time into Switzerland, as affording better facilities for the kind of education necessary for a girl intended to mix in the society of a brilliant and polished court. Three years before the date on which we now enter, the two sisters, who were related to the Wolzogens, had seen Schiller for the first time at Mannheim, and been favourably struck by his appearance. They were on their return from Switzerland ; and the marriage of the elder daughter to M. von Beulwitz, served to settle their residence at Rudolstadt. Charlotte was highly prepossessing both in form and face. To borrow the description of her sister, ‘the expression of the purest good- ness of heart animated her features ; and her eye beamed only truth and innocence.” She had a talent for landscape- drawing, and wrote poetry with grace and feeling. But above all, she had sympathy with whatever, in others, was noble in character, or elevated in genius ;—her temper was sweet, and her disposition affectionate, faithful, and sincere.
At that time, however, Charlotte von Lengefeld was suffering under the melancholy which succeeds to the first fair illusions of life. Her early affections had been given to one from whom Fate had divided her. Her lover was in ° the army, and his duties called him to a distant part of the globe. Whether there were other obstacles, besides those of the young man’s precarious profession, does not appear clear ; but the family were opposed to the connection, and Charlotte von Lengefeld obeyed their wishes in struggling against the inclination she had formed.
Nothing could be more solitary and remote than the little valley in which the Lengefelds dwelt, No high-road inter-
LIFE OF SCHILLER, 55.
sected it: a stranger was a phenomenon. The appearance of two horsemen along the straggling street, one dark November evening, sufficed to create curiosity and interest. One of the riders, as he presented himself to the Lengefelds, playfully concealed his face in his mantle, but the ladies recognised their cousin, Wilhelm von Wolzogen. The other was un- known or unremembered, till his companion announced the already famous name of Schiller. -The simple and shy Saubian, usually distant with strangers, found himself 1787, at home at once in the family circle he had entered.
The conversation fell on his recent publication, ‘‘ The Philo- sophical Letters,” and on his earlier poems. The earnest Schiller wished the Lengefelds to become acquainted with his “Carlos.” A single evening sufficed to form an intimacy. On his departure, Schiller had already conceived the project of spending the next summer at Rudolstadt.
It so chanced that Wilhelm von Wolzogen had, from the early period of his student life at Stuttgard, cherished a romantic attachment to his fair cousin, Caroline von Lenge- feld—now Madame von Beulwitz. Her marriage was not happy, and her health was delicate and infirm. Perhaps these circumstances served to confirm in Wolzogen an af- fection that then seemed hopeless, and was only nursed in secret. But as the two friends rode to Weimar, there was no doubt much in Wolzogen’s conversation that found an echo in Schiller’s breast. An impression more deep, and yet more calm, than woman had hitherto made upon him, recalled to the Poet, amidst the distractions of Weimar and the labour of his occupations, the image of the soft and pensive Charlotte. Fortune smiled upon the dawn of this affection. Charlotte came to Weimar that very winter, on a visit to Madame von Stein, a friend of her family, and Schiller met her in the society of the place, but not frequently. Still he contrived to approach her, as nearly as his delicacy and the conscious- ness of his precarious worldly circumstances would allow to his pride, He supplied her occasionally with his favourite authors; she undertook the commission to find him a lodging at Rudolstadt for a summer. Occasion was thus found for the interchange of notes, On his part the correspondence was frank, but respectful; it proclaimed friendship and
56 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
estcem—it did not betray more. “There breathes,” in these letters, says an eloquent biographer, “‘a noble, mild, discreet. inclination, without a trace of passion ;’—and here the writer we quote adds finely, “‘Our love is generally the effigy of the one we love. Schiller’s present love was the gold, purified from the sensual passion, which had mastered him at Dresden.” Ht scems probable, however, that in neither was the memory of the previous love yet effaced : and this, while it served to invest their feeling for each other with a certain tranquillity, allowed them both more sensibly to perceive the remarkable congeniality between their minds, tastes, and tempers. Thus, as it were, the soul began to love, before the heart was thoroughly moved. Schiller’s fame, and his somewhat graver years, permitted him to assume with his young friend a certain tone of warning and advice. That court life, to which she seemed then destined, was opposed to all his ideas of true dignity and pure happiness. And, in the lines closing the second division of his poems, he expresses, in verse, the ideas often repeated in his correspondence.* In the midst of May, the following year, we find Schiller settled in the valley of Rudolstadt. He lodged ina 1788. house, half an hour’s walk from the town,+ and his chamber overlooked the banks of the Saale, flowing through meadows, and under the shade of venerable trees. There, on the opposite side of the river rose a hill, clothed with woods, at the foot of which lay tranquil villages ;— there, high above the landscape, towered the castle of Rudolstadt. A small monument, crowned with a bronze copy of Dannecker’s bust of Schiller, yet commemorates his sojourn in this happy valley, recalling Goethe’s lovely words—
és hg place that a good man has trod, remains hallowed to ali ime.”? f
It is thus, that the elder sister speaks of those days—the fairest, perhaps, in the life of Schiller.—“ How welcome was
* See ‘Lines to a Female Friend, written in her Album,” + In the village of Volkstiidt. { Hoffmeister.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 57
it after some tedious visit*—to see our genial friend approach- ing, beneath the fair trees that skirt the banks of the Saale. A forest brook, that pours itself into that river, and was crossed by a little bridge, was the meeting place at which we awaited. When we beheld him in the twilight, coming to- wards us, a serener, an ideal, life entered within us; a lofty earnestness, and the graceful ease of a mind pure and candid, ever animated Schiller’s conversation. One seemed as one heard him talk, to wander as it were between the immutable Stars of Heaven, and yet amidst the flowers of earth.”
But Schiller, during this holyday of existence, was not idle in that solemn vocation of Author—of Instructor—of High Priest in Literature—to which he was sworn. His evenings were devoted to Charlotte and her family, his mornings to study. Here he laboured at his “ History of the Revolt of the Netherlands ”—at the correction of the tale so well known in England—“ The Ghost Seer,’—here were concluded his *¢ Letters upon Don Carlos ””—and here was composed the first portion of the finest Poem written at this period of his life, “The Artists.” In the house of the Lengefelds, Schiller too, for the first time, met Goethe, on his return from Italy. With the works of Schiller hitherto published, Goethe had no sympathy ; they contradicted his own theories of art, and they revolted his serene taste. His manner to the Suabian was reserved and cold; the pride of Schiller forbade him to make the first advances ; and though, as he wrote word to his friend Korner, the great idea he had formed of Goethe was not lessened by this first personal contact, he doubted if they could ever come into close communication. ‘ Much which is yet interesting to me—that which I yet wish and hope for— has had its epoch for him. His whole being is, from its origin, constructed differently from mine ; his world is not my world; our modes of conceiving things are essentially different : from such a combination, no secure substantial intimacy can result. Time will try.”+
About this time, at the instigation of the friendly and learned Wieland, Schiller turned his attention to the literature of Greece, with which he had hitherto but a very slight and
* “ Kaffee- Visite.’’ —Coffee visit: we should say tea party. + Correspondence with Korner. Carlyle’s “‘ Life of Schiller.”
58 LIFE OF SCHILLER,
superficial acquaintance, Nothing ever produces a more durable influence upon an author’s genuis, than the deliberate and systematic recurrence to Hellenic Poetry and Letters, Studied too early, they may often correct the Taste at the expense of the Fancy ; but, studied with the mature thought of manhood, they only strengthen by purifying the inventive faculties. From that time Schiller began to comprehend true Art, the vivifier and music of Nature. From that time he became an Artist. Homer first engrossed his reverent delight ; he passed to the Greek Tragedians ; and the character of his mind, which inclined to philosophy, and the tendency of his genius, which was essentially pathetic and humane, rendered ample justice to the still wronged Euripides.*
From these new sources of inspiration came his noble Poem on the “ Gods of Greece,” and the classical perfection to which he brought ‘‘The Artists,” before begun. The former of these Poems, which appeared in the “ Mercury,” superintended by Wieland, occasioned much offence to those who sought orthodoxy, even in the wildest dreams of the Poet. Although Schiller’s mind at that time was certainly still unsettled, he yet grieved at an interpretation which he appears not to have foreseen ; and at a subsequent period, he sacrificed many of his most brilliant stanzas, in order to purify the whole from whatsoever sincere and liberal piety could reasonably revolt at or regret. . . » The remarkable frankness of his genius often, it is true, led him to depict or to imply his own struggles, and his own errors; but, in his stormiest interval of doubt, Schiller never contemplated the dangerous and dark ambition of unsettling the religious convictions of others. . .
Charlotte’s admiration of “ The Artists” greatly and sea- sonably served to cement the affection now ripening daily between them.t In fact, that fine Poem no vulgar mind could really relish and admire. In one whom so elevated an appeal to the intellectual faculties could move and animate, a lover might well behold the true companion of a Poet’s life, the true sympathiser in a Poet’s labours.
* We must not, however, suppose that Schiller ever attained to the facility of a scholar in Greek, . . In translating Euripides, he had constant need of the Latin version, and even the French of Brumoy,
ft Madame yon Wolzogen,
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 59
This summer, otherwise so happy, was however darkened by the death of Madame von Wolzogen—Schiller’s earliest protectress and second mother. He felt this affliction most deeply—his letter to her son, still extant, is full of tender. grief and delicate consolation,
In November, Schiller returned to Weimar, and occupied himself with the conclusion of his “Ghost Seer,” and trans- lations from Euripides. His chief relaxation and luxury were in his letters to Charlotte—letters unequalled in their com- bination of manly tenderness, confiding frankness, and refined yet unexaggerated romance ; still, though they now betrayed his own love, they did not formally hazard a declaration, or press for a return.
But early in the following year, he was called to a new and more activecareer. Considerable portions of 1789, his history of the ‘‘ Revolt of the Netherlands” had already appeared in Wieland’s ‘‘ Mercury,” and excited consi- derable sensation. His friends wished to see him in one of those honourable situations, which, to the credit of Germany, afforded shelter and independence to so numerous and brilliant a host of literary men. Goethe (though still not intimate with Schiller), displayed the calm magnanimity to- wards a rival natural to one in whom meanness was impossible, and employed the interest of his rank and his fame on behalf of the young historian. Schiller was finally sum- moned to take the chair of Historical Professor at Htat. 30. the University of Jena. It was not without modest reluctance, and a sense of his own deficiencies in the details of history that he undertook this office. His reception was such as might be anticipated—Four hundred Students crowded to the Lecture-room—their presence and applause animated him—and his voice, naturally not strong, filled the Hall.
Amongst the German youth of his day, Schiller is the favourite ; he was then, says Hoffmeister, “the idol.” His very defects as a Lecturer were not those on which young men would be severe or discriminating critics. Through the fire and the vigour which animated his language and his delivery, his ardent listeners were not likely to detect that rhetorical redundance, in which genius is too apt to conceal deficient information, He came too fresh to his task, He
60 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
was acquiring one day, the knowledge he imparted the next. His facts had not been sufficiently meditated, nor his views sufficiently sobered down.
The society of Jena was more congenial to Schiller than that of Weimar—here, nothing was courtly and restrained ; here were found the greatest variety of manners—the most diversified freedom of opinion. To this illustrious University flocked the Professors and the Students from so many quarters, that each part of Germany found its representatives. The streets swarmed with all varieties of costume; the halls re- sounded with all distinctions of dialect. From the coarsest manners to the most super-refined ; from the most limited information and the narrowest prejudice, to the profoundest wisdom—to the most liberal knowledge of the world; all forms of intellect were here mixed and confounded. Whata school for a man, who had yet to complete his education by the study of his kind—not in books, but in actual life! The true Poet must divide his existence between solitude and the crowd. :
Schiller’s correspondence with Charlotte continued; and his chivalrous devotion, the habitual intercourse with his noble and beautiful nature, had produced, at last, its full effect upon his young admirer. The old affection was effaced—the new affection confirmed. Charlotte owned to her sister,—“ that she had so lived in’ Schiller—he had so contributed to the formation of her mind, and to her happiness—that it seemed to her impossible to divide her lot from his.”
The sisters were now staying at Lauchstiidt; thither Schiller (escaping from Jena) visited them ; a full explanation of what indeed must have been long since clear to both hearts, took place. Charlotte confessed, that the love she had in- spired was not unreturned, and promised, one day or other, to become his wife. True, as yet, it was hope deferred,—the. fortunes of Schiller were yet to be confirmed—the consent of Madame von Lengefeld to be obtained. But it was enough for the present to feel that love was won. ‘ How different,” thus writes Schiller himself to Charlotte, on his return to Jena—* how different is all around me now, since in each step of my life thine image meets me: like a halo thy love hovers over me; like a fair midst does it clothe the face of
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 61
Nature. I return from a walk ; in the vast space of Nature, as in my lonely chamber, it is ever the selfsame atmosphere in which I move; and the fairest landscape serves but for the fairer mirror of one ever-enduring image. The remem- brance of thee leads me back to the All; the All reminds me, in turn, of thee. Never so freely and so boldly could I traverse, in my enthusiasm, through the world of Thought as now that my soul has found a possession—a home; and no jonger incurs the danger to lose itself in its wanderings: I know where again to find myself—in thee !”
At last came the long yearned-for holidays. Schiller was released from his task; he fled back to the neighbourhood of Rudolstadt ; he occupied his old chamber; he lived back his old life; but in the brighter air of hope assured and of love returned. As yet, however, the lovers could only hold un- witnessed interviews by stealth ; and to this date we must refer the exquisite love poems of the “ Mystery” and the “ Assionation.” At last, but not till after long and severe probation, Schiller’s hopes were crowned. After the failure of various schemes and projects, he obtained from the Duke of Saxe Weimar an appointment as Professor Extraordinary, with a salary of 200 rix dollars; and he now boldly applied to Madame yon Lengefeld for the hand of her daughter. His suit was supported with zeal and earnestness by Madame von Stein, who had great influence with Madame von Lengefeld, and by M. von Dalberg,* elder brother to the Superintendent of the Mannheim stage, a nobleman of the highest rank, and the most admirable character. Madame von Lengefeld was moyed by these instances: her prejudices gave way before the happiness of her daughter and the distinction of the suitor,
The title of Hofrath, conferred on Schiller by the Court of Meiningen, in the beginning of 1790, perhaps served yet more to content the good lady with herdaughter’s 1790. choice; and on the 20th February, 1790, after an intimate acquaintance of three years, the lovers were united.
- * Often confounded with Wolfgang Von Dalberg, the Mannheim Baron; but an infinitely better person. It was to the elder brother that Schiller addressed the verses which accompanied the copy of ‘William Tell;” not, as Mr. Carlyle supposes, to Wolfgang, who deserved no such honour,
62 LIFE OF SOHILLER.
Never was marriage, if we except only the narrowness of pecuniary circumstances, formed under more favourable auspices. The very age of the parties was that, in each, in which affection promises to be most durable, and the choice best considered. Schiller was about one-and-thirty, Charlotte about four-and-twenty : the length of the courtship had but served to found attachment upon esteem, while it angmented it by delay. The characters of bride and bridegroom were in the most perfect harmony ; where they differed, it was but for each to improve the other; the refinement of the woman softened the impetuous man; the noble fire of the man warmed and elevated the gentle woman, Schiller was now really formed for the home he had so long sighed for. With all that depth of feeling and singleness of heart which are common to those fond of solitude, he now combined much which intercourse with mankind alone can give. As all mis- anthropy had fled from his heart, so all cynicism was now banished from his manners and ‘his dress. He could no longer have been open to the caricature of the Dresden actress ; and, independent of his fame, his genius and his noble heart, a vainer woman than Charlotte von Lengefeld might have ‘been proud of her choice.
CHAPTER IX.
SCHILLER’S ILLNESS—THE SENSATION PRODUCED IN DENMARK BY THE REPORT OF HIS DEATH—THE LETTER ADDRESSED TO HIM BY THE PRINCE VON HOLSTEIN AUGUSTENBURG, AND COUNT VON SCHIMMELMANN—SCHILLER’S REPLY—— HIS STUDY OF KANT—SCHILLER REVISITS HIS NATIVE LAND.
ScHILLER was not disappointed in the hopes he had formed of domestic happiness. A few months after his marriage he exclaims in his correspondence: “ Life is quite a different thing by the side of a beloved wife, than so forsaken and
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 63
alone—eyen in summer. . . . The world again clothes itself around me in poetic forms ; old feelings are again awakening in my breast... . Fate has conquered the difficulties for me. From the future I expect everything. . . . I think my very youth will be renewed, an inward poetic life will give it me again.” * But, alas! even as these lines were written, that bodily enemy for which the mind so rarely prepares itself was at hand. Disease struck root into a con- stitution always delicate; he was attacked with a dis- 1791. order in the chest ; and though he recovered from its immediate severity, the head of the shaft was left behind. He never entirely recovered his health—from that time con- sumption rankled within.
He had been labouring more intensely than ever: to such aman, the consciousness that on his toils rested the worldly comforts of a wife who had resigned a Court for a scholar’s roof stimulated industry into fever. He was immersed in severe studies connected with the historical pursuits to which he was now devoted, but the first and most peremptory in- junction of his physician was to repose his intellect... . Repose—and his very subsistence rested on activity! At this crisis, however, one of those rare acts of munificence which are the godlike prerogatives of wealth, came to brighten poverty. and comfort genius. A report of Schiller’s death had been spread abroad: it had reached Denmark, at the moment when a princely circle of the Poet’s admirers had resolyed to repair to Hellebeck, near Copenhagen, and amidst its sublime and enchanting scenery, to hold a court in his honour, and chaunt his “‘ Hymn to Joy.” Amongst these were the Danish Poet, Baggesen; the Count Ernest von Schimmelmann; the Prince Christian von Holstein Augus- tenburg and his Princess. Their grief, as enthusiastic as their admiration, changed the meditated festivities into a funeral solemnity.
They met at Hellebeck, on the shore of the sea, opposite the high rocks of Sweden, and Baggesen began to read the hymn. Clarinets, horns, and flutes chimed in to the song of the chorus; two additional stanzas, in honour of the sup- posed dead, were chaunted, and may be thus translated ;
* Extracted from the translation in Carlyle’s ‘‘ Life.”
i
64 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
*« Hail to a friend, O choir of friends! ’ The dead we love shall live once more ; Bright to the groves of heaven ascends His soul: our lives it hovers o’er.
Chorus.—Lift your attesting hands on high ; Swear by this wine from Lands made free,* Till found once more in yonder sky ; - Faith to our brother’s memory.”
As the song ceased, all eyes wept.
Homage to the dead is a vulgar and idle tribute, if it come after neglect or injury to the living. The heart sickens at that mockery of admiration, which allowed Spenser to die of a broken heart, and threw copies of verses into his grave,— which suffered political vengeance to reduce Dryden to a bookseller’s drudge, and insisted on burying his dust in the sepulchre of kings. To Schiller’s biographers belongs the pleasing task of commemorating the only true homage ever rendered to a dead poet,—simply because the poet was not dead! No sooner was the report confuted, than the noble mourners exulted to exchange ceremonial honours to the life- less, for practical benefits to the living. A letter, from which we extract the purport, was sent to Schiller by the Prince von Augustenburg and Count Schimmelmann.
27th Nov. 1791.
‘Two friends, united through the citizenship of the world, send this letter to you—noble man! Both are unknown to you—both love you and revere. They find in your recent works the mind and the enthusiasm which knit the bond of their own friendship; by the perusal of those works they accustom themselves to regard the author as a member itself of their own union. Great was their grief at the report of his death ; their tears were not the scantiest of those which flowed from all good men by whom he was known and loved. The lively interest with which you have inspired us must excuse us from the appearance of oflicious importunity. They tell us that your health suffers from too severe an application, and needs for some time an entire repose. This repose your pecuniary circwnstances alone forbid you to enjoy. Will you
* T.e., French wine,
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 65
grudge us the delight of contributing to your relief? We entreat you to receive, for three years, an annual gift of a thousand dollars.” * The writers proceed with dignity to touch upon their rank, and to imply a delicate hope that it may not prove an obstacle to their request ;—they desire not to wound his spirit of independence, or parade the ostentation of patronage. ‘ We know no pride but this,—to be men !— citizens in that great Republic whose boundaries extend beyond single generations—beyond the limits of earth itself.” They proceed to invite him into Denmark: “ For we are not the only ones here who know and love you; and if, after the restoration of your health, you desire to enter into the service of our state, it would be easy for us to gratify such an incli- nation. Yet think us not so selfish as to make such a change in your residence a condition: we leave our suggestion to your free choice ; we desire to preserve to Humanity its in- structor, and to this desire every other consideration is sub- ordinate.”
There may be in this letter—which the gratitude of Literature should render no less imperishable than the works of him to whom it is addressed—something of the romantic exaggeration, in tone and phrase, which betrays the influence of the French cosmopolites; but that influence here affected men of noble hearts, who desired to have an excuse in philan- thropy for individual beneficence ; not, as with the maudlin Confraternities of France, an excuse, in the citizenship of the world,—from doing good to a single creature !
The effect such a letter produced on Schiller no one can deseribe—every one can imagine. Nothing but the declara- tion of his physicians that a visit to so northern a climate would be fatal, prevented him from hurrying to benefactors go delicate and so munificent. In a letter to Baggesen, the depth and manliness of his gratitude are apparent ; and this letter is the more interesting, inasmuch as it expresses those views of the dignity of letters, and that repugnance to regard art a. a livelihood, which may serve the ambition of youthful genius at once with warning and emulation.
‘‘ From the cradle of my ‘intellect till now,” writes Schiller,
* About 1507. sterling; a sum which, at Weimar, would go perhaps three times as far as it would in England. F
66 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
“have I struggled with Fate ; and since I knew how to prize intellectual liberty, I have been condemned to want it. A rash step, ten years since, divided me from every other prac- tical livelihood, but that of a writer. I had given myself to this calling before I had made proof of its demands, or sur- veyed its difficulties. The necessity of pursuing it befel me before I was fitted for it by knowledge and intellectual ma- turity. That I felt this—that I did not bound my ideal of an author's duty to those narrow limits within which I was con- fined—I recognise as a favour of Heaven. . . As unripe, and far below that ideal which lived within me, I beheld all which I gave to the world.” With feeling and with modesty Schiller proceeded to enlarge upon the conflict between his circum- stances and his aspirations . . . . to touch upon the melancholy with which he was saddened by the contempla- tion of the great master-pieces of art, ripened only to their perfection by that happy leisure denied to him. »‘‘ What had I not given,” he exclaims, “for two or three tranquil years ; that, free from all the toils of an author, I could render my- self only to the study, the cultivation of my conception,— the ripening of my ideal.” He proceeds to observe that in the German literary world, a man could not unite the labour for subsistence with compliance with the demands of lofty art; that for ten years he had struggled to unite both; and that to make the union only in some measure possible, had cost him his health . . . . “Ina moment when life began to display its whole value—when I was about to knit a gentle and eternal bond between the reason and the phantasy—when I girded myself to a new enterprise in the service of art, death drew near. This danger indeed passed away; but I waked only to an altered life, to renew, with slackened strength and diminished hopes, my war with Fate. So the letter received from Denmark found me! ... . I attain at last the intel- lectual liberty so long and so eagerly desired. . . . . I win leisure, and through leisure I may perhaps recover my lost health ; if not, at least for the future, the trouble of my mind will not give nourishment to disease. If my lot does not permit me to confer beneficence in the same manner as my benefactors, at least, I will.seek it, where alone it is in my power,—and make that seed which they scatter, unfold
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 67
itself in me, to a fairer blossom for humanity.” And he did so!
Thus enabled to enrich while he relaxed his mind, Schiller devoted himself with ardour to the study of Kant.* With the closer knowledge of this philosopher—who, whatever his defects, certainly did more than any other reasoner to coun- teract the hard and narrow scepticism of the French Encyclo- pedists,—to -bring imagination to the aid of Faith, and at once to enlarge the tolerance of the sectarian and calm the doubts of the seeker—really commences the Third Period of Schiller’s intellectual career, though his biographers postpone its date to the time when its fruits became practically appa- rent. From that period a Catholic, all-mild, all-comprehen- sive religion surrounds his writings as with a lucid atmosphere, and his craving for the serene Ideal life loses itself in the Christian’s Heaven.
In June, 1792, Schiller and his wife visited Korner at Dresden: on their return they received Schiller’s mother and youngest sister, Nannette, whom he had not seen for eight years. The tender associations thus revived led the mind of the exile back to his Suabian home. In August, 1793, the Schillers, therefore, commenced an excursion to the Poet’s father-land.t At Heidelberg, Schiller met once more the object of his early love, Margaret Schwan, now like himself married to another; he saw her with a deep emotion, which his wife comprehended too well to resent; he who sees, un- moved, the one in whom he formerly garnered up his hopes of home, can never constitute the happiness of the home he has found with another.
At Heilbronn, unsurpassed, even in Germany, for the pe- culiar beauty of its landscape, the family of Schiller met the long-lost wanderer. He stood amongst them 1793. no longer a rude stripling, a penniless exile ;—but the favourite of princes, the idol of a people—his hopes ful-
1791—92. Aitat. 32.
* Conz, Professor of Poetry and Eloquence at Tiibingen, who visited Schiller in 1792, says that he was then thoroughly absorbed in Kant. Conz gives a gee picture of Schiller’s simple and frugal life. ‘‘ He was,’’ says the Professor, “‘ Humanity itself, and his excellent wife a pattern of complaisance and modesty.’
+ About this time Schiller’s sister-in-law, according to the German law, annulled her marriage with M. von Beulwitz. She afterwards
F2
68 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
filled —his destiny assured ; crowned already with renown, and calm in the certainty of triumphs more splendid yet to come. He had reached the time when, without humiliation, he could humble himself to his native sovereign. With Schiller’s wild love for liberty, he never was without that loyalty, which is almost inborn with the children of the North. He wrote to the Duke of Wiirtemberg such a letter as that loyalty might dictate; he received no direct reply, but was informed, privately, “that the Duke would be ignorant of his movements if he re-entered Wirtemberg.” Schiller“then repaired to Ludwigsburg, where he was in the immediate neighbourhood of his father’s house, and under the medical care of one of his early friends, von Hoven, now Court physician, Here he first enjoyed the hap- piness he had long coveted ; he became a father. His earnest, manly, and affectionate nature was precisely that which finds children at once a charge and a blessing. Now he would play for the hour together with his ‘‘ Gold son, his heart’s Karl,* as he named his first-born ; now shut himself up to study Quintilian, on the plan of edu- cation to be pursued,
Those who remembered the youth of Schiller were startled by the change which years and circumstance had effected ; all that was sharp and hard in his character was gone. His early fire was softened—it warmed more and alarmed less; there was far greater grace in his demeanour. His ancient neglect of appearance and dress was replaced by a decent elegance ; his even humour scarcely allowed them to recognise the impetuous and stormy stripling they had known ten years before.t But, alas! with the mental change had come the physical; the features were drawn and hollow, the com- plexion wan and haggard. Illness frequently confined him to his bed—Kant and Homer his companions; and at this time the grand outline of “ Wallenstein,” before chalked out, began to receive colour and fulness; he devoted himself to
Sept. 14, 1798.
married Wilhelm yon Wolzogen, attached to her, as we have before said, from his earliest youth. She also joined the Schillers at Heilbronn.
* Conz. Schwab. Hoffmeister.
t Von Hoven, ap. Mad. von Wolzogen,
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 69
its composition principally at night, diversifying the poetical task with the first sketch of his “ Philosophical Essay upon sthetical Cultivation.”
During his residence at Ludwigsburg the Grand Duke Karl died.* Schiller was asked by his father to congratulate the Duke’s successor in a poem—we oe need scarcely say that he refused. He could not : seem to rejoice at the death of a man who had been both his benefactor and his persecutor. Schiller was never more him- self than when, standing by his sovereign’s grave, with Von Hoven, he spoke thus touchingly :—‘ Here rests this once active restless man! He had great faults as a Prince, greater yet as an individual. But the first were overwhelmed by his high qualities, and the remembrance of the last must be buried with the dead. I say to thee, therefore, if thou hearest one speak of him disparagingly, as he lies there— trust that man not /—he is no good, at least, he is no noble man.” At Ludwigsburg he formed an acquaintance with Cotta the bookseller, which had considerable influence on his later labours. In connection with this publisher, a new literary periodical, the ‘‘ Horen,” was chalked out, and a new political journal, intended to take the lead over all its Ger- man contemporaries. Of this last Schiller proposed to assume the editorship ; but his growing disinclination for objects less noble than the art of which Philosophy had brought him clearer and sublimer views, induced him happily to resign this notion. The political journal was, however, set up by the publisher, and exists to-day in high repute, under the well-known name of the ‘Allgemeine Zeitung.”
* Biographers have raised a doubt if Schiller had removed from Heilbronn to Ludwigsburg before the Duke’s death. But it seems quite clear, that he was at Ludwigsburg early in September, since von Hoven, who resided at Ludwigsburg, attended his wife in her confine- ment,—Sept. 14th.
70 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
CHAPTER X.
VATA R ID. J2IGISISD IY
THE HOREN AND MUSENALMANACH—TWO DEATHS IN SCHILLER’S FAMILY—-RETURN FROM PHILOSOPHY TO POETRY-——-THE SUMMER-HOUSE—INFLUENCE OF GOETHE ON SCHILLER’S GENIUS—-APPEARANCE OF WALLENSTEIN.
In May, 1794, Schiller returned to Jena, his body worn to a shadow ;* his mind more than ever vigorous and resolved. Here he found the charm of a friendship more complete and sympathetic, in both intellect and taste, than he had yet known. Wilhelm yon Humboldt had settled at Jena, witha charming wife, whom he had lately married ;—the two families contracted the closest intimacy. The undertaking of the ‘‘ Horen” was now seriously commenced, as a monthly Periodical, with the assistance of the greatest names in Germany,—Goethe, Herder, Jacobi, Matthisson, &c. In this Journal Schiller desired to consummate an idea which had long haunted him, and which had been but imperfectly developed in the Thalia. It may be said that this idea had grown out of the vast and luminous humanity of Herder, and ripened under the influence to which Herder was most opposed—that of Kant. The journal was intended to merge all that belonged to sect, to party, and the day, and devote itself to all that could interest the common family of man; so far, this was akin to Herder; but Schiller sought the interest, not in broad and popular topics, but in that /Esthetical cultivation—that development of Ideal Beauty, which, since his study of Kant, he regarded as the flower and apex of human accomplishment. But the enterprise of this periodical, memorable in much, is so principally on account of the union it established between Goethet and Schiller— an union inestimable to both, and therefore to the world.
* Goethe thought, on seeing Schiller, that he had scarcely a fort- night’s life in him.—HorrmristER. EcxERMANN.
t We need scarcely say that Goethe’s fame and position had prodi- giously increased since the publication of Schiller’s ‘ Robbers.’’
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 71
Hitherto, these eminent men had moved in separate orbits; and Goethe’s calm kindness to his great rival had not advanced to intimacy ; but now the friendship Goethe felt for Schiller’s wife, whom he had known. from her childhood ; the ties formed by acquaintances in common ; and that power of attracting others to his designs, which Goethe himself has remarked in Schiller ; drew them closely together, and served to form a bond which death could only dissolve. Goethe says, with noble candour, in his correspondence: “TI really know not what might have become of me, without the impulse received from Schiller;”—and he proceeds to enumerate the writings which had never been produced, but for the co-operation of the only man, from whom—had Goethe been one fraction less than Goetlie—he would have been kept aloof by jealousy and alarm. Into this journal Schiller, appointed chief Editor, poured some of the finest thoughts to be found in his prose writings; embodied in the form of philosophical criticism. Here too, and in the ‘ Musen- almanach,” an annual publication, also undertaken in con- junction with Goethe, somewhat later, appeared the immortal lyrics, which perhaps established the most popular and indisputable of Schiller’s claims to admiration, purely and singly as the Poet. In this last Periodical finally flashed forth those Epigrams, under the name of Xenien ; sometimes personal and caustic, sometimes thoughtful and ideal, which set the Literary World of Germany in a blaze. The con- nection between Goethe and Schiller had excited much jealous hostility amongst many lesser writers ; an hostility wreaked upon the “ Horen,” and avenged in the ‘‘ Musen- almanach” by these laconic sarcasms. The sensation they excited was prodigious ; though they can inspire but a luke- warm interest in the public of a foreign country.* Many of the more personal epigrams Schiller had the grace to with-
* Nevertheless, their effect upon German literature yet endures. Mr. Carlyle observes—(“ Miscellanies,” vol. i. p. 67)—that ‘the war of all the few good heads in the nation with all the many bad ones, began in Schiller’s Musenalmanach for 1797 ;”” and adds, that, “since the age of Luther, there has scarcely been such strife and stir in the intellect of Europe.” We do not quite subscribe to Mr. Carlyle’s admiration for ‘the new critical doctrine,” which dates from the Xenien.
72 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
draw from the subsequent collection of his poems; and in this withdrawal he could afford to sacrifice what critics have termed his best. In the midst of these labours he had the misfortune to lose his youngest sister, Nannette, a girl 1796. of promise and beauty ; and in the same year, after a lingering disease, his father. He felt both losses acutely ; the last perhaps the most: but in his letters it pleases us to see the philosopher return to the old childlike faith in God, the reliance in Divine goodness for support in grief, the trust in Divine mercy for the life to come. For it has been.remarked with justice that, while Schiller’s reason is often troubled in regard to the fundamental truths of religion, his heart is always clear. The moment death strikes upon his affections, the phraseology of the schools vanishes from his lips—its cavils and scruples from his mind: And he comforts himself and his fellow mourners with the simple lessons of Gospel resignation and Gospel hope.
About this period Schiller began to turn wearily from the studies which had for years occupied his intellect and in- fluenced his genius. He felt that he had given himself too much to abstract speculation, too little to the free poetic impulse. “It is high time,” he says, in a letter to Goethe, ‘that for a while I should close the Philosophy Shop.” He returned with ardour to the grand outline of his Wallenstein, commenced years ago ; long suspended, never forgotten. He yearned for some escape from the learned and arid atmosphere around him, some quiet retreat in which he could be alone with his genius—a summer-house with a garden! At length, this modest desire which literally seemed to haunt him was realised. Not far from Jena, to the south-west of the town, he purchased a garden, and built himself a kind of pavilion, with a single chamber. The site commanded a wide and noble prospect. Placed on the brow of a hill, up which the garden climbed, the summer-house overlooked the valley of the Saale, and the hanging pines of a neighbouring forest.* “There,” says Goethe, in his Prologue to the Lay of the Bell—
* The house exists no more; upon its site is placed an urn dedicated to the memory of the Poet.— Donne.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 73
‘¢ There, deck’d he the fair garden watch-tower ; whence Listening he loved the voice of Stars to hear, Which to the no less eyer-living sense Made music, mystic, yet through mystery clear!”
Here then, in the summer months, did he devote himself, with a passion more fervent than in youth, to the divine faculty in creation. Often was the light seen at night streaming from the window, and the curious might even catch a glimpse of his tall shadowy figure walking to and fro the chamber ; now halting to write down the verses which he first declaimed aloud, or to support the overstrained physical power, with the fatal excitements, for which our own Byron had more excuse, and has found less mercy. It was his custom to have placed on the table not only strong coffee and chocolate, but champagne, and the far more irritating and pernicious wines of the Rhine.* Thus would he labour the night through, till sleep, or rather exhaustion, came on at morning ; and he never rose till late. Dearly purchased, indeed, was the luxury of these midnight watches ; but who shall conceive their intense delight? Thus he speaks himself in his letter to Goethe, May, 1797, on his first occupation of his new abode :—“ I greet you from my garden, on which I entered this day: a fair landscape surrounds me; the sun goes gently down; and the nightingales begin their warbles. All around serves to render me serene ; and my first evening in my own ground and soil is of the fairest omen !”
It happened, perhaps fortunately, that, in the summer of 1797, Wilhelm von Humboldt left Jena for Italy. The influence that this eminent but over-refining intellect had exercised on Schiller, had not been on the whole favourable to his poetical genius ;f it had withdrawn him too much from the broad and popular field in which poetry, of the highest order and most extended empire, should seck its
* More irritating and pernicious, if the champagne was genuine— not so if, as is most probable, the champagne was manufactured in Germany ;—sparkling poison, which no man since Mithridates could drink habitually and live long!
+t W. v. Humboldt, who was a devoted Kantian, seems to have supposed that poetry should be a riddle. It is always in the Abstract that he digs for the Beautiful.
74 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
themes, into the “Realm of Shadow,”—an obscure and metaphysical idea. With the departure of Humboldt a new and far happier direction was given to Schiller’s eager energies. More delivered to the luminous influence of Goethe, he became more imbued with his art. A friendly emulation with Goethe led to the production of Schiller’s greatest, though simplest, poetical productions—his Ballads. Goethe had already shown what epic interest and what subtle wisdom might be given to this form of verse: Schiller caught the inspiration, and composed his ‘‘ Diver,” the sublimest ballad in the world. This was followed by ‘‘ The Glove,” **The Cranes of Ibycus,” &. &. The years 1797-98 were signalised by these performances, in which the ripest art of Goethe seems united with the earliest force of Schiller.
Meanwhile, “ Wallenstein ” still, though slowly, advanced to its elaborate completion. Schiller grudged no pains, and neglected no study, which might serve to fulfil in this great work, that ideal of excellence, for the achievement of which the necessary leisure had been so desired. _ He plunged into the recesses of astrology, and consulted the dreams of the Cabalists, in order to treat with conscientious accuracy, and invest with solemn dignity, the favourite superstition of his hero.* Finally, in January 1799, after great preparation, the first portion of ‘‘ Wallenstein,” the ‘ Piccolomini,” was produced at Weimar. This was followed by the “Death of Wallenstein,” in April. If on the boards the interest of these parts of the great whole was not so intense as Schiller’s earlier dramas, he was fortunate in the cordial support of the few who ultimately decide the judgment of the many: the perusal of the work, subsequently published entire, served to deepen and to widen general admiration: the more “‘ Wallenstein” was examined and discussed, the more its profound beauty grew upon the world. Lony after its publication, Goethe compared it to a wine, which wins the taste in proportion to itsage. ‘This work,” says Tieck, “at once rich and profound, is a monu- ment for all times, of which Germany may be proud; and a
1799. Aitat. 40.
* Schiller was fond, for their own sake, of such ultra-philosophical inquiries. When at Heilbronn, 1793, he took much interest in animal magnetism.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 75
national feeling—a native sentiment—is reflected from this pure mirror, teaching us a greater sense of what we are, and what we were.” In fact, from that time Schiller became the National Poet of all Germany.
CHAPTER XI.
RESIDENCE AT WEIMAR—MARY STUART—MAID OF ORLEANS— BRIDE OF MESSINA——RECEPTION AT THE LEIPSIC THEATRE —DEATH OF SCHILLER’S MOTHER—HIS LIFE AND HABITS —HE IS ENNOBLED—ACQUAINTANCE WITH MADAME DE STAEL,
In the same year, 1799, by the advice of his physicians, Schiller removed to Weimar; the Grand Duke awarded him a pension of 1000 dollars, with a declaration that it should be doubled if illness should interfere with his other resources. His pecuniary circumstances were now competent to his moderate wants. ‘‘ Wallenstein” had brought him ample remuneration ; the periodicals with which he was connected yielded a regular and liberal income. Nevertheless, his activity increased as the ruder necessities for exertion were diminished. Vast schemes were constantly before him. His genius itself became to him that spur which Poverty is to the genius of less earnest men. His play of “ Maria Stuart,” and “ The Lay of the Bell,” long premeditated, were his next productions ; the last the greatest of his lyrics ; the first the poorest of the dramas conceived in his riper years. To an Englishman nothing can be less satisfactory than Schiller’s character of our great Elizabeth; and history is violated for insufficient causes, and from an indistinct and imperfect ideal. Madame de Staél thought more highly of the Tragedy than it deserved, precisely because of its defects. The Mary and the Elizabeth of Schiller have much of the shallowness and the tinsel of French heroines.* The public
* A. W. Schlegel, nevertheless, preferred, or affected to prefer, in many important respects, the ‘‘ Maria Stuart” to the ‘‘ Wallenstein.”
76 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
for once judged accurately in admiring the scattered beauties of the piece, and condemning it as a whole. But sickness of body may perhaps have conduced to the faults of this play. After Schiller’s death, this note, in his handwriting, was found: “The year 1800 I was very ill. Amidst pain was
_* Mary Stuart’ completed.” But from this single fall Schiller’s genius recovered itself with the bound of a Titan. The lovely image of ‘The Maid of Orleans” haunted him. Already, with the commencement of the new year 1801, three acts of this masterpiece of elevated romance were composed. In the autumn of the same year, during a visit to his friend Korner at Dresden, he laboured at the no less magnificent “‘ Bride of Messina,” unequalled as a lyrical tragedy, despite the capital mistake of an attempt to restore to the practical stage the classic chorus. From Dresden he went to Leipsic, and was present at the performance of “ The Maid of Orleans.” Here one of those signal triumphs, which so rarely await living genius, awaited him. Scarce had the drop-scene fallen on the first act, than the house resounded with the cry, ‘ Hs lebe Friedrich Schiller!” The cry was swelled by all the force of the orchestra. After the performance the whole crowd collected in the broad place before the theatre to behold the Poet. Every head was bared as he passed along ; while men lifted their children in their arms, to show the pride of Germany to the new generation—crying out, ‘‘ Dieser ist es ” —“ That is he !”
From Leipsic Schiller returned to Weimar, where ‘* The Maid of Orleans” soon found its way to the boards ; but its most gorgeous representation was at Berlin, where the New Theatre commenced with its performance on a scale of grandeur unprecedented there, and which has never been equalled since, even on the London Stage, under the direction of our great Artist-Actor.
Schiller and Goethe were now almost inseparable. To- gether they directed the management of the Weimar Theatre, in which Schiller still entertained ideas of Dramatic Dignity too lofty for the social life of the moderns. Still did his manhood desire that for which his boyhood had been destined —the Vocation of the Preacher ;—and the Stage still but suggested to him the office of the Pulpit. “The Pulpit and
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 17
the Stage are the only places for us,” said he. He loved the Theatre ; it was the sole public entertainment he habitually frequented. He was fond of the society of Actors. He used to invite them to supper at the Stadthaus, after the first, or even a more than usually successful, performance of one of his pieces. But generally, on returning from the Theatre, his mind was excited, and his° emulation fired: And the midnight lamp at Weimar, as at Jena, attested that prodigious energy, which no infirmity slackened, and no glory could appease,
At this time he purchased a small house on the Esplanade _ —associated indeed with melancholy auspices : the same day he entered it his mother died. He felt in this affliction the rupture of the last tie of youth. He wrote to his sister— ‘Ah, dear Sister, so both the beloved Parents are gone from us, and the oldest bond that fastened us to life is rent! O let us, we three, (including his other sister,) alone surviving of our father’s house, let us cling yet closer to each other; forget not that thou hast a loving brother. I remember vividly the days of our youth when we were all in all to each other. From that early existence our fate has divided us ; but attachment—confidence, remain unchanged—unchange- able.”
In his own circle lay his purest and best comfort. He loved to associate himself with the infant sports of his children. Many a time was he found with his boy playing* on the floor, Around him were assembled such friends as Genius rarely finds—men dear alike to his heart, and worthy of his intellect, At the Court, he was grown familiar, and though he frequented it less than his royal friends desired, it was no longer made displeasing to his tastes by the reserve of an inexperienced pride.
To his intellectual life Goethe had grown necessary,—while his more household friends were his old College acquaintance, Wilhelm von Wolzogen, and Wolzogen’s wife,—the eloquent and enthusiastic sister of his own. But, withal, his passion for solitary wanderings was unabated. Often was he seen in the lonely walks of the Park, stopping abruptly to note down
* At the game called “Lion and Dog,” on all-fours,
78 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
his thoughts in his tablets; often seated amidst the gloomy beeches and cypresses that clothe the crags, leading towards the Royal Pleasure House, (the Rémische Haus,) and listening to the murmur of the neighbouring brook.
In 1802, he received from the Emperor of Austria a patent of nobility ; it was obtained through the unsolicited influence of the Duke of Weimar. He esteemed the honour at its just price—not with the vulgar scorn of the would-be cynic, still less with the elation of a vain convert from Republicanism. It pleased “ Lolo and the children.”
In the following year Madame de Staél visited Weimar, where her unequalled powers of conversation were more appreciated than in London. She herself has, in her ‘‘ Allemagne,” given us an interesting sketch of Schiller. He seems at first to have been more startled with the readi- ness of her powers, than charmed with their brilliancy, or penetrated with their depth. He says of her, not without justice, that her “ Naturel and her feeling were better than her metaphysics.” He is not quite pleased with that French clearness of understanding that made her averse to the Ideal Philosophy, which she believed led only to mysticism and superstition. He asserts somewhat too positively, ‘ for what we call Poetry, she has no sense.” He complains that “she can appreciate only in such works, the passionate, the rhe- torical, the universal or popular. She does not prize the false, but she does not always recognise the true.”
In a subsequent letter to his sister, Schiller appears to have found the illustrious Frenchwoman improved upon acquaint- ance, for he there expresses his admiration with more cordiality, and less reserve. He now finds her “a Pheno- menon in her sex—for esprit and eloquence equalled but by few men—uniting with all the delicacy or finesse, obtained by intercourse with the great world, that rare earnestness and depth of mind obtained by most only through solitude.” *
* In the sixth volume of the ‘‘ Correspondence between Goethe and Schiller,” and in Goethe’s own “Tag- und Jahres-Heft,” we may nevertheless perceive, that Madame de Staél was to both these illus- trious Germans somewhat too oppressively brilliant and loquacious,— somewhat approaching occasionally to that social infliction for which we have no phrase so expressive as that which one of our most eminent
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 79
In truth, whatever were the errors of Madame de Staél, there was in her character and her genius, a genuine nobleness akin to Schiller’s ; and though much of her fame, founded on her conversational eloquence, passed away with herself, her works still attest that union of imagination with intellect—enthu- siasm with sense, which is never found but in minds of a great order, and in hearts which may indeed be misled by passion, but in which honesty and goodness are as instincts.
CHAPTER XII.
‘WILHELM TELL ??—ILL HEALTH—LAST SICOKNESS—DEATH—- BURIAL.
AND now, in that mysterious circle in which the life of genius so frequently appears to move, Schiller, nearing the close of his career, returned to the inspirations with which it had commenced. His first rude Drama had burned with the wild and half-delirious fever of Liberty ;—Liberty, purified and made rational, gave theme and substance to his last The euthanasia of the genius which had composed the ‘‘ Robbers,” was the ‘‘ Wilhelm Tell.” Goethe has observed, indeed, that, although the idea of freedom runs through all the works of Schiller, the earlier embodied the physical freedom, the latter the ideal. But this cannot fairly be regarded as the distinc- tion between “The Robbers” and “ Wilhelm Tell.” It is no ideal liberty for which the simple mountaineers, whom Schiller has drawn in outlines so large and muscular, aspire and struggle ; it is physical, practical, homely liberty—liberty of life and soil. It is this very practicability which really divides the “‘ Tell” from ‘‘ The Robbers ;” in the last heaves the perturbed sigh for a social revolution,—for some liberty contrary to all the forms and the very substance of the organised world ; it is an unreasoning passion that would risk
Englishmen somewhat bluntly applied to her :—“ The cleverest woman in the world for such a bore, and the greatest bore in the world for so clever a woman!”
80 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
a chaos for the chance that again may go forth the words— “Let there be light!” But in “Tell” the idea of liberty, intense and visible in itself, is yet circumscribed to the nar- rowest possible boundaries; itis but the struggle of an honest and universal people for independence, without one whisper of ambition, without one desire of revenge: it is a revolution portrayed in an anti-revolutionary spirit; throughout the whole breathes the condemnation of the French anarchy ; it is an evoking of the true Florimel that, beside her living and human Beauty, the false Florimel may dissolve into snow.*
In the spring of 1804, Schiller visited Berlin, at which city he was received with signal honours; in July we find him at Jena, where, while his wife was happily confined of her youngest daughter, his constitution was severely shaken by a feverish cold. He suffered much and frequently during the rest of the year, but his mental activity was undiminished : besides some of his minor poems, such as ‘The Alp Hunter,” and “‘ The Lay of the Hill,” he was employed on a Transla- tion of “ Racine’s Phédre,” and the outline of the Tragedy of *‘Demetrius,” never completed.
He also, about this time or very little later, conceived the scheme of a Drama which, if suitably executed, would have been, perhaps, the most extraordinary of all his various com- positions. The subject was to be the Hench Police—and the plot to have embraced all the evils and abuses of modern civilisa- tion. Such a work would indeed be of wide compass and noble uses, but it seems to require the space of a prose fiction, and it is difficult to comprehend how it could have been con- tracted into the limits, and expressed in the form, of a Poetical Drama. It is noticeable, that the singular sympathy with mankind which Schiller possessed, often makes him the father of ideas in others with whom no direct communication can be traced,—the seeds that spring up so lavishly in his humane intellect are dispersed by invisible winds to grow on every soil, This idea of depicting, by literary portraiture, the social ills of Civilisation and France, is the main stock of more than half the French writers of our own day.—In Balzac, in Sand, in Sue, in Souvestre, living in the midst of the great whirl-
* See, amongst the Translations, Schiller’s own Poem, entitled “William Tell, ” in which his object is brietly and simply explained, ,
LIFE OF SOHILLER. 81
pool—are heard the echoes of the Thought which was only breathed inaudibly within the heart of the Poet-student of the tranquil Weimar. And with these recurrences to the peculiar inspirations of his youth,—the desire of travel returned pro- phetically to one about to depart for ever from all earthly homes. He traced routes upon the chart, and spoke of plans and pilgrimages never to be realised.
The re-perusal of “‘ Herder’s Ideas on the History of Man ” —to which (though he was often largely indebted to it) he did not before do justice *—seems also to have deepened his meditations upon Life, Nature, and Eternal Providence. “Christianity,” he said to his gifted sister-in-law, “has stamped a new impression on Humanity, while it revealed a sublimer prospect to the soul.” According to this witness, Madame von Wolzogen—the best, for the most household, evidence—his faith increased as his life drew nearer to its goal.
At length, after many preparatory warnings—visitings, under the name of catarrhal fever, of his constitutional : pulmonary disease—Schiller was stricken with his last ie illness on the 28th of April, 1805 ; Goethe, who was 3 just recovering from a dangerous illness, called on Schiller, ‘whom he found leaving his house for the Theatre. He was too unwell to accompany, too polished to detain him,—they parted for the last time at the threshold of Schiller’s door. At the close of the performance Schiller felt himself seized with a feverish attack. A young friend, Henry Voss (son of the celebrated Author of “ Luise,” &c.), led him home. On calling the next morning, Voss found him stretched on the sofa between sleep and waking. ‘“ Here I lie again!” he said in a hollow voice. As yet, however, he had no concep- tion of his danger ; he thought to have discovered a treatment to ensure his recovery. His mind for some days continued clear, and the chief regret he expressed was for the interrup- tion to “ Demetrius.” But on the 6th of May he began to
* He said to Madame von Wolzogen—“ I know not how it is, but this Book speaks to me after quite a new fashion,”’ Terder and Schiller were not very familiarly intimate—they were too like each other for cordial concurrence. Both were essentially earnest, and therefore the differences between them resisted compromise.
q
82 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
wander: on that day Voss, visiting him again, observed that his eyes were deep sunken; every nerve twitched con- vulsively ; they brought him some lemons, at which he caught eagerly, but laid them down again with a feeble hand. Delirium came on: he raved of soldiers and war; the word - Lichtenberg, or Leuchtenburg, (the former the name of an author whom he had been lately reading, the latter of a castle which he had long desired to visit) came often to his lips. On the evening of the 7th, his mind recovered; he wished to renew his customary conversations with his sister- in-law upon the proper theme and aims of tragedy; she prayed him to keep quiet : he answered, touchingly—‘‘True ; now, when no one understands me, and I no more under- stand myself, it is better that I should be silent.” Shortly before, he had concluded some talk on death with these striking words: ‘Death can be no evil, for it is universal.” And now the thought of eternity seems to have occupied his mind in his dreams ; for in sleep he exclaimed, “Is that your hell 1—is that your heaven?” He then raised his looks, and a soft smile came over his face. It was, perhaps, on awaking from this sleep that he used those memorable words—“ Now is life so clear !—so much is made clear and plain !”
In the evening he took some broth and said to his friends that “he thought that night to sleep well, with God’s will.” His faithful servant, who watched him, said that, during the night, he recited many lines from ‘‘ Demetrius,” and once he called on God to preserve him from a long and tedious death- bed.
On the morning of the 8th of May he woke up composed, and asked for his youngest child. She was brought to him. He took the infant’s hand in his own, and gazed at her long with a look of unspeakable sorrow. He then began to weep bitterly, kissed the young face with emotion, and beckoned to them to remove the child.
Towards the evening his sister-in-law approached his bed, and asked how he felt. ‘Better and better, calmer and calmer,” was his answer. He then longed once more to see the sun; they drew aside the curtains ; he looked serenely on the setting light. Nature received his farewell.
His sleep that night was disturbed; his mind again wan-
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 83
dered ; with the morning he had lost consciousness. He spoke incoherently, and chiefly in Latin. His last drink was champagne. Towards three in the afternoon came on the last exhaustion ; the breath began to fail. Towards four, he would have called for naphtha, but the last syllable died on his lips ;—finding himself speechless, he motioned’ that he wished to write something; but his hand could trace only three letters, in which was yet recognisable the distinct character of his writing. His wife knelt by his side; he pressed her hand. His sister-in-law stood with the physician at the foot of the bed, applying warm cushions to the cold feet. Suddenly a sort of electric shock came over his countenance ; the head fell back; the deepest calm settled on his face. His features were as those of one in a soft sleep.
The news of Schiller’s death soon spread through Weimar. The theatre was closed; men gathered together in groups. Each felt as if he had lost his dearest friend. To Goethe, enfeebled himself by long illness, and again stricken by some relapse, no one had the courage to mention the death of his * beloved rival. When the tidings came to Henry Meyer, who was with him, Meyer left the house abruptly, lest his grief might escape him. No one else had the courage to break the intelligence. Goethe perceived that the members of his household seemed embarrassed, and anxious to avoid him. He divined something of the fact, and said, at last, ‘“I see,— Schiller must be very ill.” That night they overheard him —the serene man, who seemed almost above human affection, who disdained to reveal to others whatever grief he felt when his son died—they overheard GortHE weep! In the morning he said to a friend, “Is it not true that Schiller was very ill yesterday?” The friend (it was a woman) sobbed. ‘He is dead,” said Goethe faintly. ‘You have said it,” was the answer. ‘‘He is dead!” repeated Goethe, and covered his eyes with his hands.
The body was dissected ; and it might be some consolation to the mourners to know that much prolongation of life had been beyond the art of medicine; the left lung was destroyed, the ventricles of the heart wasted, the liver indurated, the gall-bladder extremely swelled. A son of the great Herder, one of the physicians who examined the body, thought it im-
a2
84 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
possible that, under any circumstances, he could have lived half a year, nor that without great suffering.
Schiller was buried in the night of the 11th of May; twelve young men of good family bore the coffin; the heavens were clouded, but the nightingales sang loud and full. As the train proceeded, the sound of a horse’s hoofs was heard ; a rider dismounted and followed the procession— it was Wilhelm von Wolzogen, who had heard the fatal news at Naumberg, and hastened to pay the last respect to the remains of his college friend. As the bier was lowered, the wind suddenly scattered the mists, and the moon broke forth, and its light streamed upon the coffin. When all was over, the skies were suddenly obscured again.
CONCLUDING CHAPTER.
CRITICAL SUMMARY.
So, at the early age of forty-five, closed the earthly career of Friedrich Schiller. This, our brief epitome of his life, has been designed simply as the illustration and companion of the poems we translate. By the light of a noble life, we can best read the remains of a noble genius. We regret the omissions necessary to so compact an abridgment of Schiller’s many and voluminous biographers. But our object is at- tained, if, from amidst masses of interwoven detail, and super- structured disquisition, we have hewn out as a frontispiece to these volumes, a rude but faithful likeness of the man.
It is necessary for English readers, who would form an estimate of Schiller’s claims on posterity, to remember that he preceded the great poets who have made the Nineteenth Century an era in British literature inferior only to the Elizabethan. How largely, though indirectly, he has influ- enced the spirit of our recent poetry must be apparent to those familiar with his writings; not, perhaps, that all in whom that influence may be traced were acquainted even with the language in which he wrote. The influence of genius
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 85
circulates insensibly, through a thousand channels impossible to trace; and, as in Elizabeth’s day, the Italian mind coloured deeply the very atmosphere in which Shakespeare breathed inspiration, so, in the earlier years of the present century, the spirit of Schiller operated almost equally on those versed in, and those ignorant of, the German language. It affected each peculiar mind according to its own pecular idiosyncrasy —was reflective with Coleridge, chivalrous with Scott, ani- mated and passionate with Byron, and transfused its lyric fire into the kindling melodies of Campbell.
In the subjoined translation a thousand thoughts, and turns of thought, will remind the reader of our later masters of song, and may want the charm of novelty merely because they have furnished novelty to others. But what distinguishes Schiller from those we have named, is the purpose, the philo- sophical aim, and thoughtful conception, with which most of
-his later pieces were composed. In all ‘Childe Harold” there is not the purpose of “The Walk ;” in ail ‘‘ Marmion”. there is no glimpse of the deep and ethical meaning which exalts “The Diver:” And this brings us to the material dis- tinction of Schiller:—his singular ardour for Truth, his solemn conviction of the duties of a Poet—that deep-rooted idea on which we have been more than once before called upon to insist, that the Minstrel should be the Preacher, that. Song is the Sister of Religion in its largest sense,—that the Stage is the Pulpit to all sects, all nations, all time. No author ever had more earnestness than Schiller,—his carnest- ness was the real secret of his greatness ; this combination of philosuphy and poetry, this harmony between genius and con- science, sprang out of the almost perfect, almost unrivalled equality of proportions which gave symmetry to his various faculties.* With him the imagination and the intellect were so nicely balanced, that one knows not which was the greater ; owing, happily, to the extensive range of his studies, it may
* Hence Mr. Carlyle well observes, ‘‘ Sometimes we suspect that it is the very grandeur of his general powers which prevents us from exclusively admiring his poetic genius. We are not lulled by the siren song of poetry because her melodies are blended with the clearer, manilier tones of serious reason, and of honest though exalted feeling.” —Carlyle’s Life of Schiller.
86 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
be said that as the intellect was enriched, the imagination was strengthened. Unlike Goethe’s poet in “ Wilhelm Meister,” he did not sing “ as the bird sings,” from the mere impulse of song, but he rather selected Poetry as the most perfect form for the expression of noble fancies and high thoughts. “ His conscience was his Muse.”* It was thus said of him with truth,—“ that his poetical excellence was of later growth than his intellectual;” and as the style of Lord Bacon ascended to its sonorous beauty, in proportion as his mind became more stored, and his meaning more profound, so the faculty of expression ripened with Schiller in exact ratio to the cultivation of his intellect. His earliest compositions were written with difficulty and labour, and he was slow in acquiring thorough mastery over the gigantic elements of his language. Perhaps this very difficulty (for nothing is so fatal to the mental constitution as that verbal dysentery which we call facility) served both to increase his passion for his art, and to direct it to objects worthy the time and the care he was in his younger manhood compelled to bestow upon his compositions. From this finely-poised adjustment between the reasoning and the imaginative faculties, came the large ‘range of his ambition, not confined to Poetry alone, but ex- tending over the whole field of Letters. We can little appreciate Schiller, if we regard him only as the author of “Wallenstein,” and the ‘ Lay of the Bell;” wherever the genius of his age was astir, we see the flight of his wing and the print of his footstep. While, in verse, he has made ex- periments in almost every combination, except the epic (and in that he at one time conceived and sketched a noble out- line), embracing the drama, the ode, the elegy, the narrative, the didactic, the epigrammatic, and in each achieved a triumph,—in Prose, he has left monuments only less im- perishable in. the various and rarely reconcileable lands of romance, of criticism, of high-wrought philosophical specu- lation, and impartial historical research, His Romance of the “‘ Ghost-Seer ” is popular in every nation, and if not perfect of its kind, the faults are those of a super-exuberant intellect, which often impedes, by too disquisitive a dialogue, the pro-
* “Sa conscience étoit sa Muse.”—De Staél.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 87
gress of the narrative, and the thread of the events. In this he resembled Godwin rather than Scott. If with “St. Léon,” and ‘‘ Caleb Williams ” the “ Ghost-Seer ” rests in the second class of popularity, it is because, as with them, it requires a reflective mind to seize all its beauties, and yield to all its charms.
In History, if Schiller did not attain to the highest rank, it was not because he wanted the greatest qualities of the historian, but because the subjects he selected did not admit of their full development. But while his works in that direction are amongst the most charming, impartial, and justly popular, of which his nation boasts, he has shown, in the introductory Lecture, delivered by himself at Jena, how grand his estimate of history was. His notions on history are worth whole libraries of history itself* As a Philo- sophical Essayist, he is not perhaps very original, (though in borrowing from Kant he adds much that may fairly be called his own,) and rigid Metaphysicians have complained of his vagueness and obscurity.t But his object was not that of severe and logical reasoning ; it was to exalt the art to which most of his essays were devoted ; to make the great and the pure popular; to educate the populace up to purity and greatness. The ideal philosophy, as professed by Schiller, _was, in fact, a kind of mental as well as moral Christianity, that was to penetrate the mind as well as the soul—extend to the arts of man as well as his creeds; to make all nature a temple—all artists priests ; Christianity in spirit and effect it was—for its main purpose was that of the Gospel creed, viz., to draw men out of this life into a purer and higher air of being—to wean from virtue the hopes of reward below—to make enjoyment consist in something beyond the senses. What holy meditation was to the saints of old, the ideal of
* Of this lecture—‘‘ What is universal History, and with what views should it be studied? ’’—Mr. Carlyle observes justly, ‘‘ there perhaps has never been in Europe another course of history sketched out on principles so magnificent and philosophical.” —Carlyle’s Life of Schiller.
+ Mr. Carlyle, however, estimates the logical precision of Schiller more highly dha many of Schiller’s own countrymen; and speaks of the Aisthetic Letters, as “one of the deepest, most compact pieces of reasoning he is anywhere acquainted with.” —AMiscell. p. 62.
88 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
Asthetic art was to the creed of Schiller. Therefore, his philosophy, in strict accordance with his poetry, was designed not so much to convince as to ennoble ; it addresses the soul rather than the understanding ;—and, therefore, though in the wide compass of Schiller’s works there are passages which would wound the sincere and unquestioning believer ; though in his life there were times when he was overshadowed by the doubts that beset inquiry ; though in the orthodox and narrower sense of the word Christian,* it would be pre- sumptuous to define his sect, or decide on his belief; the whole scope and tendency of his works, taken one with the other, are, like his mind, eminently Christian. No German writer—no writer, not simply theological—has done more to increase, to widen, and to sanctify the reverent disposition that inclines to Faith.
As Schiller’s poetry was the flower of his mind, so in his poetry are to be found, in their most blooming produce, all the faculties that led him to philosophy, criticism, and history. In his poetry are reflected all his manifold studies. Philo- sophy, criticism, and history pour their treasures into his verse. One of a mind so candid, and a life so studious, could not fail to be impressed by many and progressive in- fluences. Schiller’s career was one education, and its grades are strongly marked. Always essentially humane, with a heart that beat warmly for mankind, his first works betray the intemperate zeal and fervour of the Revolution which then in its fair outbreak misled not more the inexperience of youth than the sagacity of wisdom ; a zeal and fervour in- creased in Schiller by the formal oppression of academical tyranny ;f a nature unusually fiery and impatient; and a
* It is impossible to over-estimate that plasticity which all profound theologians have recognised as the attribute of the Christian religion— a plasticity which accommodates itself to all climates— all manners—all times—all degrees of understanding — all varieties of civilisation, Hence, not only the multiplicity of its sects, but the innumerable dis- tinvtions of individual belief, included in an embrace wide as the vault of Heaven itself. Could we read all hearts, it would perhaps be found that the most rigid sectarian has in his conscience some points in which he differs from the fellow-sectarian beside whom he kneels.
t Thus Schiller himself calls his ‘‘ Robbers’? “a monster produced by the unnatural union of Genius with Thraldom.”
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 89
taste terribly perverted by the sentiment of Rousseau and the bombast of Klopstock. Friendship, love, indignation, poverty, and solitude, all served afterwards to enrich his mind with the recollection of strong passions and keen sufferings : and, thrown much upon himself, it is his own life and his own thoughts that he constantly reproduces on the stage. The perusal of Shakespeare has less visible and direct influence on his genius than he himself seems to suppose ;—the study of History has far more. From the period in which he steadily investigated the past, his characters grow more actual; his Humanity more rational and serene. He outgrows Rousseau ; the revolutionary spirit fades gradually from his mind ; he views the vast chronicle of man not with the fervour of a boy, but the calm of a statesman. At this time he begins to deserve the epithet Goethe has emphatically bestowed on him—he becomes ‘ practical.’ But with the study of history comes the crisis of doubt, the period of his scepticism and his anguish. From this influence he emerged into the purer air, which he never afterwards abandoned, of the Ideal Philosophy. Here he found a solution of his doubts—a religion for his mind. Almost at the same time that his intellect is calmed and deepened by philosophy, his taste ac- - quires harmonious symmetry and repose from the study of the ancient masterpieces. From that period, his style attains its final beauty of simplicity combined with stateliness, and vigour best shown by ease. A happy marriage, a fame as- sured, an income competent to his wants, serve permanently to settle into earnest and serious dignity a life hitherto rest- less—an ambition hitherto vague and undefined. Thenceforth he surrenders himself wholly to the highest and purest obe » jects human art can attain. His frame is attacked, his health gone for ever; but the body has here no influence on the mind. Schiller lives in his art; he attains to the ideal existence he has depicted ; he becomes the Pure Form, the Archetype, the Gestalt, that he has described in his poem of the ‘‘ Ideal and the Actual ;” living divorced from the body —in the heavenly fields, a spirit amongst the gods. It is now that we trace in his works the influences of two master minds with which he lived familiarly—William yon Hum-
90 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
boldt and Goethe.* The first we see in his mystical, typical, and Kantian compositions; the last in the more lucid and genial spirit of his lyrics and his narratives. By degrees, the latter happily prevailed. As Humboldt receded from the scene, and his intercourse with Goethe mellowed, Schiller comes out of the cloud into the light. He recognises the true ideal of art; the clear expression of serene thought ; the Grecian Athené prevailing over the typical Egyptian Naith. The last influence produced on him by profane literature was in the works of Calderon, then just trans- lated ; and which, according to the testimony of Goethe, deeply and sensibly impressed him. But he did not survive long enough for that impression to become apparent in his own compositions.
We have omitted all detailed criticism of Schiller’s Dramas, as they have been made more or less familiar to the reader, by various translations, by repeated notices in our popular journals, and by the attention they have received in the biographical work of Mr. Carlyle. Our limits would not permit us to do justice to works requiring lengthened and elaborate consideration, or to enter into a controversy with other critics, from whom we may differ as to their merits or defects. Briefly, it appears to us, that like the dramas of many great poets, from Byron up even to Shakspeare, their highest merit is not that purely dramatic. Perhaps of this quality there is more in the earlier than the later Tragedies, “The Robbers” is still upon the whole the most frequently acted of all Schiller’s Plays.t Glancing over his riper per-
* The intimacy between Goethe and Schiller was the more remark- able, because it was almost purely intellectual. Goethe says, in a conversation with Eckermann, “that there was no necessity for especial Pee tee between them—their common efforts made their noblest
ond.’
+ The true test of the Dramatic faculty, apart from the Poetical, is its practical adaptability to the stage. A play of very inferior literary merit may keep its hold on the boards, to the exclusion of works infinitely more poetical, by its dramatic qualities ;—viz., by the corre- spondence between the action of its plot and emotions the most generally popular. . . Hence, the vitality on the stage of plays that are almost despised in the library—such as the “¢ Stranger,” ‘“ Pizarro,’s &c. Kotzebue’s Dramatic talont, as separate from intellectual excels
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 91
formances, his grandest, in point of intellect, is ‘“ Wallen- s‘cin ;” in point of verbal poetry, the music, and the expres- sion, “The Bride of Messina” is the loveliest: in point of feeling and conception ‘‘ The Maid of Orleans ” most engrosses the heart and enlists the fancy. But the one in which Schiller, with the fullest success, emancipates his art from himself—in which his own individuality the least moulds and influences his creations—seems to us the ‘“ Wilhelm Tell.” As his chief merit, whether as Man or Artist, lay in his earnestness, so in that earnestness lay his main defect as a writer for the Stage. He could not, as the stage-writer really ought, reflect indifferently—veluti in speculum—vice and virtue*—the mean and the sublime. He could not escape the temptation of placing in the mouths of his cha- tacters, the sentiments he desired to enforce upon the world —even though the occasion was inappropriate. All his favourite characters talk too much—and too much as Schiller thought and Schiller felt. Morally one of the least selfish of men,—intellectually he is one of the most egotistical. Who that held the doctrine that the Dramatist, the Poet, should be the Preacher, could fail to be so? He loved Truth too much to suffer her to be silent, whenever he had occasion to make her oracles be heard. The complex varieties—the sinuous windings of human character, are, for the most part, without the pale of his conscientious and stately genius. He thus avoids (at least in his later works) the vulgar reproach attached to Goethe, and which might with equal truth be urged against Shakspeare, viz. that he makes error amiable, and clothes crime with charm. His characters are, for the most part, embodiments of great principles and great truths,
‘yather than the flexile and miultiform representations of
human nature, which, while idealised into poetry, still render the creations of Shakspeare so living and distinct.
lence or Poetic inspiration, is positively wonderful, and deserves the minutest study of all practical writers for the stage. Of this, Schiller was fully aware. ‘
* Thus Madame de Staél well observes, “‘that he lived, spoke, and acted as if the wicked did not exist; and when in his works he described them, it was with more exaggeration and less depth than if he had really known them.”
92 IIFE OF SCHILLER.
Schiller is thus, on the whole, greater as a Poct than a Dramatist—so, indeed, is Shakspeare, but from entirely different and opposite causes ; Shakspeare, from the exquisite subtlety of his imagination, which, in a Caliban, an Ariel, a Titania, escapes the grossness of representation ; Schiller, from too statuelike a rigidity and hardness: we do not see the veins at play beneath his marble.
It is in the Collection of his Minor Poems that Schiller’s true variety is best seen—a variety not of character, but of thought, of sentiment, of fancy, of diction, and of metre. No single specimens of his poems can give any accu- rate idea of the excellence of the whole. It is the pre- dominant merit of this collection, that it conveys the most transparent exposition of the Poet: its contents are the con- fessions of his soul, as well as the exercises of his genius. For, with a little modification, what Jean Paul said. of Herder, may be said of Schiller, “that he was less a Poet than a Poem,”—and therefore all his poetry should be studied as illustrations of the Human Poem—Schiller him- self! Through the exuberant variety of his verse, is discernible—as an elementary and harmonious principle—a character singularly frank, thoughtful, elevated, and pure; hence, as with some great orator, favourite thoughts are often repeated, because the earnestness of the man desires certain truths to be impressed upon the memory. Itis not till we have concluded the entire collection, that we can. thoroughly appreciate each single poem,* or comprehend, in all. its phases, the lofty nature of the Poet. Here, better than in all biographies, may be traced the development of a great and laborious mind : The exuberant fire of the First Period ; the subdued melody of the Second, whether in joy or in doubt— in sorrowful passion or the first glimpses of serene Art ; the fulness of ripened knowledge—the calm repose of mature genius, which characterise the Third,—all reflect, as in a glass, the changes of a progressive career—the development of a nature striving for improvement, as a plant for the light. To an ordinary English reader,—more especially through the medium of translation,—the different degree of merit between
* One Poem is, indeed, often the best commentary on—the best explanation of—another. ;
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 93
Schiller’s Poems of the First and those of the Third Period will not, perhaps, be very evident; partly, indeed, because amongst us, of late years, everything that can pervert true taste in poetic diction, has been elaborately and systematically done ; and most of our young poets vie with each other who can write the most affectedly : masculine thought is dwindled into some hair-breadth conceit ; the wording is twisted into some effeminate barbarism called “poetic expression:” a poem is not regarded as a whole, but as a string to hold together glittering and fantastic lines which, as in Shelley, only distract the reader from the comprehension of the general idea, —if, indeed, any general idea is to be found buried amidst the gaudy verbiage. Now, in Schiller’s riper and more perfect poems, there is no straining for “ poetical expressions ”—no impertinence of fine lines, episodical to the main design. His notion of a poem, however brief the poem may be, is that of infinitely higher art than is dreamt of by phrase-hunting poetasters. He studies a poem as a whole, which is to contain some single thought, or imply some definite truth ; and if, at times, obscure from terseness and concentration, he rejects with disdain the tags and tinsel of irrelevant ornament. In the earlier poems, on the contrary, there is often—not, indeed, affectation, but extravagance, in seeking after out-of-the-way ideas and hyperbolical expres- sions,—something more akin to the vagaries of our modern schools. Much of this he, indeed, corrected in his own later collection of his poems; but the traces of the unclassical and erroneous taste from which such tricks of language proceed, may yet be sufficiently discovered in the Poems to ‘“ Laura,” the “ Letter from Julius to Raphael,” &. The ordinary characteristic, then, of Schiller’s later style in his poems, is the absence of verbal mannerism, and a manliness of versifi- cation occasionally reminding us of Dryden, and, at times, of Byron ;* but always in sturdy contrast to that adulterated
* Not, indeed, according to our judgment, that, in point of style, he ever equalled the nervous and lucid distinctness of Dryden’s heroic yerse, or the unstudied eloquence and affluent melody which distinguish the two latter cantos of “Childe Harold,” the best passages in “ Don Juan,’’ and the melodious line of ‘‘ Manfred.” But in his later poems
he resembles these masters of diction in seeking verbal poetry rather in passages than in lines—in an evoidance of isolated prettiness and the
94 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
composition which has, of late years, aimed at the mongrel eclecticism of all that is worst in Keates and Coleridge, Wordsworth and Shelley.
All comparison between Goethe and Schiller would be, and has been, but a futile attempt at comparing dissimilarities.* We shall waste no time in attempting to show where one is greater or the other less. Brothers they were in life—let them shine together in equal lustre—the immortal Dioscuri —twin stars! Nor shall we touch upon those theories of art which the mention of Schiller and Goethe calls into discus- sion amongst the metaphysical critics of their country ; may that jargon of the “objective” and “subjective,” which has helped to spoil rational criticism in Germany, never be im- ported into English literature, to bewilder the public with definitions which art never will admit: for art cannot be de- graded into a science; it cannot be limited to the fetters of scientific phraseology. We cannot invent a set of school terms to prove, without farther discussion, that one poem is great because objective—another not so great because sub- jective. Beauty escapes all technical definitions; the art of estimating beauty—viz. ertticism—must follow the genius it would examine through all its capricious windings, and admire equally, Milton where subjective,—and where ob- jective, Shakspeare.
There is a class of poets in which self-consciousness is scarcely perceptible ; another in which it is pervading and intense. In the former class, Shakspeare and Homer tower pre-eminent ; in the latter, we recognise Dante and Milton— Schiller, Byron, and Burns.
To the last two, Schiller, in some attributes of his genius, bears a greater resemblance+ than perhaps to any of his own
jingle of rhetorical expression. Goethe says well of Schiller’s style,— “that it is best where he does not philosophise;’’ where he does, indeed, he falls into almost the worst fault a poet’s style can have— obscurity. A poet should always suppose his audience to be a multi- tude—a people; and obscurity is as inappropriate in him as in an orator on the hustings.
* Goethe himself is reported to have said: ‘‘ The Germans are great fools to quarrel which should take the prior rank, Schiller or myself— they ought only to be too happy that they have us both.’’
t Goethe himself has remarked the similarity in some points between Byron and Schiller.
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 95
countrymen ; resembling them in the haunting sense of indi- viduality—in the power of blending interest for the poet with delight at the poem—in the subordination of sentiment to feeling—in the embodiment of what is peculiar in forms the most widely popular ;—resembling them in these points, differing from them no less widely in others, according as the different modifications of life, habits, education, heart, and conscience, differ in the noble Englishman, the student Ger- man, the peasant Scotchman. But to all three there is this characteristic of a common tribe—their poetry expresses them- selves. To borrow the idea of Schiller himself, they. seek truth in the heart within—others in the world without,—by each order of inquirer can truth equally be found: Or, to avail ourselves again of Schiller’s accurate and noble dis- tinctions, whether light breaks into the variety of colours in which its individuality is Jost, or unites the colours into a single shimmer, it is still the light which vivifies and illumes the world.
Our illustrious critic, who has done so much not only to familiarise our public with the masterpieces of Germany, but (whatever may be the differences of taste as to the style he assumes), to elevate the moral feeling with which literary works should be regarded, and dethrone the popular error— that the end of art is to please, quotes, with some approval, a pert phrase: “that readers till their twenty-fifth year usually prefer Schiller; after their twenty-fifth year, Goethe.”* If Herder and Novalis are right in their belief, that the true elements of wisdom and poetry are found freshest and purest in the young, this is no disparagement to Schiller. It is, certainly, only in proportion as the glow for all that is noble in thought and heroic in character fades from the weaker order of mind, amidst the cavils, disgusts and scepticism of later life, that the halo around the genius of Schiller, which is but a teflection of all that is noble and heroic, wanes also into feebler lustre. For the stronger nature which still ‘‘feels as the enthusiast, while it learns to see as the world-wise,”t . . there is no conceivable reason why Schiller should charm less in maturity than youth. . . Goethe may please a reader more,
* Carlyle’s ‘‘ Miscellanies,” vol. iii. p. 6 t See Schiller: “Light and Warmth,” me i, p. 80.
96 LIFE OF SCHILLER,
in proportion as his mind can embrace a wider circumference in life. But, unless his mind loses in elevation what it gains in expansion, his eye will still turn with as fond a worship to the lofty star, which is not less holy than the sun-light, though it less fills the atmosphere immediately around us. The great weight attached so deservedly to the opinion of Mr. Carlyle, constrains us also, though with profound deference, to dispute an opinion which, while it seems rashly hazarded, tends, in our judgment, seriously to lower the standard to which our critic himself has so nobly sought to exalt the popular judgment on works of art. ‘ Humour,” says Mr. Carlyle, “has justly been regarded as the finest perfection of poetic genius. He who wants it, be his other gifts what they may, has only half a mind. . . . Now, among all writers of any real poetic genius, we cannot recollect one who, in this respect, exhibits such total deficiency as Schiller.” *
First, with regard to the general proposition, we deny altogether that Humour can justly be regarded ‘‘as the finest perfection of poetic genius.” . . Mr. Carlyle, as the vindicator of Goethe, in whom the faculty of humour was profusely developed, and as himself a humourist of very high and _ spiritual order, rather injures than promotes his cause, by placing it on grounds so exaggerated. We know of no poet, not ,even Shakspeare,—nay, not even Aristophanes,—in whom humour can be justly regarded as the finest perfection. And the greatest poets in general have certainly been little distinguished for their humour. Small trace, indeed, of it is to be found in the author of the “Iliad,” or the later Homer of the “Odyssey.” We conclude that Mr. Carlyle will not ask us to accept as genuinely Homeric, the burlesque once attributed to Homer; though even in that case he could scarcely there find the finest perfection of Homer’s poetic genius! Milton’s ‘‘elephantine” struggles after humour do not seem to us, as Mr. Carlyle indeed almost allows, to establish any case for his proposition. But Milton is not a solitary exception: for neither in Virgil, nor in Lucretius, nor in Dante, nor in Tasso, nor in Spenser, can we find that ‘‘humour was the finest perfection!” In brief, we should
* Carlyle’s ‘‘ Miscellanies,” vol. iii. p. 47.
IIFE OF SCHILLER, 97
go almost even to the opposite extreme, and say, that with some few exceptions, the greatest poets of every land have shown in no faculty a more marked deficiency than in that of humour. It were hard to say that they “had but half a mind;” if so, in their case we must think with Hesiod, “that the half is better than the whole”—the whole of all save Shakspeare; and (if Mr. Carlyle insists upon it) save Goethe also.
So much as to the general proposition: as to its applica- tion to Schiller we must equally demur. It is perfectly true that Schiller did not indulge in humour; that was incom- patible with his peculiar loftiness, and his disposition, as Mr. Carlyle so well says, “rather to look aloft than around.” But we think first, that though he did not indulge, he was not deficient in it: that this is evident, not only in ‘* Wallenstein’s Lager,” but in the “ Poetical Epistle from one Married Man to another,” and in some of his “ Epigrams,” to say nothing of the play of “Turandot,” and the admirable translation from Picard, to which he gives the title of ‘Der Parasit” (The Parasite): and secondly, that whether or not he was deficient in it, Mr. Carlyle’s memory must be surely in fault, when he recollects no other writer of real poetic genius, in whom there is “such total “deficiency.” A slight effort would have brought before him a tolerably long and illustrious catalogue—a few names in which we have already ventured to suggest to him. We do not dispute, nor seek to lower the merit of Humour, but how many of the old ‘ Kings of Melody” would be dethroned by the revolutionary doctrine, that what Mr. Carlyle himself truly calls, “ the exponent of low things,” is the finest perfection of poetic genius? Let us admire Hogarth without lamenting that Raffaelle had only “half a mind.”
We now leave this volume to its fate: We shall regret for other reasons than those more purely selfish, if it incurs the neglect to which Poetry has become proverbially subject : For, as in the Life of Schiller, the student may gather noble and useful lessons of the virtue of manly perseverance—of the necessity of continued self-cultivation—of the alliance between labour and success—between honesty and genius ;— so in his Poems there is that which no deficiency in the
w
98 LIFE OF SCHILLER.
translator can prevent from being living and distinct; a great and forcible intellect ever appealing to the best feelings— ever exalting those whom it addresses—ever intent upon strengthening man in his struggles with his destiny, and uniting with a golden chain the outer world and the inner to the Celestial Throne. The beauty of diction, the harmony of cadence, may escape the translator. But Schiller’s poetry is less in form than in substance—less in subtle elegance of words than in robust healthfulness of thought, which, like man himself, will bear transplanting to every clime. The vocation of his Muse is a Religious Mission ; she loses not her spiritual prerogative, though shorn of her statcly pageantry, and despoiled of her festive robes, Her power to convert and to enlighten, to purify and to raise, depends not on the splendour of her appearance, but on the truths that she proclaims,-
THE
POEMS AND BALLADS
oy
SCHILLER.
TUE
POEMS AND BALLADS
OF
SCHILLER.
THE DIVER, A BALLAD.
[Tue original of the story on which Schiller has founded this ballad, matchless perhaps for the power and grandeur of its descriptions, is to be found in Kircher. According to the true principles of imitative art, Schiller has preserved all that is striking in the legend, and ennobled all that is commonplace. The name of the Diver was Nicholas, sur- named the Fish. ‘The King appears, according to Hoffmeister’s pro- bable conjectures, to have been either Frederic I. or Frederic II., of Sicily. Date from 1295 to 1377.]
*©Oh, where is the knight or the squire so bold, As to dive to the howling charybdis below ?— I cast in the whirlpool a goblet of gold, And o’er it already the dark waters flow ; ‘Whoever to me may the goblet bring, Shall have for his guerdon that gift of his king.”
He spoke, and the cup from the terrible steep, That, rugged and hoary, hung over the verge Of the endless and measureless world of the deep, Swirl’d into the maélstrom that madden’d the surge, “ And where is the diver so stout to go— I ask ye again—to the deep below?”
102 PORMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
And the knights and the squires that gather’d around, Stood silent—and fix’d on the ocean their eyes ; They look’d on the dismal and savage Profound, And the peril chill’d back every thought of the prize. And thrice spoke the monarch—“ The cup to win, Is there never a wight who will venture in?”
And all as before heard in silence the king—
Till a youth with an aspect unfearing but gentle, ’Mid the tremulous squires—stept out from the ring, Unbuckling his girdle, and doffing his mantle ; And the murmuring crowd as they parted asunder,
On the stately boy cast their looks of wonder.
As he strode to the marge of the summit, and gave One glance on the gulf of that merciless main ; Lo! the wave that for ever devours the wave, Casts roaringly up the charybdis again ; And, as with the swell of the far thunder-boom, Rushes foamingly forth from the heart of the gloom.
And it bubbles and seethes, and it hisses and roars,* As when fire is with water commix’d and contending, And the spray of its wrath to the welkin up-soars, And flood upon flood hurries on, never ending. And it never will rest, nor from travail be free, Like a sea that is labouring the birth of a sea.
Yet, at length, comes a lull o’er the mighty commotion, As the whirlpool sucks into black smoothness the swell
Of the white-foaming breakers—and cleaves thro’ the ocean A path that seems winding in darkness to hell.
* «Und es wallet, und siedet, und brauset, und zischt,” &c. Goethe was particularly struck with the truthfulness of these lines, of which his personal observation at the Falls of the Rhine enabled him to judge. Schiller modestly owns his obligations to Homer’s descrip- tion of Charybdis, Odyss. 1.12. The property of the higher order of imagination to reflect truth, though not familiar to experience, is Pines | pisses in this description, Schiller had never seen even a Waterfall,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 103
Round and round whirl’d the waves—deep and deeper still driven, Like a gorge thro’ the mountainous main thunder-riven !
The youth gave his trust to his Maker! Before That path through the riven abyss closed again— Hark! a shriek from the crowd rang aloft from the shore, And, behold! he is whirl’d in the grasp of the main ! And o’er him the breakers mysteriously roll’d, And the giant-mouth closed on the swimmer so bold.
O’er the surface grim silence lay dark; but the crowd Heard the wail from the deep murmur hollow and fell ; They hearken and shudder, lamenting aloud— “Gallant youth—noble heart—fare-thee-well, fare-thee- well!” More hollow and more wails the deep on the ear— More dread and more dread grows suspense in its fear.
If thou shouldst in those waters thy diadem fling, And cry, “Who may find it shall win it and wear ;” God wet, though the prize were the crown of a king--- A crown at such hazard were valued too dear. For never shall lips of the living reveal What the deeps that howl yonder in terror conceal.
Oh, many a bark, to that breast grappled fast,
Has gone down to the fearful and fathomless grave ; Again, crash’d together the keel and the mast,
To be seen, toss’d aloft in the glee of the wave.— Like the growth of a storm ever louder and clearer, Grows the roar of the gulf rising nearer and nearer.
And it bubbles and secthes, and it hisses and roars, As when fire is with water commix’d and contending ; And the spray of its wrath to the welkin up-soars, And flood upon flood hurries on, never ending ; And as with the swell of the far thunder-boom, Rushes roaringly forth from the heart of the gloom.
104 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
And, lo! from the heart of that far-floating gloom,” What gleams on the darkness so swanlike and white?
Lo! an arm and a neck, glancing up from the tomb !— They battle—the Man’s with the Element’s might.
It is he—it is he! in his left hand behold,
As a sign—-as a joy !—shines the goblet of gold!
And he breathéed deep, and he breathed long, And he greeted the heavenly delight of the day. They gaze on each other—they shout, as they throng— “He lives—lo the ocean has render’d its prey ! And safe from the whirlpool and free from the grave, Comes back to the daylight the soul of the brave!”
And he comes, with the crowd in their clamour and glee, And the goblet his daring has won from the water, He lifts to the king as he sinks on his knee ;— And the king from her maidens has beckon’d his daughter— She pours to the boy the bright wine which they bring, And thus spake the Diver—* Long life to the king!
‘“‘ Happy they whom the rose-hues of daylight rejoice, The air and the sky that to mortals are given ! May the horror below never more find a voice— Nor Man stretch too far the wide mercy of Heaven ! Never more—never more may he lift from the sight . The veil which is woven with Terror and Night !
“ Quick-brightening like lightning—it tore me along, Down, down, till the gush of a torrent, at play In the rocks of its wilderness, caught me—and strong As the wings of an eagle, it whirl’d me away. Vain, vain was my struggle—the circle had won me, Round and_round in its dance, the wild element spun me.
“ And I call’d on my God, and my God heard my prayer, In the strength of my need, in the gasp of my breath—
* The same rhyme as the preceding line in the original.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 105
And show’d me a crag that rose up from the lair, And I clung to it, nimbly—and baffled the death !
And, safe in the perils around me, behold
On the spikes of the coral the goblet of gold.
“Below, at the foot of that precipice drear, Spread the gloomy, and purple, and pathless Obscure ! A silence of Horror that slept on the ear, That the eye more appall’d might the Horror endure ! -Salamander—snake — dragon—vast reptiles that dwell In the deep—coil’d about the grim jaws of their hell.
€ Dark-crawl’d—glided dark the unspeakable swarms, Clump’d together in masses, misshapen and vast— Here clung and here bristled the fashionless forms— Here the dark-moving bulk of the Hammer-fish pass’d— And with teeth grinning white, and a menacing motion, Went the terrible Shark—the Hyeena of Ocean.
‘‘There I hung, and the awe gather’d icily o’er me, So far from the earth, where man’s help there was none! The One Human Thing, with the Goblins before me— Alone—in a loneness so ghastly—aLone ! Fathom-deep from man’s eye in the speechless profound, With the death of the Main and the Monsters around.
‘¢ Methought, as I gazed through the darkness, that now Ir * saw —the dread hundred-limbed creature—its prey ! And darted—O God! from the far flaming-bough Of the coral, I swept on the horrible way ; And it seized me, the wave with its wrath and its roar, It seized me to save—King, the danger is o’er !”
On the youth gazed the monarch, and marvell’d ; quoth he, “Bold Diver, the goblet I promised is thine,
ee da kroch’s heran,” &c. The Z¢ in the original has been greatly admired. The poet thus yaguely represents the fabulous misshapen monster, the Polypus of the ancients.
106 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
And this ring will I give, a fresh guerdon to thee,
Never jewels more precious shone up from the mine ; Tf thou It bring me fresh tidings, and venture again, To say what lies hid in the innermost main ?”
ih
Then outspake the daughter in tender emotion : “Ah! father, my father, what more can there rest ? Enough of this sport with the pitiless ocean He has served thee as none would, thyself hast confest. If nothing can slake thy wild thirst of desire, Let thy knights put to shame the exploit of the squire
1?
The king seized the goblet—he swung it on high,
And whirling, it fell in the roar of the tide : “ But bring back that goblet again to my eye,
And T’ll hold thee the dearest that rides by my side ; And thine arms shall embrace, as thy bride, I decree, . The maiden whose pity now pleadeth for thee.”
In his heart, as he listen’d, there leapt the wild joy— And the hope and the love through his eyes spoke in fire,
On that bloom, on that blush, gazed delighted the boy ; The maiden—she faints at the feet of her sire !
Here the guerdon divine, there the danger beneath ;
He resolves! To the strife with the life and the death !
They hear the loud surges sweep back in their swell, Their coming the thunder-sound heralds along !
Fond eyes * yet are tracking the spot where he fell : They come, the wild waters, in tumult and throng,
Roaring up to the cliff—roaring back, as before,
But no wave ever brings the lost youth to the shore,
This Ballad is the first composed by Schiller, if we except his early and ruder lay of “Count Eberhard, the Quarreller,”’ which really, however, has more of the true old ballad spirit about it than those grand and artistic tales elaborated by his riper genius and belonging to a school of poetry, to which the ancient Ballad singer certainly never pretended to aspire. . , The old Ballad is but a simple narrative,
* Viz.; the King’s Daughter, Toffmeister, Sup. iv, 301.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCIILLER. 107
without any symbolical or interior meaning. . . But in most of the performances to which Schiller has given the name of Ballad, a certain purpose, not to say philosophy, in conception, elevates the Narrative into Dramatic dignity. . . . Rightly, for instance, has ‘‘'The Diver ” been called a Lyrical Tragedy in two Acts—the first act ending with the disappearance of the hero amidst the whirlpool; and the concep- tion of the contest of Man’s will with physical Nature, . . . together with the darkly hinted moral, not to stretch too far the mercy of Heaven, . . . belong in themselves to the design and the. ethics of Tragedy.
There is another peculiarity in the art which Schiller employs upon his narrative poems.— Though he usually enters at once on the interest of his story, and adopts, for the most part, the simple and level style of recital, he selects a subject admitting naturally of some striking picture, upon which he lavishes those resources of description that are only at the command of a great poet; . . . thus elevating the ancient ballad not only into something of the Drama, by conception, but into some- thing ot the Epic by execution.—The reader will recognise this pecu- larity in the description of the Charybdis and the Abyss in the Ballad he has just concluded—in that of the Storm in ‘‘ Hero and Leander’’ —of the Forge and the Catholic Ritual in ‘‘ Fridolin””—of the Furies in the ‘‘ Cranes of Ibycus,’’ &c. . . . We have the more drawn the reader’s notice to these distinctions between the simple baliad of the -ancient minstrels, and the artistical narratives of Schiller—because it seems to us, that our English critics are too much inclined to consider that modern Ballad-writing succeeds or fails in proportion as it seizes merely the spirit of the ancient. . . . But this would but lower genius to an exercise of the same imitative ingenuity which a school-boy or a college prizeman displays upon Latin Lyrics . . . in which the merit consists in the ayoidance of originality. The Great Poet cannot be content with only imitating what he studies: And he succeeds really in proportion not to his fidelity but his innovations . . . that is, in
roportion as he improves upon what serves him as a model.
In the ballad of ‘‘ The Diver,” Schiller not only sought the simple but the sublime.—According to his own just theory—‘‘The main Ingredient of Terror is the Unknown.” He here seeks to accomplish as a poet what he before perceived as a critic. . . . And certainly the picture of his lonely Diver amidst the horrors of the Abyss, dwells
upon the memory amongst the sublimest conceptions of modern Poetry.
108 POZMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
THE GLOVE, A. TALE.
[The original of this well-known story is in St. Foix—(Zssay sur . Paris); date the reign of Francis I.]
BrrorkE his lion-court, To see the griesly sport, Sate the king ; Beside him group’d his princely peers, And dames aloft, in circling tiers, Wreath’d round their blooming ring. King Francis, where he sate, Raised a finger—yawn’d the gate, And, slow from his repose, A LION goes! Dumbly he gazed around The foe-encircled ground ; And, with a lazy gape, He stretch’d his lordly shape, And shook his careless mane, And—laid him down again !
A finger raised the king— And nimbly have the guard A second gate unbarr’d ; Forth, with a rushing spring, A TIGER sprung ! Wildly the wild one yell’d When the lion he beheld ; And, bristling at the look, With his tail his sides he strook, And roll’d his rabid tongue ; In many a wary ring He swept round the forest king, With a fell and rattling sound ;— And laid him on the ground, Grommelling ! The king raised his finger ; then Leap’d two LEoPaRDS from the den With a bound ;
er
os
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 109
And boldly bounded they Where the crouching tiger lay Terrible ! And he griped the beasts in his deadly hold ; In the grim embrace they grappled and roll’d ; Rose the lion with a roar! And stood the strife before ; And the wild-cats on the spot, From the blood-thirst, wroth and hot, Halted still !
Now from the balcony above, A snowy hand let fall a glove :— Midway between the beasts of prey, Lion and tiger ; there it lay,
The winsome lady’s glove !
Fair Cunigonde said, with a lip of scorn,
To the knight DELoRces—“ If the love you have sworn Were as gallant and leal as you boast it to be,
I might ask you to bring back that glove to me!”
The knight left the place where the lady sate ; The knight he has pass’d thro’ the fearful gate ; The lion and tiger he stoop’d above,
And his fingers have closed on the lady’s glove !
All shuddering and stunn’d, they beheld him there— The noble knights and the ladies fair ;
But loud was the joy and the praise the while
He bore back the glove with his tranquil smile!
With a tender look in her softening eyes,
That promised reward to his warmest sighs,
Fair Cunigonde rose her knight to grace,
He toss’d the glove in the lady’s face !
“ Nay, spare me the guerdon, at least,” quoth he: And he left for ever that fair ladye !
110 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
THE KNIGHT OF TOGGENBURG.
[In this beautiful ballad, Schiller is but little indebted to the true Legend of Toggenburg, which is nevertheless well adapted to Narra- tive Poetry. Ida, wite of Henry Count of Toggenburg, was suspected by her husband of a guilty attachment to one of his vassals, and ordered to be thrown from a high wall. Her life, however, was miraculously saved; she lived for some time as a female hermit in the neighbouring forest, till she was at length discovered, and her innocence recognised. She refused to live again with the Lord whose jealousy had wronged her, retired to a convent, and was acknowledged as a saint after her death. This Legend, if abandoned by Schiller, has found a German Poet not unworthy of its simple beauty and pathos. Schiller has rather founded his poem, which sufficiently tells its own tale, upon a Tyrolese Legend, similar to the one that yet consecrates Rolandseck and Nonnenworth on the Rhine. Hoffmeister implies that, unlike ‘‘The Diver,” and some other of Schiller’s Ballads, ‘‘ The Knight of Toggenburg’’ dispenses with all intellectual and typical meaning, draws its poetry from feeling, and has no other purpose than that of moving the heart. Still upon Feeling itself are founded those ideal truths which make up the true philosophy of a Poet. In these few stanzas are represented the poetical chivalry of an age—the contest between the earthly passion and the religious devotion, which con- stantly agitated human life in the era of the Crusades. How much of deep thought has been employed to arouse the feelings—what intimate conviction of the moral of the middle ages, in the picture of the aN looking up to the convent—of the Nun bowing calmly to the vale !
“ KNIGHT, a sister’s quiet love Gives my heart to thee !
Ask me not for other love, For it paineth me!
Calmly could’st thou greet me now, Calmly from me go ;
Calmly ever,—why dost thou Weep in silence, so?”
Sadly—(not a word he said !)— To the heart she wrung,
Sadly clasp’d he once the maid,— On his steed he sprung !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 111
“Up, my men of Swisserland ! ” Up awake the brave !
Forth they go—the Red-Cross band, To the Saviour’s grave !
High your deeds, and great your fame, Heroes of the tomb !
Glancing through the carnage came Many a dauntless plume.
Terror of the Moorish foe, Toggenburg, thou art !
But thy heart is heavy! Oh, Heavy is thy heart !
Heavy was the load his breast For a twelvemonth bore :
Never can his trouble rest ! And he left the shore,
Lo! a ship on Joppa’s strand, Breeze and billow fair,
On to that beloved land, Where she breathes the air!
Knocking at her castle-gate Was the pilgrim heard ;
Woe the answer from the grate ! Woe the thunder-word !
s She thou seckest lives—a Nun! To the world she died!
When, with yester-morning’s sun, Heaven received a Bride!”
From that day, his father’s hall Ne’er his home may be ;
Helm, and hauberk, steed and all, Evermore left he!
Where his castle-crowned height Frowns the valley down,
Dwells unknown the hermit-knight, In a sackcloth gown.
112 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER...
Rude the hut he built him there, Where his eyes may view
Wall and cloister glisten fair Dusky lindens through.*
There, when dawn was in the skies, Till the eve-star shone,
Sate he with mute wisful eyes, Sate he there—alone !
Looking to the cloister, still, Looking forth afar,
Looking to her lattice—till Clink’d the lattice-bar.
Till—a passing glimpse allowd— Paused her image pale,
Calm and angel-mild, and bow’d Meekly tow’rds the vale.
Then the watch of day was o’er, Then, consoled awhile,
Down he lay, to greet once more, Morning’s early smile.
Days and years are gone, and still Looks he forth afar,
Uncomplaining, hoping—till Clinks the lattice-bar :
Till,—a passing glimpse allow’d,— Paused her image pale,
Calm, and angel-mild, and bow’d Meekly tow’rds the vale.
* In this description (though to the best of our recollection it has escaped the vigilance of his many commentators) Schiller evidently has his eye and his mind upon the scene of his early childhood at Lorch, a scene to which in later life he was fondly attached.
The village of Lorch lies at the foot of a hill crowned with a convent, before the walls of which springs an old linden or lime tree. The ruined castle of Hohenstaufen is in the immediate neighbourhood. See the preliminary Biography.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 113
So, upon that lonely spot, Sate he, dead at last,
With the look where life was not Tow’rds the casement cast !
THE MEETING.
_[This poem and the two that immediately follow, appear to have been inspired by Charlotte von Lengefeld, whom Schiller afterwards
married. I. I sex her still, with many a fair one nigh, Of every fair the stateliest shape appear : Like a lone sun she shone upon my eye— I stood afar, and durst not venture near. Seized, as her presence brighten’d round me, by The trembling passion of voluptuous fear, Yet, swift, as borne upon some hurrying wing, The impulse snatch’d me, and I struck the string!
II.
What then I felt—what sung—my memory hence
From that wild moment would in vain invoke— It was the life of some discover’d sense
That in the heart’s divine emotion spoke ; Long years imprison’d, and escaping thence
From every chain, the Soun enchanted broke, And found a music in its own deep core, Its holiest, deepest deep, unguess’d before.
' II. Like melody long hush’d, and lost in space, Back to its home the breathing spirit came : ~ I look’d, and saw upon that angel face
The fair love circled with the modest shame ;
I heard (and heaven descended on the place) Low-whisper’d words a charmed truth proclaim—
I
114 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Save in thy choral hymns, O spirit-shore, Ne’er may I hear such thrilling sweetness more !
IV.
“JT know the worth within the heart which sighs, Yet shuns, the modest sorrow to declare ; And what rude Fortune niggardly denies, Love to the noble can with love repair. The lowly have the birthright of the skies ; Love only culls the flower that love should wear ; And ne’er in vain for love’s rich gifts shall yearn © The heart that feels their wealth—and can return !”*
- THE ASSIGNATION.
{Norz.—In Schiller the eight long lines that conclude each stanza of this charming love-poem, instead of rhyming alternately as in the translation, chime somewhat to the tune of Byron’s Don Juan—six lines rhyming with each other, and the two last forming a separate
couplet.
In other respects the translation, it is hoped, is sufficiently
close and literal. ]
I
Hear I the creaking gate unclose ? The gleaming latch uplifted ? No—twas the wind that, whirring, rose, Amidst the poplars drifted !
Adorn: thyself, thou green leaf-bowering roof, Destined the Bright One’s presence to receive, For her, a shadowy palace-hall aloof With holy Night, thy boughs familiar weave. And ye sweet flatteries of the delicate air, Awake and sport her rosy cheek around, When their light weight the tender feet shall bear, When Beauty comes to Passion’s trysting-eround.
* This is the only one of Schiller’s poems that reminds us of the Italian poets.—It has in it something of the sweet mannerism of
Petrarch,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, Y15
II. Hush! what amidst the copses crept— So swiftly by me now? No—’twas the startled bird that swept The light leaves of the bough !
Day, quench thy torch ! come, ghost-like, from on high, With thy loved Silence, come, thou haunting Eve, Broaden below thy web of purple dye, Which lulléd boughs mysterious round us weave. For love’s delight, enduring listeners none, The froward witness of the light will flee ; Hesper alone, the rosy Silent One, Down-glancing may our sweet Familiar be !
III. What murmur in the distance spoke, And like a whisper died ? No !—’twas the swan that gently broke In rings the silver tide!
Soft to my ear there comes a.music-flow ; In gleesome murmur glides the waterfall ;
To Zephyr’s kiss the flowers are bending low ; Through life goes joy, exchanging joy with all. Tempt to the touch the grapes—the blushing fruit,* Voluptuous swelling from the leaves that hide ; And, drinking fever from my cheek, the mute Air sleeps all liquid in the Odour-Tide !
IV. Hark! through the.alley hear I now A footfall? Comes the maiden? No,—’twas the fruit slid from the bough, With its own richness laden !
Day’s lustrous eyes grow heavy in sweet death, And pale and paler wane his jocund hues,
The flowers too gentle for his glowing breath, Ope their frank beauty to the twilight dews.
* The Peach. 12
116 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
The bright face of the moon is still and lone, Melts in vast masses the world silently ;
Slides from each charm the slowly loosening zone ; And round all beauty, veilless, roves the eye.
v. What yonder seems to glimmer? Her white robe’s glancing hues }— No,—’twas the column’s shimmer Athwart the darksome yews !
O, longing heart, no more delight-upbuoy’d Let the sweet airy image thee befool ! The arms that would embrace her clasp the void : This feverish breast no phantom-bliss can cool. O, waft her here, the true, the living one! Let but my hand her hand, the tender, feel— The very shadow of her robe alone !— So into life the idle dream shall steal !
* As glide from heaven, when least we ween, The rosy hours of bliss, All gently came the maid, unseen :— He waked beneath her kiss!
THE SECRET.
Awnp not a word by her was spoken ; For many a listener’s ear was by, But sweetly was the silence broken, For eye could well interpret eye. Soft to thy hush’d pavilion stealing, Thou fair, far-spreading Beech, I glide, Thy favouring veil our forms concealing, And all the garish world denied.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. \\%
From far, with dull, unquiet clamour, Labours the vex’d and busy day, And, through the hum, the sullen hammer Comes heaving down its heavy way. Thus man pursues his weary calling, And wrings the hard life from the sky, While happiness unseen is falling Down from God’s bosom silently.
O, all unheard be still the lonely Delights in our true love embrac’d. The hearts that never loved can only Disturb the well they shun to taste. The world but searches to destroy her, The Bliss conceal’d from vulgar eyes— In secret seize, in stealth enjoy her, Ere watchful Envy can surprise.
Soft, upon tiptoe, comes she greeting, Thro’ silent night she loves to stray,
A nymph, that fades to air, if meeting One gaze her mysteries to betray.
Roll round us, roll, thou softest river,* Thy broad’ning stream, a barrier given,
And guard with threat’ning waves for ever This one last Heritage of Heaven !
TO EMMA,
I. Anupst the cloud-grey deeps afar The Bliss departed lies ; How linger on one lonely star The loving wistful eyes ! Alas—a star in truth—the light Shines but a signal of the night!
* Probably the river Saale, on the banks of which Schiller was ac- customed to meet his Charlotte.
118. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Il. If lock’d within the icy chill Of the long sleep, thou wert— My faithful grief could find thee still A life within my heart ;— But, oh, the worse despair to see Thee live to earth, and die to me!
Iil. Can those sweet longing hopes, which make Love’s essence, thus decay ? Can that be love which doth forsake ?— That tove—which fades away ? That earthly gifts are brief, I knew—~ Ts that all heaven-born mortal too ?
THE POET TO HIS FRIENDS.
(WRITTEN AT WEIMAR.)
Ii FriEnDs, fairer times have been (Who can deny ?) than we ourselves have seen ; And an old race of more majestic worth. Were History silent on the Past, in sooth, A thousand stones would witness of the truth Which men disbury from the womb of earth. But yet that race, if more endowed than ours Is past !—no joy to death can glory give ; But we—we are—to us the breathing hours, They have the best—who live !
II, Suns are of happier ray Than where, not ill, we while our life away, If the far-wandering traveller speaks aright ; But much which Nature hath to us denied Hath not kind Art, the genial friend, supplied, And our hearts warm’d beneath her mother-light !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 119
Tho’ native not beneath our winters keen, Or bays or myrtle—for our mountain shrines And hardy brows, their lusty garlands green Weave the thick-clustering vines,
It.
Well may proud hearts take pleasure Where change four worlds their intermingled treasure, And Trade’s great pomp the wanderer may behold, Where, on rich Thames, a thousand sails unfurl’d Or seek or leave the market of the world— And throned in splendour sits the Earth-god,—aonp, But never, in the mire of troubled streams, Swell’d by wild torrents from the mountain’s breast, But on the still wave’s mirror, the soft beams Of happy sunshine rest.*
IV.
Prouder and more elate
Than we o’ the North, beside the Angel’s Gate,t
The beggar basking views eternal Rome! Round to his gaze bright-swarming beauties given, And, holy in the heaven, a second heaven,
The world’s large wonder, hangs St. Peter’s Dome.
But Rome in all her glory is a grave,
The Past, that ghost of power, alone is hers,
Strew’d by the green Hours, where the young leaves wavé Breathes all the life that stirs.
Vv.
Elsewhere are nobler things Than to our souls our scant existence brings: The New beneath the sun hath never been.
* These lines afford one of the many instances of the peculiar tenacity with which Schiller retained certain favourite ideas. At the age of seventeen he had said, ‘‘ Not on the stormy sea, but on the calm and glassy stream, does the sun reflect itself.”.—See Hoffmeister, Part Ten p-
39. + St. Peter’s Church.
120 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Yet still the greatness of each elder age We see—the conscious phantoms of the stage— As the world finds its symbol on the scene .* Life but repeats itself, all stale and worn ; Swect Phantasy alone is young for ever ; What ne’er and nowhere on the earth was bornt Alone grows aged never.
EVENING. (FROM A PICTURE.)
Stink, shining god—tired Nature halts ; and parch’d Earth needs the dews; adown the welkin arcli’d Falter thy languid steeds ;— Sink in thy ocean halls ! Who beckons from the erystal waves unto thee ? Knows not thy heart the smiles of love that wco thee? Quicken the homeward steeds ! The silver Thetis calls!
Swift to her arms he springs, and, with the bridle Young Eros toys—the gladdening steeds (as idle The guideless chariot rests) The cool wave bend above ; And Night, with gentle step and melancholy, Breathes low through heaven; with her comes Love the holy— Pheebus the lover rests,— Be all life, rest and love !
* The signitication of these lines in the original has been disputed-= we accept Hoffmeister’s interpretation—Part vi., p. 40. T “ The light that never was on sea or land, The Consecration and the Poet’s Dream.’’—Worpsworrit.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 121
THE LONGING.
From out this dim and gloomy hollow, Where hang the cold clouds heavily, Could I but gain the clue to follow, How blessed would the journey be ! Aloft I see a fair dominion, Through time and change all vernal still ; But where the power, and what the pinion, To gain the ever-blooming hill ?
Afar I hear the music ringing— The lulling sounds of heaven’s repose, And the light gales are downward bringing The sweets of flowers the mountain knows, I see the fruits, all golden-glowing, Beckon the glossy leaves between, And o’er the blooms that there are blowing Nor blight nor winter’s wrath hath been.
To suns that shine for ever, yonder,
O’er fields that fade not, sweet to flee : The very winds that there may wander,
How healing must their breathing be! But lo, between us rolls a river—
O’er which the wrathful tempest raves ; I feel the soul within me shiver
To gaze upon the gloomy waves.
A rocking boat mine eyes discover, But, woe is me, the pilot fails !— In, boldly in—undaunted over! And trust the life that swells the sails ! Thou must believe, and thou must venture, In fearless faith thy safety dwells ; * By miracles alone men enter The glorious Land of Miracles !
* “ Wo kein Wunder geschicht, ist kein Begliickter zu sehn.” Scuituer, Das Glick,
122 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
’
THE PILGRIM.
Yourr’s gay spring-time scarcely knowing Went I forth the world to roam— And the dance of youth, the glowing, Left I in my Father’s home. Of my birthright, glad-believing, Of my world-gear took I none, Careless as an infant, cleaving To my pilgrim staff alone. For I placed my mighty hope in Dim and holy words of Faith, ** Wander forth—the way is open, Ever on the upward path— Till thou gain the Golden Portal, Till its gates unclose to thee. There the Earthly and the Mortal, Deathless and Divine shall be !” Night on Morning stole, and stealeth, Never, never stand I still, And the Future yet concealeth, What I seek, and what I will! Mount on mount arose before me, Torrents hemm’d me every side, But I built a bridge that bore me O’er the roaring tempest-tide. Towards the East I reach’d a river, On its shores I did not rest ;, Faith from Danger can deliver, And I trusted to its breast. Drifted in the whirling motion, Seas themselves around me roll— Wide and wider spreads the ocean, Far and farther flies the goal, While I live is never given Bridge or wave the goal to near— Earth will never meet the Heaven, Never can the THErn be HERE!
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 123.
The two poems of ** The Longing” and “ The Pilgrim ” belong to a class which may be said to allegorise Feeling, and the meaning, agreeably to the genius of allegory or parable, has been left somewhat ebscure. The commentators agree in referring both poems to the. illustration of the Ideal. ‘The Longing” represents the desire to escape from the real world into the higher. realms of being ‘‘ The Pilgrim” represents the active labour of the idealist to reach ‘the Golden Gate.” The belief in what is beyond Reality is necessary to all who would escape from the Real; and in ‘‘The Longing” it is intimated that that belief may attain the end. But ‘‘ The Pilgrim,” after all his travail, finds that the earth will never reach the heaven, and the There never can be Here. The two poems are certainly capable of an interpretation at once loftier and more familiar than that which the commentators give to it. They are apparently intended to express the natural human feeling—common not to poets alone, but to us all—the human feeling which approaches to an instinct, and in which so many philosophers haye recognised the inward assurance of a hereafter, viz., the desire to escape from the coldness and confinement, ‘‘the valley and the cloud,’’ of actual life, into the happier world which smiles, in truth, evermore upon those who delieve that it exists: the desire of the poet is identical with the desire of the religious man. He who longs tor another world—only to be attained by abstraction from the low desires of this—longs for what the Christian strives for. And if he finds, with Schiller’s Pilgrim, that in spite of all his longing and all his labour, the goal cannot be reached below, still, as Schillerexpresses it elsewhere, ‘‘ He has had Hope—his belief has been his reward.” That Heaven which ‘‘The Longing” yearns for, which ‘‘The Pilgrim ”’ seeks, may be called “the Ideal,” or whatever else refiners please ; but, in plain fact and in plain words, that Ideal is the Here- after—is Heaven!
THE DANCE.
SrE how like lightest waves at play, the airy dancers fleet ;
And scarcely feels the floor the wings of those harmonious feet.
Oh, are they flying shadows from their native forms set free?
Or phantoms in the fairy ring that summer moonbeams see 4
As, by the gentle zephyr blown, some light mist flees in air,
As skiffs that skim adown the tide, when silver waves are fair,
So sports the docile footstep to the heave of that sweet measure,
As music wafts the form aloft at its melodious pleasure,
124. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Now breaking through the woven chain of the entangled dance, 6
From where the ranks the thickest press, a belder pair advance,
The path they leave behind them lost—wide opes the path beyond,
The way unfolds or closes up as by a magic wand.
See now, they vanish from the gaze in wild confusion blended ;
Ah, in sweet chaos whirl’d again, that gentle world is ended!
No !—disentangled glides the knot, the gay disorder ranges—
The only system ruling here, a grace that ever changes.
For aye destroy’l—for aye renewd, whirls on that fair creation ;
And yet one peaceful law can still pervade in each mutation.
And what can to the reeling maze breathe harmony and vigour,
And give an order and repose to every gliding figure ?
That each a ruler to himself doth but himself obey,
Yet through the hurrying course still keeps his own appointed way.
What, would’st thou know? It is in truth the mighty power of Tune,
A power that every step obeys, as tides obey the moon ;
That threadeth with a golden clue the intricate employment,
Curbs bounding strength to tranquil grace, and tames the wild enjoyment.
And comes THE WoRLD’s wide harmony in vain upon thine ears ?
The stream of music borne aloft from yonder choral spheres ?
And feel’st thou not the measure which Eternal Nature keeps?
The whirling Dance for ever held in yonder azure deeps ?
The suns that wheel in varying maze ?—That music thou discernest ?
No! Thou canst honour that in sport which thou forgett’st in earnest.
Norr.—This poem is very characteristic of the noble ease with which Schiller often loves to surprise the reader, by the sudden intro- duction of matter for the loftiest reflection, in the midst of the most familiar subjects. What can be more accurate and happy than the poet’s description of the national dance, as if such description were his only object—the outpouring, as it were, of a young gallant, in- ‘toxicated by the music, and dizzy with the waltz? Suddenly and im- perceptibly the reader finds himself elevated from a trivial scene. He
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 1:5
is borne upward to the harmony of the spheres. He bows before the great law of the universe—the young gallant is transformed into the mighty teacher ; and this without one hard conceit—without one touch of pedantry. It is but a flash of light ; and where glowed the playful picture, shines the solemn moral.
THE SHARING OF THE EARTH.
Take the world,” cried the God from his heaven To men—* I proclaim you its heirs ;
To divide it amongst you ’tis given, You have only to settle the shares.”
Each takes for himself as it pleases, Old and young have alike their desire ; The Harvest the Husbandman seizes, Through the wood and the chase sweeps the Squire.
The Merchant his warehouse is locking— The Abbot is choosing his wine—
Cries the Monarch, the thoroughfares blocking, “‘ Every toll for the passage is mine !”
All too late, when the sharing was over, Comes the Poet—He came from afar—
Nothing left can the laggard discover, Not an inch but its owners are there.
‘¢ Woe is me, is there nothing remaining, For the son who best loves thee alone !”
Thus to Jove went his voice in complaining, As he fell at the Thunderer’s throne.
‘In the land of the dreams if abiding,” Quoth the God—“ Canst thou murmur at ME? Where wert thou, when the Earth was dividing ?” ““T was,” said the Poet, ‘BY THEE !
126 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER
“‘ Mine eye by thy glory was captur’d— Mine ear by thy music of blias,
Pardon him whom ‘hy world so enraptur’d— As to lose him his portion in this !”
“ Alas,” said the God—* Earth is given ! Field, forest, and market, and all !— What say you to quarters in Heaven?
We'll admit you whenever you call !”
THE INDIAN DEATH-DIRGE.
[Tux idea of this Poem is taken from Carver’s Travels through North America. Goethe reckoned it amongst Schiller’s best poems of the kind, and wished he had made a dozen such. But, precisely be- cause Goethe admired it for its objectivity, William Von Humboldt found it wanting in ideality. See Hoffmeister, p. 3, 311.]
SEE on his mat—as if of yore, All life-like, sits he here !
With that same aspect which he wore When light to him was dear.
But where the right hand’s strength —and where The breath that loved to breathe,
To the Great Spirit aloft in air, The peace-pipe’s lusty wreath ?
And where the hawk-like eye, alas ! That wont the deer pursue,
Along the waves of rippling grass, Or fields that shone with dew ?
Are these the limber, bounding feet, That swept the winter snows ?
What stateliest stag so fast and fleet? Their speed outstript the roe’s !
These arms that then the sturdy how Could supple from its pride, -
How stark and helpless hang they now Adown the stiffen’d side!
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 127
Yet weal to him—at peace he strays Where never fall the snows ; Where ¢’2r the meadows springs the maize That mortal never sows : Where birds are blithe on every brake— Where forests teem with deer— Where glide the fish through every lake— One chase from year to year! With spirits now he feasts above ; All left us—to revere - . The deeds we honour with our love, The dust we bury here. Here bring the last gifts !—loud and shrill Wail, death-dirge for the brave ! What pleased him most in life may still ‘Give pleasure in the grave. We lay the axe beneath his head ‘He swung, when strength was strong— The bear on which his banquets fed— The way from earth is long! _And here, new-sharpen’d, place the knife That sever’d from the clay. - From. which the axe had spoil’d the life, The conquer’d scalp away ? The paints that deck the Dead, bestow— Yes, place them in his hand— ' That red the Kingly Shade may glow Amidst the Spirit-Land !
128 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
THE LAY OF THE MOUNTAIN.
[The scenery of Gotthardt is here personified. The three following ballads, in which Switzerland is the scene, be- tray their origin in Schiller’s studies for the drama of William Tell.
To the solemn abyss leads the terrible path, The life and the death winding dizzy between ; In thy desolate way, grim with menace and wrath, To daunt thee the spectres of giants are seen ; That thou wake not the Wild One,* all silently tread— Let thy lip breathe no breath in the pathway of Dread !
High over the marge of the horrible deep Hangs and hovers a Bridge with its phantom-like span,t Not by man was it built, o’er the vastness to sweep ; Such thought never came to the daring of Man ! The stream roars beneath—late and early it raves— But the bridge which it threatens, is safe from the waves.
Black-yawning a Portal, thy soul to affright,
Like the gate to the kingdom, the Fiend for the king— Yet beyond it there smiles but a land of delight,
Where the Autumn in marriage is met with the Spring, From a lot which the care and the trouble assail, Could I fly to the bliss of that balm-breathing vale !
Through that field, from a fount ever hidden their birth, Four Rivers in tumult rush roaringly forth ; They fly to the fourfold divisions of earth— The sunrise, the sunset, the south, and the north. And, true to the mystical mother that bore, Forth they rush to their goal, and are lost evermore.
* The avalanche—the cguwivogue of the original, turning on the Swiss word Lawine, it is impossible to render intelligible to the English reader. ‘The giants in the preceding line are the rocks that overhang the pass which winds now to the right, now to the left, of a roaring stream.
+ The Devil’s Bridge. The Land of Delight (called in Tell “a serene valley of joy’’) to which the dreary portal (in Tell the black rock gate) leads, is the Urse Vale, The four rivers, in the next stanza, are the Reus, the Rhine, the Tessin, end the Rhdne,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 129
High over the races of men in the blue Of the ether, the Mount in twin summits is riven ; There, veil’d in the gold-woven webs of the dew, Moves the Dance of the Clouds—the pale Daughters of Heaven ! There, in solitude circles their mystical maze, Where no witness can hearken, no earthborn surveys.
August on a throne which no ages can move, Sits a Queen, in her beauty serene and sublime,* The diadem blazing with diamonds above The glory of brows, never darken’d by time, His arrows of light on that form shoots the sun— And he gilds them with all, but he warms them with none!
THE ALP HUNTER.
{Founded on a legend of the Valley of Ormond, in the Pays de Vaud. ]
‘‘ Witt thou not, thy lamblings heeding, (Soft and innocent are they !)
Watch them on the herbage feeding, Or beside the brooklet play ?”
“ Mother, mother, let me go,
O’er the mount to chase the roe.”
“ Wilt thou not, around thee bringing, Lure the herds with lively horn !—-
Gaily go the clear bells ringing, Through the echoing forest borne !”
‘Mother, mother, let me go,
O’er the wilds to chase the roe.”
* The everlasting glacier. See William Tell, act v., scene 2. K
130 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
* Wilt thou not (their blushes woo thee !) In their sweet beds tend thy flowers ; Smiles so fair a garden to thee, Where the savage mountain lours ?” “ Leave the flowers in peace to blow ; Mother, mother, let me go!”
On and ever onwards bounding, Scours the hunter to the chase, On and ever onwards hounding To the mountain’s wildest space. Swift, as footed by the wind, Flies before the trembling hind.
Light and limber, upwards driven, On the hoar crag quivering,
Or through gorges thunder-riven Leaps she with her airy spring !
But behind her still the Foe—
Near, and near the deadly bow !
Fast and faster on—-unslack’ning ; Now she hangs above the brink,
Where the last rocks, grim and black’ning, Down the gulf abruptly sink.
Never pathway there may wind,
Chasms below—and death behind !
To the hard man—dumb-lamenting, Turns she with her look of woe ; Turns in vain—the Unrelenting Meets the look—and bends the bow.— Sudden—from the darksome deep, Rose the Spirit of the Steep !—
And his godlike hand extending,
From the hunter snatch’d the prey, ‘Wherefore, woe and slaughter sending,
To my solitary sway ?— Why should my herds before thee fall — THERE'S ROOM UPON THE Eartu For ALL!”
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 131
RUDOLF OF HAPSBURG.
A Batuap.
{Hrxricus properly classes this striking ballad (together with the yet grander one of the “ Fight with the Dragon ”’) amongst those de- signed to depict and exalt the virtue of Humility. The source of the story is in A‘gidius Tschudi, a Swiss chronicler ; and Schiller appears to have adhered, with much fidelity, to the original narrative. ]
Art Aachen, in imperial state, In that time-haliow’d hall renown’d, At solemn feast King Rudolf sate, The day that saw the hero crown’d ! Bohemia and thy Palgrave, Rhine, Give this the feast, and that the wine ; * The Arch Electoral Seven, Like choral stars around the sun, Gird him whose hand a world has won, The anointed choice of Heaven.
In galleries raised above the pomp, Press’d crowd on crowd their panting way ; And with the joy-resounding tromp, Rang out the million’s loud hurra ! For closed at last the age of slaughter, When human blood was pour’d as water— Law dawns upon the world ! t Sharp force no more shall right the wrong, And grind the weak to crown the strong— War’s carnage-flag is furl’d !
* The office, at the coronation feast, of the Count Palatine of the Rhine (Grand Sewer of the Empire and one of the Seven Electors) was to bear the Imperial Globe and set the dishes on the board ; that of the King of Bohemia was cup-bearer. The latter was not, how- ever, present, as Schiller himself observed in a note (omitted in the editions of his collected works), at the coronation of Rudolf.
t Literally, ‘‘.4 judge (cin Richter) was again upon the earth.’”’ The word substituted in the translation is introduced in order to recall to the reader the sublime name given, not without justice, to Rudolf of Hapsburg, viz., “‘ The Living Law.”
K 2
132 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCIILLER.
In Rudolf’s hand the goblet shines— And gaily round the board look’d he ; ‘‘ And proud the feast, and bright the wines, My kingly heart.feels glad.to me! Yet where the Gladness-Bringer—blest In the sweet Art which moves the breast With lyre and verse divine ? Dear from my youth the eraft of song, And what as knight I loved so long, As Kaiser, still be mine.”
Lo, from the circle bending there, With sweeping robe the Bard appears, As silver-white his gleaming hair, Bleach’d by the many winds of years ; “ And music sleeps in golden strings— Love’s rich reward the minstrel sings, Well known to him the Ann High thoughts and ardent souls desire ! What would the Kaiser from the lyre Amidst the banquet-hall ?”
The Great One smiled—“ Not mine the sway— - The minstrel owns a loftier power— A mightier king inspires the lay— Its hest—Tuer Ivpunse or THE Hour!” As through wide air the tempests sweep, As gush the springs from mystic deep, Or lone untrodden glen ; So from dark hidden fount within, Comes Sone, its own wild world to win Amidst the souls of men !”
Swift with the fire the minstrel glow’d,
And loud the music swept the ear :— “Forth to the chase a Hero rode,
To hunt the bounding chamois-deer ; With shaft and horn the squire behind ;— Through greensward meads the riders wind—
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
A small sweet bell they hear. Lo, with the Host, a holy man,— Before him strides the sacristan,
And the bell sounds near and near,
“The noble hunter down-inclined His reverent head and soften’d eye, And honour’d with a Christian’s mind The Christ who loves humility ! Loud through the pasture, brawls and raves A brook— the rains had fed the waves, And torrents from the hill. His sandal shoon the priest unbound, And laid the Host upon the ground, And near’d the swollen rill!
*¢ What wouldst thou, priest?’ the Count began, As, marvelling much, he halted there. ‘Sir Count, I seek a dying man, Sore-hungering for the heavenly fare. The bridge that once its safety gave, Rent by the anger of the wave, Drifts down the tide below. Yet barefoot now, I will not fear (The soul that seeks its God to cheer) Through the wild wave to go!’
“He gave that priest the knightly steed, He reach’d that priest the lordly reins, That he might serve the sick man’s need, Nor slight the task that heaven ordains, He took the horse the squire bestrode ; On to the chase the hunter rode, On to the sick the priest ! And when the morrow’s sun was red, The servant of the Saviour led Back to its lord the beast,
134. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
‘©¢ Now Heaven forefend !’ the Hero cricd, ‘That e’er to chase or battle more These limbs the sacred steed bestride That once my Maker's image bore : If not a boon allowed to thee, Thy Lord and mine its Master he, My tribute to the King, From whom I hold, as fiefs, since birth, Honour, renown, the goods of earth, Life and each living thing !’
“So may the God, who faileth never
To hear the weak and guide the dim, To thee give honour here and ever,
As thou hast duly honour’d Him ! Far-famed ev’n now through Swisserland, Thy generous heart and dauntless hand ;
And fair from thine embrace, Six daughters bloom,* six crowns to bring, Blest as “the daughters of a KING,
The mothers of a Racz !?”
The mighty Kaiser heard amazed ! Tis heart was in the days of old ; Into the minstrel’s heart he gazed,
That tale the Kaiser’s own had. told. Yes, in the bard the priest he knew, And in the purple veil’d from view
The gush of holy tears ! A thrill through that vast audience ran, And every heart the godlike man Revering God—reveres !
* At the coronation of Rudolf was celebrated the marriage-feast of three of his daughters—to Ludwig of Bavaria, Otto of Brandenburg, and Albrecht of Saxony. is other three daughters married after- wards Otto, nephew of Ludwig of Bavaria, Charles Martell, son of Charles of Anjou, and Wenceslaus, son of Ottocar of Bohemia. ‘The royal house of England numbers Rudolf of Hapsburg amongst its ancestors.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCMILLER. 135
THE FIGHT WITH THE DRAGON.
WHo comes ?—why rushes fast and loud, Through lane and street the hurtling crowd, Is Rhodes on fire —Hurrah !—along Faster and faster storms the throng ! High towers a shape in knightly garb— Behold the Rider and the Barb ! Behind is dragg’d a wondrous load ; Beneath what monster groans the road ? The horrid jaws—the Crocodile,
The shape the mightier Dragon, shows— From Man to Monster all the while —
The alternate wonder glancing goes.
Shout thousands, with a single voice,
“Behold the Dragon, and rejoice,
Safe roves the herd, and safe the swain !
Lo !—there the Slayer—here the Slain !
Full many a breast, a gallant life,
Has waged against the ghastly strife,
And ne’er return’d to mortal sight—
Hurrah, then, for the Hero Knight!”
So to the Cloister, where the vow’d And peerless brethren of St. John
In conclave sit—that sea-like crowd, Wave upon wave, goes thundering on.
High o’er the rest, the chief is seen— There wends the Knight with modest mien ; Pours through the galleries raised for all Above that Hero-council Hall, The crowd—And thus the Victor One :— “‘ Prince—the knight’s duty I have done, The Dragon that devour’d the land Lies slain beneath thy servant’s hand ; Free, o’er the pasture, rove the flocks— And free the idler’s steps may stray— And freely o’er the lonely rocks, The holier pilgrim wends his way !”
136 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER:
A lofty look the Master gave : “ Certes,” he said, “ thy deed is brave ; Dread was the danger, dread the fight— Bold deeds bring fame to vulgar knight ; But say, what sways with holier laws The knight who sees in Christ his cause, And wears his cross ?”—Then every cheek Grew pale to hear the Master speak ; But nobler was the blush that spread His face—the Victor’s of the day— As bending lowly—*“ Prince,” he said ; “ His noblest duty—to opny !”
* And yet that duty, son,” replied The chief, ‘‘ methinks thou hast denicd ; And dared thy sacred sword to wield For fame in a forbidden field.” “ Master, thy judgment, howso’er Tt lean, till all is told, forbear— Thy law, in spirit and in will, I had no thought but to fulfil. Not rash, as some, did I depart A Christian’s blood in vain to shed ; But hoped by skill, and strove by art, To make my life avenge the dead.
“ Five of our Order, in renown
The war-gems of our saintly crown
The martyr’s glory bought with life ;
’Twas then thy law forbade the strife.
Yet in my heart there gnaw’d, like fire,
Proud sorrow, fed with stern desire :
In the still visions of the night,
Panting I fought the fancied fight ;
-And when the morrow glimmering came, With tales of ravage freshly done,
The dream remember’d, turn’d to shame, That night should dare what day should shun,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 137
“ And thus my fiery musings ran— ‘What youth has learn’d should nerve the man ; How lived the great in days of old, Whose fame to time by bards is told— Who, heathens though they were, became As gods—upborne to heaven by fame ! How proved they best the hero’s worth? They chased the monster from the earth— They sought the lion in his den—
They pierced the Cretan’s deadly maze— Their noble blood gave humble men
Their happy birthright—peaceful days.
“¢What! sacred, but against the horde Of Mahound, is the Christian’s sword ? All strife, save one, should he forbear ? No! earth itself the Christian’s care— From every ill and every harm, Man’s shield should be the Christian’s arm. Yet art o’er strength will oft prevail, And mind must aid where heart may fail !’ Thus musing, oft I roam’d alone,
Where wont the Hell-born Beast to lie ; Till sudden light upon me shone,
And on my hope broke victory!
“Then, Prince, I sought thee with the prayer To breathe once more my native air ; The license given—the ocean past— I reach’d the shores of heme at last. Scarce hail’d the old beloved land, Than huge, beneath the artist’s hand, To every hideous feature true, The Dragon’s monster-model grew, The dwarf ’d, deforméd limbs upbore The lengthen’d body’s ponderous load ; The scales the impervious surface wore, Like links of burnish’d harness, glow’d.
138 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
“ Life-like, the huge neck seem’d to swell, And widely, as some porch to hell, You might the horrent jaws survey, Griesly, and greeding for their prey. Grim fangs an added terror gave, Like crags that whiten through a cave. The very tongue a sword in seeming— The deep-sunk eyes in sparkles gleaming. Where the vast body ends, succeed
The serpent spires around it rol’?d— Woe—woe to rider, woe to steed,
Whom coils as fearful e’er enfold !
All to the awful life was done— The very hue, so ghastly, won— The grey, dull tint :—the labour ceased, It stood—half reptile and half beast ! And now began the mimic chase ; Two dogs I sought, of noblest race, Fierce, nimble, fleet, and wont to scorn The wild bull’s wrath and levell’d horn ; These, docile to my cheering ery, I train’d to bound, and rend, and spring, Now round the Monster-shape to fly, Now to the Monster-shape to cling !
“ And where their gripe the best assails,
The belly left unsheath’d in scales,
I taught the dexterous hounds to hang
And find the spot to fix the fang ;
Whilst I, with lance and mailéd garb,
Launch’d on the beast mine Arab barb.
From purest race that Arab came,
And steeds, like men, are fired by fame.
Beneath the spur he-chafes to rage ; Onwards we ride in full career—
I seem, in truth, the war to wage— The monster reels beneath my spear !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
* Albeit, when first the destrier * eyed The laidly thing, it swerved aside, Snorted and rear’d—and even they, The fierce hounds, shrank with startled bay ; I ceased not, till, by custom bold, After three tedious moons were told, Both barb and hounds were train’d Fierce for the fight—then left the shore! Three days have fleeted since I prest (Return’d at length) this welcome soil, Nor once would lay my limbs to rest, Till wrought the glorious crowning toil.
“For much it moved my soul to know The unslack’ning curse of that grim foe. Fresh rent, men’s bones lay bleach’d and bare Around the hell-worm’s swampy lair ; And pity nerved me into steel :— Advice ?—I had a heart to feel, And strength to dare! So, to the deed.— I call’d my squires—hestrode my steed, And with my stalwart hounds, and by Lone secret paths, we gaily go Unseen—at least by human eye Against a worse than human foe!
nay, more,
139
‘Thou know’st the sharp rock—steep and hoar ?—
The abyss ?—the chapel glimmering o’er?
Built by the Fearless Master’s hand,
The fane looks down on all the land.
Humble and mean that house of prayer—
Yet God hath shrined a wonder there :—
Mother and Child, to whom of old
The Three Kings knelt with gifts, behold !
By three times thirty steps, the shrine The pilgrim gains—and faint and dim,
And dizzy with the height, divine Strength on the sudden springs to him!
* War-borse.
140 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
‘‘Yawns wide within that holy steep
A mighty cavern dark and deep—
By blessed sunbeam never lit—
Rank foetid swamps engirdle it ;
And there by night, and there by day,
Ever at watch, the fiend-worm lay,
Holding the Hell of its abode
Fast by the hallow’d House of God.
And when the pilgrim gladly ween’d His feet had found the healing way,
Forth from its ambush rush’d the fiend, And down to darkness dragg’d the prey.
*‘ With solemn soul, that solemn height I clomb, ere yet I sought the fight— Kneeling before the cross within, My heart, confessing, clear’d its sin. Then, as befits the Christian knight, T donn’d the spotless surplice white, And, by the altar, grasp’d the spear :— So down I strode with conscience clear— Bade my leal squires afar the deed, By death or conquest crown’d, await— Leapt lightly on my lithesome steed, And gave to God his soldier’s fate !
“ Before me wide the marshes lay— Started the hounds with sudden bay— Aghast the swerving charger slanting Snorted—then stood abrupt and panting— For curling there, in coiléd fold, The Unutterable Beast behold ! Lazily basking in the sun. Forth sprang the dogs. The fight ’s begun ! But lo! the hounds, in cowering, fly
Before the mighty poison-breath— A fierce yell, like the jackal’s ery,
Howl’d, mingling with that wind of death.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 141
“No halt—I gave one cheering sound, Lustily springs each dauntless hound— Swift as the dauntless hounds advance, Whirringly skirrs my stalwart lance— Whirringly skirrs ; and from the seale Bounds, as a reed aslant the mail. Onward—but no !—the craven steed Shrinks from his lord in that dread need — Smitten and scar’d before that eye Of basilisk horror, and that blast Of death, it only seeks to fly— And half the mighty hope is past !
“ A moment, and to earth I leapt ;
Swift from its sheath the falchion swept ;
Swift on that rock-like mail it plied—
The rock-like mail the sword defied :
The monster lash’d its mighty coil—
Down hurl’d—behold.me on the soil !
Behold the hell-jaws gaping wide—
When lo! they bound—the flesh is found ; Upon the scaleless parts they spring !
Springs either hound ;—the flesh is found— Tt roars ; the blood-dogs cleave and cling !
“No time to foil its fast’ning foes—
Light, as it writhed, I sprang, and rose ;
The all-unguarded place explored,
Up to the hilt I plunged the sword—
Buried one instant in the blood—
The next, upsprang the bubbling flood !
The next, one Vastness spread the plain—
Crush’d down—the victor with the slain ;
And all was dark—and on the ground My life, suspended, lost the sun,
Till waking —lo my squires around— And the dead foe ! my tale-is done.”
Then burst, as from a common breast, The eager land so-long supprest—
142 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
A thousand voices, choral-blending,
Up to the vaulted dome ascending—
From groinéd roof and banner’d wall,
Invisible echoes answering all
The very Brethren, grave and high,
Forget their state, and join the cry.
‘With laurel wreaths his brows be crown’d, Let throng to throng his triumph tell ;
Hail him all Rhodes !”—the Master frown’d, And raised his hand—and silence fell.
“Well,” said that solemn voice, “ thy hand From the wild-beast hath freed the land. An idol to the People be ! A foe our Order frowns on thee ! For in thy heart, superb and vain, A hell-worm laidlier than the slain, To discord which engenders death, Poisons each thought with baleful breath ! - That hell-worm is the stubborn Will— Oh! What were man and nations worth If each his own desire fulfil, And law be banish’d from the earth ?
“ Valour the Heathen gives to story— Obedience is the Christian’s glory ; And on that soil our Saviour-God As the meek low-born mortal trod, We the Apostle-knights were sworn To laws thy daring laughs to scorn— Not fame, but duty to fulfil— Our noblest offering—man’s wild will. Vain-glory doth thy soul betray— Begone—thy conquest is thy loss : No breast too haughty to obey, Is worthy of the Christian’s cross !”
From their cold awe the crowds awaken, As with some storm the halls are shaken ;
POEMS AND BALLADS GF SCHILLER, 143
The noble Brethren plead for grace—
Mute stands the doom’d, with downward face ;
And mutely loosen’d from its band
The badge, and kiss’d the Master’s hand,
And meekly turn’d him to depart:
A moist eye follow’d, “To my heart
Come back, my son !”—the Master cries : “Thy grace a harder fight obtains ;
When Valour risks the Christian’s prize, Lo, how Humility regains ! ”
In the poem just presented to the reader, Schiller designed, as he wrote to Goethe, to depict the old Christian chivalry—half knightly, half monastic. The attempt is strikingly successful. Indeed, ‘‘ The Fight of the Dragon ”’ appears to us the most spirited and nervous of all Schiller’s narrative poems, with the single exception of ‘‘ The Diver ;’ and if its interest is less intense than that of the matchless “ Diver,’’ and its descriptions less poetically striking and effective, its interior meaning or philosophical conception is at once more profound and more elevated. In ‘“‘ The Fight ot the Dragon,” is expressed the moral of that humility which consists in seif-conquest—even merit may lead to vain-glory—and, after vanquisling the fiercest enemies without, Man has still to contend with his worst foe,—the pride or disobedience of his own heart. ‘‘ Every one,’’ as a recent and acute, but somewhat over-refining critic has remarked, ‘‘has more or less his own ‘fight with the Dragon ’—his own double victory (without and within) to achieve.” The origin of this poem is to be found in the Annals of the Order of Malta—and the details may beseen in Vertot’s History. The date assigned to the conquest of the Dragon is 1342. Helion de Villeneuve was the name of the Grand Master—that of the Knight, Dieu-Donné de Gozon. Thevenot declares that the head of the monster (to whatever species it really belonged), or its effigies, was still placed over one of the gates of the city in his time.—Dieu-Donné _ succeeded De Villeneuve as Grand Master, and on his gravestone were inscribed the words ‘‘ Draconis Exstinctor.”
DITHYRAMB.*
BELIEVE me, together The bright gods come ever, Still as of old;
* This has been paraphrased by Coleridge.
144 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER
Scarce see I Bacchus, the giver of joy, Than comes up fair Eros, the laugh-loving boy; And Pheebus, the stately, behold !
They come near and nearer, The Heavenly Ones all—
The Gods with their presence Fill earth as their hall !
Say, how shall J welcome, Human and earthborn, Sons of the Sky ? Pour out to me—pour the full life that ye live ! What to you, O ye gods! can the mortal-one give ¢
The Joys can dwell only In Jupiter’s palace— Brimm’d bright with your nectar, Oh, reach me the chalice ! “ Hebe, the chalice Fill full to the brim! Steep his eyes—steep his eyes in the bath of the dew, Let him dream, while the Styx is concealed from his es That the life of the Gods is for him!”
It murmurs, it sparkles, The Fount of Delight ; The bosom grows tranquil— The eye becomes bright.
THE KNIGHTS OF ST. JOHN.
On, nobly shone the fearful Cross upon your mail afar,
When Rhodes and Acre hail’d your might, O lions of the war!
When leading many a pilgrim horde, through wastes of Syrian gloom ;
Or standing with the cherub’s sw one before the Holy Tomb,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 145
Yet on your forms the Apron scem’d a nobler armour far, When by the sick man’s bed ye stood, O lions of the war! When ye, the high-born, bow’d your pride to tend the lowly
weakness, The duty, though it brought no fame,* fulfill’d by Christian meekness—
Religion of the Cross, thou blend’st, as in a single flower, The twofold branches of the palm—HUMILITY AND POWER.
THE MAIDEN FROM AFAR.
(OR FROM ABROAD.)
WitHIn a-vale, each infant year, When earliest larks first carol free, To humble shepherds doth appear A wondrous maiden, fair to see. Not born within that lowly place— From whence she wander’d, none could tell; Tler parting footsteps left no trace, When once the maiden sigh’d farewell,
And blesséd was her presence there— Each heart, expanding, grew more gay ; Yet something loftier still than fair Kept man’s familiar looks away. From fairy gardens, known to none, She brought mysterious fruits and flowers— The things of some serener sun— Some Nature more benign than ours,
With each, her gifts the maiden shared— To some the fruits, the flowers to some ; Alike the young, the aged fared ; Each bore a blessing back to home.
* The epithet in the first edition is ruhm/ose.
146 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
Though every guest was welcome there, Yet some the maiden held more dear, And cull’d her rarest sweets whene’er She saw two hearts that loved draw near.
Norz.—It scems generally agreed that Poetry is allegorised in these stanzas ; though, with this interpretation, it is difficult to recon- cile the sense of some of the lines—for instance, the last in the first stanza. How can Poetry be said to leave no trace when she takes farewell ?
THE TWO GUIDES OF LIFIE—
THE SUBLIME AND THE BEAUTIFUL.
Two genii are there, from thy birth through weary life, to guide thee ;
Ah, happy when united both, they stand to aid, beside thee !
With gleesome play, to cheer the path, the One comes blithe with beauty—
And lighter, leaning on her arm, the destiny and duty.
With jest and sweet discourse, she goes unto the rock sublime,
Where halts above the Eternal Sea,* the shuddering Child of Time.
The Other here, resolved and mute, and solemn claspeth thee,
And bears thee in her giant arms across the fearful sea.
Never admit the one alone !—Give not the gentle guide
Thy honour—nor unto the stern thy happiness confide !
* By this, Schiller informs us elsewhere that he does not mean Death alone ; but that the thought applies equally to every period in life, when we can divest ourselves of the body, and perceive or act. as pure spirits; we are truly then under the influence of the Sublime.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 147
THE FOUR AGES OF THE WORLD.
[This Poem is one of those in which Schiller has traced the pro- gress of Civilization, and to which the Germans have given the name of Culture-Historic. ]
- BRIGHT-PURPLING the glass glows the blush of the wine— Bright sparkle the eyes of each guest ; The Port has enter’d the circle to join— To the good brings the Poet the best. Ey’n Olympus were mean, with its nectar and all, If the lute’s happy magic were mute in the hall.
Bestow’d by the gods on the poet has been A soul that can mirror the world! Whate’er has been done on this earth he has seen, And the future to him is unfwl’d. He sits with the gods in their council sublime, And views the dark seeds in the bosom of Time.
The folds of this life, in the pomp of its hues, He broadens all lustily forth, And to him is the magic he takes from the Muse, To deck, like a temple, the earth. A hut, though the humblest that man ever trod, He can charm to a heaven, and illume with a god !
As the god and the genius, whose birth was of Jove,* In one type all creation reveal’d,’
When the ocean, the earth, and the star-realm above, Lay compress’d in the orb of a shield ;
So the poet, a shape and a type of the All,
From a sound, that is mute in a moment, can call.
* Vulcan—the allusion, which is exquisitely beautiful, is to the Shield of Achilles.—Homer, II.i. 18.
‘“‘ There Earth, there Heaven, there Ocean, he design’d.’’—Porz.
+ This line is obscure, not only in the translation, but so in the original. Schiller means to say that the Poet is the true generaliser of the infinite—a position which he himself practically illustrates, by con-
L 2
148 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Blithe pilgrim! his footsteps have pass’d in their way, Every time, every far generation : He comes frony the age when the earth was at play, In the childhood and bloom of Creation. - Four Ages of men have deeay’d to his eye, And fresh to the Fifth he glides youthfully by.
King Saturn first ruled us, the simple and true—-  —- ' Each day as each yesterday fair :
No grief and no guile the calm shepherd-race knew— Their life was the absence of care ; They loved, and to love was the whole of their task— -
Kind earth upon all lavish’d all they could ask.
Then the Lazour arose, and the demi-god man Went the monster and dragon to seek ; And the age of the hero, the ruler, began, And the strong were the stay of the weak. By Scamander the strife and the glory had birth ; But the Beautiful still was the god of the earth.
From the strife came the conquest; and Strength, like a wind, Swept its way through the meek and the mild:
Still vocal the Muse, and in marble enshrined, The gods upon Helicon smiled.
Alas, for the age which fair Phantasie bore !—
It is fled from the earth, to return nevermore,
The gods from their thrones in Olympus were hurl’d, Fane and column lay rent and forlorn ;
And—holy, to heal all the wounds of the world— The Son of the Virgin was born.
The lusts of the senses subdued or suppress’d,
Man mused on life’s ends, and took tHougut to his breast.*
densing, in the few verses that follow, the whole history of the world. Thus, too, Homer is the condenser of the whole heroic age of Greeee. In the Prologue to ‘‘ Wallenstein,” the same expressions, with little alteration, are employed to convey the perishable nature of the Actor’s
; * “ Der Mensch griff denkend in seine Brust,’ oe i, e, Man strove by reflection to apprehend the phenomena of his own
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 149
Ever gone were those charms, the voluptuous and vain, Which had deck’d the young world with delight ; For the monk and the nun were the penance and pain,
And the tilt for the iron-clad knight. Yet, however that life might be darksome and wild, Love linger’d with looks still as lovely and mild:
By the shrine of an altar yet chaste and divine, Stood the Muses in stillness and shade ; And honour’d the household, and holy that shrine— In the blush—in the heart of the maid : And the sweet light of song bum’d the fresher and truer, In the lay and the love of the wild Troubadour.
As ever, so aye, in their beautiful band, May the Maid and the Poet unite: Their task be to work, and to weave, hand in hand, The zone of the Fair and the Right! Love and Song, Song and Love, intertwined evermore, - Weary earth to the suns of its youth can restore.
THE MAIDEN’S LAMENT.
[The two first Stanzas of this Poem are sung by Thekla, in the third Act of the “ Piccolomini.” ]
Tue wind rocks the forest, The clouds gather o’er; - The girl sitteth lonely
Beside the green shore ;
The breakers are dashing with might, with might : And she mingles her sighs with the gloomy night,
‘And her eyes are hot with tears. hen being—the cae of his own nature. The development of the philosophical, as distinguished from the natural consciousness, forms a very important sera in the history of civilisation, It is in fact the
great turnine-point of humanity, both individually and historicaily. _ Griff, Begriff—has a peculiar logical significance in German. -
150 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
“The earth is a desert, And broken my heart, Nor aught to my wishes The world can impart. To her Father in Heaven may the daughter now go ; T have known all the joys that the world can bestow— I have lived—I have loved” —
“Tn vain, oh! how vainly, Flows tear upon tear ! Human woe never waketh Dull Death’s heavy ear !— Yet say what can soothe for the sweet vanish’d love, And I, the Celestial, will shed from above The balm for thy breast.”
“Let ever, though vainly, Flow tear upon tear ; Human woe never waketh Dull Death’s heavy ear ; Yet still when the heart mourns the sweet vanish’d love, No balm for its wound can descend from above Like Love’s own faithful tears !”
THE IMMUTABLE.
Trak flies on restless pinions—constant never. Be constant—and thou chainest time for ever,
THE VEILED IMAGE AT SAIS,
A yourH, whom wisdom’s warm desire had lured To learn the secret lore of Egypt’s priests,
To Sais came. And soon, from step to step
Of upward mystery, swept his rapid soul !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 15
Still ever sped the glorious Hope along,
Nor could the parch’d Impatience halt, appeased By the calm answer of the Hierophant—
** What have IJ, if I have not all,” he sigh’d ; ** And givest thou but the little and the more ? Does thy truth dwindle to the gauge of gold, A sum that man may smaller or less small Possess and count—subtract or add to—still ? Is not TRUTH one and indivisible? *
Take from the Harmony a single tone—
A single tint take from the Ivis bow,
And lo! what once was all, is nothing—while Fails to the lovely whole one tint or tone!”
They stood within the temple’s silent dome, And as the young man paused abrupt, his gaze Upon a veil’d and giant Dace fell: Amazed he turn’d unto his guide— And what Towers, yonder, vast beneath the veil?” “Tur TRUra,” Answered the Priest. « And have I for the truth Panted and struggled with a lonely soul, And yon the thin and ceremonial robe That wraps her from mine eyes?” Replied the priest, “ There shrouds herself the still Divinity. Hear, and revere her hest:; ‘Till I this veil Lift—may no mortal-born presume to raise ; And who with guilty and unhallow’d hand Too soon profanes the Holy and Forbidden— He,’ says the goddess ”
“Well?” “< ¢SHALL SEE THE TRUTH |?” “ A wond’rous oracle ; and hast thou never Lifted the veil?” “ No! nor desired to raise !” “What! nor desired? O strange incurious heart, Tere the thin barrier—there reyeal’d the truth !”
152 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Mildly return’d the priestly master, ‘‘ Son, More mighty than thou dream’st of, Holy Law Spreads interwoven in yon slender web, Air-light to touch—lead-heavy to the soul !”
The young man, thoughtful, turn’d him to his home, And the sharp fever of the Wish to Know Robb’d night of sleep. Around his couch he roll’d, Till midnight hatch’d resolve— “Unto the shrine !”
Stealthily on, the involuntary tread
Bears him—he gains the boundary, scales the wall, And midway in the inmost, holiest dome,
Strides with adventurous step the daring man.
Now halts he where the lifeless Silence sleeps
In the embrace of mournful Solitude ;—
Silence unstirr’d,—save where the guilty tread Call’d the dull echo from mysterious vaults !
High from the opening of the dome above,
Came with wan smile the silver-shining moon.
And, awful as some pale presiding god, Dim-gleaming through the hush of that large gloom, In its wan veil the Giant Image stood.
With an unsteady step he onwards past, Already toucl’d the violating hand The Holy—and recoil’d! a shudder thrill’d His limbs, fire-hot and icy-cold in turns, As if invisible arms would pluck the soul Back from the deed.
“©O miserable man !
What would’st thou?” (Thus within the inmost heart Murmur’d the warning whisper.) ‘ Wilt thou dare The All-hallow’d to profane? ‘No mortal-born (So spake the oracular word) may lift the veil Till T myself shall raise!’ Yet said it not, The same oracular word— who lifts the veil Shall see the truth?’ Behind, be what there may,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 153
I dare the hazard—lI will lift the veil—”
Loud rang his shouting voice—“ and I will see!” “SEE!”
A lengthen’d echo, mocking, shrill’d again !
He spoke and rais’d the veil! And ask’st thou what
Unto the sacrilegious gaze lay bare ?
I know not—pale and senseless, stretch’d before
The statue of the great Egyptian queen,
The priests beheld him at the dawn of day ;
But what he saw, or what did there befall,
His lips reveal’d not. Ever from his heart
Was fled the sweet serenity of life,
And the deep anguish dug the early grave :
“ Woe—woe to him”—such were his warning words,
Answering some curious and impetuous brain,
** Woe—for her face shall charm him never more!
Woe—woe to him who treads through Guilt to TRurH!”
THE CHILD IN THE CRADLE.
Wirtuin that narrow bed, glad babe to thee A boundless world is spread !
Unto thy soul the boundless world shall be When man, a narrow bed !*
THE RING OF POLYCRATES.
Upon his battlements he stands— And proudly looks along the lands— His Samos and the Sea!
* This epigram has a considerable resemblance to the epitaph on Alexander the Great: Sufficit huic Tumulus, cui non suffecerat orbis : Res brevis huic ampla est, cui fuit ampla brevis. A little tomb sufficeth him whom not sufficed all: The small is now as great to him as once the great was small. Vide Buackwoon’s Magazine, April 1838, p. 556,
154 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
‘ And all,” he said, “ that we survey, Egyptian king, my power obey— * Own, Fortune favours me !”
‘‘With thee the Gods their favour share,
And they who once thine equals were, In thee a monarch know !
Yet one there lives to avenge the rest,
Nor can my lips pronounce thee blest, While on thee frowns the Foe!”
He spoke, and from Miletus sent, There came a breathless man, and bent Before the tyrant there.
‘Let incense smoke upon the shrine, And with the lively laurel twine, Victor, thy godlike hair !
“The foe sunk, smitten by the spear ; With the glad tidings sends me here, Thy faithful Polydore.” And from the griesly bowl he drew (Grim sight they well might start to view !) A head that dripp’d with gore.
The Egyptian king recoil’d in fear,
“ Hold not thy fortune yet too dear— Bethink thee yet,” he cried,
Thy fieets are on the faithless. seas ;
Thy fortune trembles in the breeze, And floats upon the tide,”
Ere yet the warning word was spoken— Below, the choral joy has broken— Shouts ring from street to street ! Home-veering to the crowded shore— Their freight of richest booty bore The Forests of the Fleet.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 155
Astounded stood that kingly guest,
“Thy luck this day must be confest, Yet trust not the Unsteady!
The banners of the Cretan foe
Wave war, and bode thine overthrow— They near thy sands already ! ”
Scarce spoke the Egyptian Kine—before Hark, ‘ Victory—Victory !” from the shore, And from the seas ascended ; “Escaped the doom that round us lower’d,
Swift storm the Cretan has devoured, And war itself is ended !”
Shudder’d the guest—“ In sooth,” he falter’d, “To-day, thy fortune smiles unalter’d, Yet more thy fate I dread— The Gods oft grudge what they have given, And ne’er unmix’d with grief has Heaven, - Its joys on Mortals shed !
“No less than thine my rule has thriven, And o’er each deed the gracious heaven Has, favouring, smiled as yet. But one beloved heir had L— God took him !—I beheld him die, His life paid fortune’s debt.
“So, would’st thow ’scape the coming ill— Implore the dread Invisible Thy sweets themselves to sour ! Well ends his life, believe me, never, On whom, with hands thus full for ever, The Gods their bounty shower.
“ And if thy prayer the Gods can gain not This counsel of thy friend disdain not— Thine own afllictor be! And what of all thy worldly gear Thy deepest heart esteems most dear, Cast into yonder sca!”
~:
156 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
The Samian thrill’d to hear the king— ‘‘ No gems so rich as deck this ring, The wealth of Samos gave : By this—O may the Fatal Three My glut of fortune pardon me! ”— He cast it on the wave—
And when the morrow’s dawn began, All joyous came a fisherman
Before the prince.—Quoth he, ‘Behold this fish—so fair a spoil Ne’er yet repaid the snarer’s toil,
I bring my best to thee!”
The cook to dress the fish begun— The cook ran fast as cook could run— - “Look, look !—O master mine— The ring—the ring the sea did win, I found the fish’s maw within— Was ever luck like thine !”
In horror turns the kingly guest— ‘‘Then longer here I may not rest,
I'll have no friend in thee! The Gods have marked thee for their prey, To share thy doom I dare not stay !”
He spoke—and put to sea.
Nore.—This story is taken from the well-known correspondence between Amasis and Polycrates, in the third book of Herodotus. Poly- crates—one of the ablest of that most able race, the Greek tyrants,— was afterwards decoyed into the power of Oretes, governor of Sardis, and died on the cross. Herodotus informs us, that the ring Polycrates so prized, was an emerald set in gold, the workmanship’ of Theodorus the Samian. Pliny, on the contrary, affirms it to have been a sardonyx, and in his time it was supposed still to exist among the treasures in the Temple of Concord. It is worth while to turn to Herodotus (c. 40— 48, book 38), to notice the admirable art with which Schiller has adapted the narrative, and heightened its effect. a
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 157
HOPE.
WE speak with the lip, and we dream in the soul, Of some better and fairer day ; And our days, the meanwhile, to that golden goal Are gliding and sliding away. - Now the world becomes old, now again it is young, But “‘ The Better” ’s for ever the word on the tongue.
At the threshold of life Hope leads us in—
_ Hope plays round the mirthful boy ;
Though the best of its charms may with youth begin, Yet for age it reserves its toy.
When we sink at the grave, why the grave has scope,
And over the coffin Man planteth —Horz!
And it is not a dream of a fancy proud, With a fool for its dull begetter ; There’s a voice at the heart that proclaims aloud— “Weare born for a something Better |” And that Voice of the Heart, oh, ye may believe, Will never the Hope of the Soul deceive !
THE SEXES.
Sez in the babe two loveliest flowers united—yet in truth,
While in the bud they seem the same—the virgin and the youth !
But loosen’d is the gentle bond, no longer side by side—
From holy Shame the fiery Strength will soon itself divide.
Permit the youth to sport, and still the wild desire to chase,
For, but when sated, weary strength returns to seek the grace.
Yet in the bud, the double flowers the future strife begin,
How precious all—yet nought can still the longing -heart within,
In ripening charms the virgin bloom to woman shape hath grown,
158 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
But round the ripening charms the pride hath clasp’d its guardian zone ;
Shy, as before the hunter’s horn the doe all trembling moves,
She flies from man as from a foe, and hates before she loves!
From lowering brows this struggling world the fearless youth observes, And, harden’d for the strife betimes, he strains the willing nerves ; Far to the armed throng and to the race prepared to start, Inviting glory calls him forth, and grasps the troubled heart :— Protect thy work, O Nature now! one from the other flies, Till thou unitest each at last that for the other sighs. There art thou, mighty one! where’er the discord darkest frown, Thou call’st the meek harmonious Peace, the godlike soother, down. The noisy chase is lull’d asleep, day’s clamour dies afar, And through the sweet and veiléd air in- beauty comes the star. Soft-sighing through the crispéd reeds, the brooklet glides along, And every wood the nightingale melodious fills with song. O virgin ! now what instinct heaves thy bosom with the sigh? O youth ! and wherefore steals the tear into thy dreaming eye? Alas! they seek in vain within the charm around bestow’d, The tender fruit is ripen’d now, and bows to earth its load. And restless goes the youth to feed his heart upon its fire, — Ah, where the gentle breath to cool the flame of young desire! _And now they meet—the holy love that leads them lights their eyes, And still behind the winged god the wingéd victory flies. O heavenly love !—'tis thy sweet task the human flowers to bind, For aye apart, and yet by thee for ever intertwined !
,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 159
HONOURS.
[Dienirres would be the better title, if the word were not so essen- tially unpoetical.]
WHEN the column of light on the waters is glass’d, As blent in one glow seem the shine and the stream ;
But wave after wave through the glory has pass’d, Just catches, and flies as it catches, the beam :
_So Honours but mirror on mortals their light’; Not the Man but the Puace that he passes is bright.
POMPEII AND HERCULANEUM.
Waar wonder this ?—we ask the lymphid well,
O Earth! of thee—and from thy solemn womb
What yield’st thou ?—Is there life in the abyss—
Doth a new race beneath the lava dwell?
Returns the Past, awakening from the tomb ? Rome—Greece !—O, come !—Behold—hbehold! For this Our living world—the old Pompeii sees ;
And built anew the town of Dorian Hercules !
House upon house—its silent halls once more Opes the broad Portico !—O, haste and fill
Again those halls with life !—O, pour along Through the seven-vista’d theatre the throng ! Where are ye, mimes ?—Come forth, the steel prepare For crown’d Atrides, or Orestes haunt,
Ye choral Furies with your dismal chaunt !
The Arch of Triumph !—whither leads it /—<till Behold the Forum !—On the curule chair
Where the majestic image? Lictors, where Your solemn fasces 1—Place upon his throne
The Prator—here the Witness lead, and there Bid the Accuser stand !
160 POLMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
O God! how lone The clear streets glitter in the quiet day—
The footpath by the doors winding its lifeless way ! The roofs arise in shelter, and around
The desolate Atrium—every gentle room
Wears still the dear familiar smile of Home !
Open the doors—the shops—on dreary night
Let lusty day laugh down in jocund light !
See the trim benches ranged in order !—See
The marble-tesselated floor—and there
The very walls are glittering livingly
With their clear colours. But the artist where?
Sure but this instant he hath laid aside
Pencil and colours !—Glittering on the eye
Swell the rich fruits, and bloom the flowers !—See all Art’s gentle wreaths still fresh upon the wall!
Here the arch Cupid slyly seems to glide
By with bloom-laden basket. There the shapes
Of Genii press with purpling feet the grapes.
Here springs the wild Bacchante to the dance,
And there she sleeps [while that voluptuous trance Eyes the sly faun with never-sated glance]
Now on one knee upon the centaur-steeds Hovering—the Thyrsus plies, —Hurrah!—away she speeds
Come—come, why loiter ye Here, here, how fair The goodly vessels still! Girls, hither turn,
Fill from the fountain the Etruscan urn !
On the wing’d sphinxes see the Tripod.
Ho! Quick—quick, ye slaves come—fire !—the hearth prepare ! Ha ! wilt thou sell ?—this coin shall pay thee—this, Fresh from the mint of mighty Titus !—Lo! Here lie the scales, and not a weight we miss ! So—bring the light! The delicate lamp !—what toil Shaped thy minutest grace !—quick, pour the oil ! Yonder the fairy chest !—come, maid, behold The bridegroom’s gifts—the armlets—they are gol1l, And paste out-feigning jewels !—lead the bride
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Into the odorous bath—lo, unguents still— And still the crystal vase the arts for beauty fill!
But where the men of old—perchance a prize More precious yet in yon papyrus lies, And see ev’n still the tokens of their toil— The waxen tablets—the recording style.
The earth, with faithful watch, has hoarded all ! Still stand the mute Penates in the hall ; Back to his haunts returns each ancient God. Why absent only from their ancient stand The Priests ?—waves Hermes his Caducean rod, And the wing’d victory struggles from the hand. Kindle the flame—behold the Altar there ! Long hath the God been worshipless—To prayer !
LIGHT AND WARMTH.
In cheerful faith that fears no ill The good man doth the world begin ; And dreams that all without shall still Reflect the trusting soul within. Warm with the noble vows of youth, Hallowing his true arm to the truth ;
Yet is the littleness of all So soon to sad experience shown, That crowds but teach him to recall And centre thought on self alone ; Till love, no more, emotion knows, And the heart freezes to repose.
Alas! though truth may light bestow,
Not always warmth the beams impart, Blest he who gains the BooN TO KNOW,
Nor buys the knowledge with the heart. For warmth and light a blessing both to he, Feel as the Enthusiast—as the World-wise see.
161
162 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
BREADTH AND DEPTH.
FuLL many a shining wit one sees, With tongue on all things well-conversing ; The what can charm, the what can please, In every nice detail rehearsing. Their raptures so transport the college, It seems one honeymoon of knowledge.
Yet out they go in silence where
They whilome held their learned prate ; Ah! he who would achieve the fair,
Or sow the embryo of the great, Must hoard—to wait the ripening hour— In the least point the loftiest power.
With wanton boughs and pranksome hues, Aloft in air aspires the stem ; The glittering leaves inhale the dews, But fruits are not conceal’d in them. From the small kernel’s undiscerned repose The oak that lords it o’er the Forest grows.
THE PHILOSOPHICAL EGOIST.
Hast thou the infant seen that yet, unknowing of the love
Which warms and cradles, calmly sleeps the mother’s heart above—
Wandering from arm to arm, until the call of passion wakes,
And glimmering on the conscious eye—the world in glory breaks ?—
And hast thou seen the mother there her anxious vigil keep,
Buying with love that never sleeps the darling’s happy sleep?
With her own life she fans and feeds that weak life's trembling rays,
And with the sweetness of the care, the care itself repays,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCIILLER. 163
And dost thou Nature then Dblaspheme—that, both the child and mother
Each unto each unites, the while the one doth need the other ?—
All self-sufficing wilt thou from that lovely circle stand—
That creature still to creature links in faith’s familiar band ?
Ah! dar’st thou, poor one, from the rest thy lonely self estrange ? Eternal Power itself is but all powers in interchange !
FRIDOLIN; oR, THE MESSAGE TO THE FORGE.
[ScuttieER speaking of this Ballad, which he had then nearly con- cluded, says that ‘accident had suggested to him a very pretty theme for a Ballad;” and that “after having travelled through air and water,” alluding to “‘ The Cranes of Ibycus” and ‘‘ The Diver,” ‘‘he should now claim to himself the Element of Fire.’’—Hoffmeister sup- poses from the name of Savern, the French orthography for Zabern, a town in Alsatia, that Schiller took the material for his tale from a French source; though there are German Legends analogous to it. The general style of the Ballad is simple almost to homeliness, though ~ net to the puerility affected by some of our own Ballad writers.—But the pictures of the Forge and the Catholic Ritual are worked out with singular force and truthtulness. ]
A HARMLESS lad was Fridolin, A pious youth was he ;
He served and sought her grace to win, Count Savern’s fair ladye ;
And gentle was the Dame as fair,
And light the toils of service there ;
And yet the woman’s wildest whim
In her—had been but joy to him,
u 2
164 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
Soon as the early morning shone, Until the vesper bell, For her sweet hest he lived alone Nor e’er could serve too well. She bade him oft not labour so : But then his eyes would overflow. . . It seemed a sin if strength could swerve, From that one thought—her will to serve!
And so of all her House, the Dame Most favour’d him always ; And from her lip for ever came His unexhausted praise. On him, more like some gentle child, Than serving-youth, the lady smiled, And took a harmless pleasure in The comely looks of Fridolin.
For this, the Huntsman Robert’s heart The favour’d Henchman cursed : And long, till ripen’d into art, The hateful envy nursed. His Lord was rash of thought and deed : And thus the knave the deadly seed, (As from the chase they homeward rode,) That poisons thought to fury, sow’d—
“Your lot, great Count, in truth is fair, (Thus spoke the craft suppress’d) ;
The gnawing tooth of doubt can ne’er Consume your golden rest.
He who a noble spouse can claim,
Sees love begirt with holy shame ;
Her truth no villain arts ensnare—
The smooth seducer comes not there,
“‘ How now !—bold man, what sayest thou ?” The frowning Count replied—
“ Think’st thou I build on woman’s vow, Unstable as the tide?
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Too well the flatterer’s lip allureth— On firmer ground my faith endureth ; The Count Von Savern’s wife unto No smooth seducer comes to woo!”
“ Right !”—quoth the other— and your scorn The fool enow the fool chastises,
Who though a simple vassal born, Himself so highly prizes ;
Who buoys his heart with rash desires,
And to the Dame he serves aspires.”
“ How!” cried the Count, and trembled—“ How !
Of One who lives, then, speakest thou ?”
“ Surely ; can that to all reveal’d Be all unknown to you? Yet, from your ear if thus conceal’d, Let me be silent too.” Out burst the Count, with gasping breath, “¢ Fool—fool !—thou speak’st the words of death ! What brain has dared so bold a sin ?” ‘My lord, I spoke of Fridolin !
“ His face is comely to behold” He adds—then paused with art.
The Count grew hot—the Count grew cold— The words had pierced his heart.
“ My gracious master sure must see
That only in her eyes lives he ;
Behind your board he stands unheeding,
Close by her chair—his passion feeding.
165
“ And then the rhymes. . .” ‘The rhymes!” ‘ The same—
Confess’d the frantic thought.” “ Confess’d !” “Ay, and a mutual flame The foolish boy besought ! No doubt the Countess, soft and tender, Forbore the lines to you to render,... And I repent the babbling word That scaped my Jips What ails my lord?”
166 POHMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
Straight to a wood, in scorn and shame, Away Count Savern rode— Where, in the soaring furnace-flame, The molten iron glow’d. Here, late and early, still the brand Kindled the smiths, with crafty hand ; The bellows heave and the sparkles fly, As if they would melt down the mountains high.
Their strength the Fire, the Water gave, In interleagued endeavour ; The mill-wheel, whirl’d amidst the wave, Rolls on for aye and ever— Here, day and night, resounds the clamour, While measured beats the heaving hammer ; And, suppled in that ceaseless storm, Tron to iron stamps a form,
Two smiths before Count Savern bend, Forth-beckon’d from their task.
“ The first whom I to you may send, And who of you may ask—
‘ Have you ny lord’s command obey’d 2’
—Thrust in the hell-fire yonder made ;
Shrunk to the cinders of your ore,
Let him offend mine eyes no more !”
Then gloated they—the griesly pair— They felt the hangman’s zest ; For senseless as the iron there, The heart lay in the breast. And hied they, with the bellows’ breath, To strengthen still the furnace-death ; The murder-priests nor flag nor falter— Wait the victim—trim the altar !
The huntsman seeks the page—God wot, How smooth a face hath he !
“ Off, comrade, off! and tarry not ; Thy lord hath need of thee !”
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Thus spoke his lord to Fridolin,
“ Haste to the forge the wood within, And ask the serfs who ply the trade—- ‘ Have you my lord’s command obey’d 2’ ”
‘Tt shall be done ”—and to the task He hies without delay. Had she no hest ?—’twere well to ask, To make less long the way. So, wending backward at the thought, The youth the gracious lady sought. “Ere I go to the forge, I have come to thee : Hast thou any commands, by the road, for me?”
‘J fain,” thus spake that lady fair,
In winsome tone and low, * But for mine infant ailing there,:
To hear the mass would go. Go thou, my child—and on the way, For me and mine thy heart shall pray ; Repent each sinful thought of thine— So shall thy soul find grace for mine ! ”
Forth on the welcome task he wends, Her wish the task endears, Till, where the quiet hamlet ends, A sudden sound he hears. To and fro the church-bell, swinging, Cheerily, clearly forth is ringing ; Knolling souls that would repent To the Holy Sacrament.
He thought, ‘Seek God upon thy way, And He will come to thee !”
He gains the House of Prayer to pray, But all stood silently.
It was the Harvest’s merry reign,
The scythe was busy in the grain ;
One clerkly hand the rites require
To serve the mass and aid the choir.
167
168 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
At once the good resolve he takes, As sacristan to serve :
“ No halt,” quoth he, “the footstep makes That doth but heavenward swerve !”
So, on the priest, with humble soul, ©
He hung the cingulum and stole,
And eke prepares each holy thing
To the high mass administ’ring.
Now, as the ministrant, before The priest he took his stand ; Now towards the altar moved, and bore The mass-book in his hand. Rightward, leftward kneeleth he, Watchful every sign to see ; Tinkling, as the sanctus fell, Thrice at each holy name, the bell.
Now the meek priest, bending lowly, Turns unto the solemn shrine, And with lifted hand and holy, Rears the cross divine, While the clear bell, lightly swinging, That boy-sacristan is ringing ;— Strike their breasts, and down inclining, Kneel the crowd, the symbol signing.
Still in every point excelling, With a quick and nimble art— Every custom in that dwelling Knew the boy by heart } To the close he tarried thus, Till Vobiscwm Dominus ; To the crowd inclines the priest, And the crowd have sign’d—and ceased !
Now back in its appointed place, His footsteps but delay
To range each symbol-sign of grace— Then forward on his way.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCIUILLER. 169
So, conscience-calm, he lightly goes ; Before his steps the furnace glows ;
His lips, the while, (the count completing,) Twelve paternosters slow-repeating.
He gain’d the forge—the smiths survey’d, As there they grimly stand :
‘* How fares it, friends —have ye obey’d,” He cried, ‘‘ my lord’s command ?”
“Ho! ho!” they shout and ghastly grin,
And point the furnace-throat within :
‘With zeal and heed, we did the deed—
The master’s praise, the servants’ meed.”
On, with this answer, onward home, With fleeter step he flies ; Afar, the Count beheld him come— He scarce could trust his eyes. “‘ Whence com’st thou?” ‘From the furnace.” ‘So! Not elsewhere? troth, thy steps are slow ; Thou hast loiter’d long !”—* Yet only till I might the trust consign’d fulfil.
“My noble lord, ’tis true, to-day,
T’d chanced, on quitting thee, To ask my duties, on the way,
Of her who guideth me. She bade me, (and how sweet and dear It was !) the holy mass to hear ; Rosaries four I told, delaying, ° Grace for thee and thine heart-praying.”
All stunn’d, Count Savern heard the speech — A wondering man was he ;
«¢ And when thou didst the furnace reach, What answer gave they thee?”
“ An answer hard the sense to win ;
Thus spake the men with ghastly grin,
‘With zeal and heed, we did the deed—
The master’s praise, the servants’ meed.’ ”
170 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
“ And Robert ?”—gasp’d the Count, as lost In awe, he shuddering stood—
“ Thou must, be sure, his path have cross’d ? I sent him to the wood.”
“In wood nor field where I have been,
No single trace of him was seen.”
All deathlike stood the Count: “ Thy might,
O God of heaven, hath judged the right !”
Then meekly, humbled from his pride, He took the servant’s hand ; He led him to his lady’s side, She nought mote understand, “This child—no angel is more pure— Long may thy grace for him endure ; Our strength how weak, our sense how dim— GoD AND HIS HOSTS ARE OVER HIM!”
THE YOUTH BY THE BROOK.
{Sung in “ The Parasite,” a comedy which Schiller translated from Picard—much the best comedy, by the way, that Picard ever wrote. ]
BesIDE the brook the Boy reclin’d And wove his flowery wreath,
And to the waves the wreath. consign’d— The waves that danced beneath.
“So fleet mine hours,” he sigh’d, “ away Like waves that restless flow :
And, so my flowers of youth decay Like those that float below.
‘¢ Ask not why I, alone.on earth, Am sad in life’s young time ; To all the rest are hope and mirth When spring renews its prime,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 171
Alas! the music Nature makes, In thousand songs of gladness— While charming all around me, wakes My heavy heart to sadness.
** Ah! vain to me the joys that break From Spring, voluptuous are ;
For only ONE ’tis mine to seek— The Near, yet ever Far !
I stretch my arms, that shadow-shape In fond embrace to hold ;
Still doth the shade the clasp escape—- The heart is unconsoled !
Come forth, fair Friend, come forth below, And leave thy lofty hall,
The fairest flowers the spring can know In thy dear lap shall fall!
Clear glides the brook in silver roll’d, Sweet carols fill the air ;
The meanest hut hath space to hold
19)
A happy loving Pair?!
TO THE ID™AL.
[To appreciate the beauty of this Poem,—the reader must remember that it preceded our own School—vwe will not say of Egotism, but of Self-expression ; a school of which the great Byron is the everlasting master—and in which the Poet reveals the hearts of others, by con- fessing the emotions of his own. Of late years we have been over- whelmed with attempts at the kind of pathos which the following stanzas embody with melancholy tenderness—yet with manly resigna- tion. Butat the time Schiller wrote this elegy on departed youth, he had the merit of originality—a merit the greater, because the Poem expresses feelings which almost all of us have felt in the progress of lite. —The only Poem written before it, which it resembles, is the ‘‘ Ode on a Distant Prospect of Eton College,’’ by our own illustrious Gray, whom the little critics of our day seek to depreciate.—Beautiful as the German’s Poem is, (in his own language,) the Englishman’s excels it.]
172 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
THEN wilt thou, with thy fancies holy— Wilt thou, faithless, fly from me? With thy joy, thy melancholy, Wilt thou thus relentless flee? O Golden Time, O Human May, Can nothing, Fleet One, thee restrain? - Must thy sweet river glide away Into the eternal Ocean-Main ?
The suns serene are lost and vanish’d
That wont the path of youth to gild, And all the fair Ideals banish’d
From that wild heart they whilome fill’d. Gone the divine and sweet believing
In dreams which Heaven itself unfurl’d! What godlike shapes have years bereaving
Swept from this real work-day world !
As once, with tearful passion fired, The Cyprian Sculptor clasp’d the stone, - Till the cold cheeks, delight inspired, Blush’d—to sweet life the marble grown : So youth’s desire for Nature !—round The Statue, so my arms I wreathed, Till warmth and life in mine it found, And breath that poets breathe—it breathed ;
With my own burning thoughts it burn’d ;— Its silence stirr’d to speech divine ;—
Its lips my glowing kiss return’d ;— Its heart in beating answer’d mine !
How fair was then the flower—the tree !— How silver-sweet the fountain’s fall!
The soulless had a soul to me! My life its own life lent to all!
The Universe of Things seem’d swelling The panting heart to burst its bound, And wandering Fancy found a dwelling In every shape—thought—deed, and sound.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 173
Germ’d in the mystic buds, reposing, A whole creation slumber’d mute, Alas, when from the buds unclosing, How scant and blighted sprung the fruit!
How-happy in his dreaming error, His own gay valour for his wing, Of not one care as yet in terror, Did Youth upon his journey spring ; Till floods of balm, through air’s dominion, Bore upward to the faintest star— For never atight to that bright pinion Could dwell too high, or spread too far.
Though laden with delight, how lightly The wanderer heavenward still could soar, And aye the ways of life how brightly The airy Pageant danced before !— Love, showering gifts (life’s sweetest) down, Fortune, with golden garlands gay, And Fame, with starbeams for a crown, And Truth, whose dwelling is the Day.
Ah! midway soon lost evermore, Afar the blithe companions stray ; In vain their faithless steps explore, As, one by one, they glide away. Fleet Fortune was the first escaper— The thirst for wisdom linger’d yet ; But doubts with many a gloomy vapour The sun-shape of the Truth beset !
The holy crown which Fame was wreathing, Behold! the mean man’s temples wore, And but for one short spring-day breathing,
Bloom’d Love—the Beautiful—no more ! And ever stiller yet, and ever The barren path more lonely lay, Till scarce from waning Hope could quiver A glance along the gloomy way
174 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Who, loving, lingered yet to guide me, When all her boon companions fled, Who stands consoling yet beside me, And follows to the House of Dread ? Thine FrrpenpsH1e—thine the hand so tender, Thine the balm dropping on the wound, Thy task, the load more light to render, QO! earliest scught and soonest found !—
And Thou, so pleased, with her uniting, To charm the soul-storm into peace, Sweet TOIL, in toil itself delighting, That more it laboured, less could cease, Tho’ but by grains thou aid’st the pile The vast Eternity uprears, At least thou strik’st from Time the while Life’s debt—the minutes, days and years.*
PHILOSOPHERS.
To learn what gives to every thing
The form and life which we survey, The law by which the Eternal King Moves all Creation’s order’d ring,
And keeps it from decay—
When to great Doctor Wiseman we go — If help’d not out by Fichté’s Ego— All from his brain that we can delve, Is this sage answer—“ Ten’s not Twelve,” +
* Though the Ideal images of youth forsake us, the Ideal itself still remains to the Poet. Jt is his task and his companion—unlike the Phantasies of Fortune, Fame, and Love, the Phantasies of the Ideal are imperishable. While, as the occupation of life, it pays off the debt of Time, as the exalter of life it contributes to the Building of Eternity.
t+ “ Wenn Ich nicht drauf ihm helfe Er heisst; zehn ist nicht zwélfe.’’
If the Ich in the text is correctly printed with a capital initial, the
intention of Schiller must apparently be to ridicule the absolute Ego
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 175
The snow can chill, the fire can burn,
Men when they walk on two feet go ;— A sun in Heayen all eyes discern— This through the senses we may learn,
Nor go to school to know!
But the profounder student sees, That that which burns—will seldom freeze ; And can instruct the astonish’d hearer, How moisture moistens—light makes clearer.
Homer composed his mighty song, The hero danger dared to scorn, The brave man did his duty, long Before—(and who shall say ’m wrong)— Philosophers were born ! Without Descartes and Locke—the Sun Saw things by Heart and Genius done, Which those great men have proved, on viewing, The—possibility of doing !
Strength in this life prevails and sways— Bold Power oppresses humble Woith— He who can not command obeys— In short there’s not too much to praise In this poor orb of earth.
of Fichté—a philosopher whom he elsewhere treats with very little ceremony—and thus Hoffmeister seems to interpret the meaning.— Hinrichs, on the other hand, quoting the passage without the capital initial, assumes the satire to be directed against the first great law of logic, which logicians call the Principle of Contradiction, viz., that it is impossible for a thing to be and not to be at the same time; or, as Schiller expresses it, that it is impossible for ten to be both ten and twelve ; a truth which is obvious to all men, and which, precisely be- cause it is obvious to all men, Philosophers can state andexplain. Ac- cording to this interpretation, the sense of the translation is not correctly given, and Schiller seems rather to say, ‘‘I should call that man exceedingly clever who could explain to me the great law of the Universe, if I did not first explain it to him by saying it is this, Ten is not Twelve—i. e., No philosopher can tell a plain man anything about a profound principle, which any plain man could not just as well have told to the Philosopher,”
176 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
But how things better might be done, If sages had this world begun,
By moral systems of their own,
Most incontestably is shown !
“Man needs mankind, must be confest— In all he labours to fulfil,
Must work, or with, or for, the rest ;
Tis drops that swell the ocean’s breast— ’Tis waves that turn the mill.
The savage life for man unfit is,
So take a wife and live in cities.”
Thus ex cathedréd teach, we know,
Wise Messieurs Puffendorf and Co.
Yet since, what grave professors preach, The crowd may be excused from knowing ;
Meanwhile, old Nature looks to each, Tinkers the chain, and mends the breach,
And keeps the clockwork going. Some day, Philosophy, no doubt, A better World will bring about : Till then the Old a little longer, Must blunder on—through Love and Hunger!
PUNCH SONG.
Four Elements, join’d in An emulous strife,
Fashion the world, and Constitute life.
From the sharp citron The starry juice pour ; Acid to Life is The innermost core,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. i%7
Now, let the sugar The bitter one mect ; Still be life’s bitter Tamed down with the sweet !
Let the bright water Flow into the bowl ;
Water, the calm one, Embraces the Whole.
Drops from the spirit
Pour quick’ning within ; Life but its life from
The spirit can win,
Haste, while it gloweth, Your vessels to bring ;
The wave has but virtue Drunk hot from the spring !
PUNCH SONG.
TO BE SUNG IN THE NORTH.
On the free southern hills Where the full summers shine,
Nature quicken’d by sunlight, Gives birth to the vine!
Her work the Great Mother Conceals from the sight,
Untrack’d is the labour, Unfathom’d the might.
As the child of the sunbeam, The wine leaps to day,
From the tun springs the crystal, A fountain at play,
178 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
All the senses it gladdens, Gives Hope to the breast ; To grief a soft balsam, To life a new zest.
But, our zone palely gilding, The Sun of the North;
From the leaves it scarce tinteth No fruit ripens forth.
Yet life will ne’er freely Life’s gladness resien ;
Our vales know no vineyard— Invent we a wine !
But wan the libation, In truth must appear ; Living Nature alone gives The bright and the clear !
Yet draw from the dim fount, The Waters of Mirth!
For Heaven gave us Art, The Prometheus of Earth.
Wherever strength reacheth, What kingdoms await her ! From the Old, the New shaping,
Art, ay—a Creator !—
The Elements’ union Divides at her rod,
With the hearth- nits she mimics The glow of a god.
To Hesperidan Islands She sends the ship forth ; Lo, the southern fruits lending Their gold to the North!
PORMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 179
So, this sap wrung from flame be A symbol-sign still,
Of the wonders man works with The Force and the Will!
PEGASUS IN HARNESS.
Av Smithfield* once, as I’ve been told, Or some such place where beasts are sold, A bard, whose bones from flesh were all free, Put up for sale the Muses’ palfrey. His ears how cock’d, his tail how stiff! Loud neigh’d the prancing Hippoeriff. The crowd grew large, the crowd grew larger : “* By Jove, indeed a splendid charger ! ’Twould suit some coach of state !—the king’s! But, bless my soul, what frightful wings ! No doubt the breed is mighty rare— But who would coach it through the air ? Who'd trust his neck to such a flyer?” In short, the bard could find no buyer.
At last a farmer pluck’d up mettle: “ Let’s see if we the thing can settle. These useless wings my man may lop, Or tie down tight—I likes a crop! *T might draw my cart; it seems to frisk it ; Come, twenty pounds !—ecod, Dll risk it.” I blush to say the bard consented, And Hodge bears off his prize, contented. The noble beast is in the cart ; Hodge cries, “‘ Gee hup!” and off they start. He scarcely feels the load behind, Skirrs, scours, aud scampers like the wind. The wings begin for heaven to itch, The wheels go devilish near the ditch !
* Literally ‘‘ Haymarket.”
180 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
“So ho!” grunts Hodge, “ ’tis more than funny Tve got a penn’orth for my money.
To-morrow, if I still survive,
I have some score of folks to drive ;—
The load of five the beast could drag on ;
Pll make him leader to the waggon.
Choler and collar wear with time ;
The lively rogue is in his prime.”
All’s well at first ; a famous start— Waggon and team go like a dart.
The wheelers’ heavy plod behind him, But doubly speeds the task assign’d him ; Till, with tall crest, he snuffs the heaven, Spurns the dull road so smooth and even. True the impetuous instinct to,
Field, fen, and bog, he scampers through. The frenzy seems to catch the team ;
The driver tugs, the travellers scream. O’er ditch, o’er hedge, splash, dash, and crash on, Ne’er farmer flew in such a fashion.
At last, all batter’d, bruised, and broken, (Poor Hodge’s state may not be spoken,) Waggon, and team, and travellers stop, Perch’d on a mountain’s steepest top ! Exceeding sore, and much perplext,
“‘T fegs,” the farmer cries, “ what next? This helter-skelter sport will never do, But break him in [’ll yet endeavour to ; Let ’s see if work and starving diet Can’t tame the monster into quiet!”
The proof was made, and save us! if in Three days you’d seen the hippogriffin, You'd scarce the noble beast have known, Starved duly down to skin and bone. Cries Hodge, rejoiced, “ I have it now, Bring out my ox, he goes to plough.”
So said, so done, and droll the tether, Wing’d horse, slow ox, at plough together :
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 181
The unwilling griffin strains his might, One last strong struggle yet for flight ;
In vain, for well mured to labour,
Plods sober on his heavy neighbour,
And forces, inch by inch, to creep,
The hoofs that love the air to sweep ; Until, worn out, the eye grows dim,
The sinews fail the founder’d limb,
The god-steed droops, the strife is past, He writhes amidst the mire at last !
“ Accursed brute !” the farmer cries ; And, while he bawls, the cart-whip plies, ** All use it seems you think to shirk
So fierce to run—so dull to work !
My twenty pounds !—Not worth a pin! Confound the rogue who took me in !” He vents his wrath, he plies his thong, When, lo! there gaily comes along,
With looks of light and locks of yellow, And lute in hand, a buxom fellow ; Through the bright clusters of his hair
A golden circlet glistens fair.
‘‘What’s this—a wondrous yoke and pleasant?” Cries out the stranger to the peasant,
“ The bird and ox thus leash’d together— Come, prithee, just unbrace the tether : But let me mount him for a minute— That beast !—you ’Il see how much is in it.”
The steed releasea—the easy stranger Leaps on his back, and smiles at danger ; Scarce felt that steed the master’s rein, When all his fire returns again :
He champs the bit—he rears on high, Light, like a soul, looks from his eye ; Changed from a creature of the sod, Beliold the spirit and the god :
As sweeps the whirlwind, heavenward springs The unfurl’d glory of his wings.
Before the eye can track the flight,
Tost in the azure fields of light.
182 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
HERO AND LEANDER. A BALLAD.
[We have already seen, in ‘‘The Ring of Polyerates,”’ Schiller’s mode of dealing with classical subjects. In the poems that follow, derived from similar sources, the same spirit is maintained. In spite of Humboldt, we venture to think that Schiller certainly does not narrate Greek legends in the spirit of an ancient Greek. ‘he Gothic sentiment, in its ethical depth and mournful tenderness, more or less prevades all that he translates from classic fable into modern pathos. The grief of Hero, in the ballad subjoined, touches closely on the lamentations of Thekla, in ‘‘ Wallenstein.” The Complaint of Ceres, embodies Christian Grief and Christian Hope. The Trojan Cassandra expresses the moral of the Northern Faust. Even the ‘ Victor Feast”’ changes the whole spirit of Homer, on whom it is founded, by the introduction of the Ethical Sentiment at the close, borrowed as a modern would apply what he so borrows, from the moralising Horace. Nothing can be more foreign to the Hellenic Genius, (if we except the very disputable intention of the ‘‘ Prometheus ”’), than the interior and typical design which usually exalts every conception in Schiller. But it is perfectly open to the Modern Poet to treat of ancient legends in the modern spirit. Though he selects a Greek story, he is still a modern who narrates—he can never make himself a Greek, any more than Aschylus in the ‘‘ Persxe”’ could make himself a Persian. But this is still more the privilege of the Poet in Narrative, or lyrical com- position, than in the Drama, for in the former he does not abandon his identity, as in the latter he must—yet eyen this must has its limits. Shakespeare’s wonderful power of self-tranfusion has no doubt enabled him, in his Plays from Roman History, to animate his characters with much of Roman life. - But no one can maintain that a Roman would ever have written plays, in the least resembling ‘‘ Julius Czwsar,’’ or ‘*Coriolanus,”’ or ‘‘ Antony and Cleopatra.’’ The Portraits may be Roman, but they are painted in the manner of the Gothic School. The Spirit of antiquity is only in them, inasmuch as the representation of. Human Nature, under certain circumstances, is accurately, though loosely outlined. When the Poet raises the dead, it is not to restore, but to remodel. ]
SEE you the towers, that, sray and old, Frown through the sunlight’s liquid gold, Steep sternly fronting steep ? The Hellespont beneath them swells, And roaring cleaves the Dardanelles, The Rock-Gates of the Deep !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 183
Hear you the Sea, whose stormy wave, From Asia, Europe clove in thunder ?
That sea which rent a world, can ndt Rend Love from Love asunder !
- In Hero’s, in Leander’s heart,
; Thrills the sweet anguish of the dart Whose feather flies from Love. |
All Hebe’s bloom in Hero’s cheek—
And his the hunter’s steps that seek Delight, the hills above !
Between their sires the rival feud Forbids their plighted hearts to meet ;
Love’s fruits hang over Danger’s gulf, By danger made more sweet.
Alone on Sestos’ rocky tower,
Where upward sent in stormy shower, The whirling waters foam,—
Alone the maiden sits, and eyes
The cliffs of fair Abydos rise Afar—her lover’s home.
Oh, safely thrown from strand to strand, No bridge can love to love convey ;
No boatman shoots from yonder shore, Yet Love has found the way.—
: b i .
That Love, which could the Labyrinth pierce— Which nerves the weak, and curbs the fierce, And wings with wit the dull ;— That Love which o’er the furrow’d land Bow’d—tame beneath young Jason’s hanl— The fiery-snorting Bull ! Yes, Styx itself, that nine-fold flows, Has Love, the fearless, ventured o’er, And back to daylight borne the bride, From Pluto’s dreary shore !
What marvel then that wind and wave, Leander doth but burn to brave, When Love, that goads him, guides!
184 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Still when the day, with fainter glimmer, Wanes pale—he leaps, the daring swimmer, Amid the darkening tides ; With lusty arms he cleaves the waves, And strives for that dear strand afar ; Where high from Hero’s lonely tower Lone streams the Beacon-star.
In vain his blood the wave may chill, These tender arms can warm it still— And, weary if the way, By many a sweet embrace, above All earthly boons—can liberal Love The Lover’s toil repay, Until Aurora breaks the dream, And warns the Loiterer to depart— Back to the ocean’s icy bed, Scared from that loving heart.
So thirty suns have sped their flight— Still in that theft of sweet delight
Exult the happy pair ; Caress will never pall caress, And joys that gods might envy, bless
The single bride-night there. Ah! never he has rapture known,
Who has not, where the waves are driven Upon the fearful shores of Hell,
Pluck’d fruits that taste of Heaven !
Now changing in their Season are, The Morning and the Hesper Star ;— Nor see those happy eyes 3 The leaves that withering droop and fall, Nor hear, when, from its northern hall, The neighbowing Winter sighs ; Or, if they see, the shortening days But seem to them to close in kindness ; For longer joys, in lengthening nights, They thank the heaven in blindness.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 185
It is the time, when Night and Day,
In egual scales contend for sway *— Lone, on her rocky steep,
Lingers the girl with wistful eyes
That watch the sun-steeds down the skies, Careering towards the deep.
Lull’d lay the smooth and silent sea, A mirror in translucent calm,
The breeze, along that crystal realm, Unmurmuring, died in balm.
In wanton swarms and blithe array, The merry dolphins glide and play Amid the silver waves. In gray and dusky troops are seen, The hosts that serve the Ocean-Queen, Upborne from coral caves: They—only they—have witness’d love To rapture steal its secret way : And Hecate + seals the only lips That could the tale betray !
She marks in joy the lulled water, And Sestos, thus thy tender daughter, Soft-flattering, woos the sea ! ‘Fair god—and canst thou then betray ¢ No! falsehood dwells with them that say That falsehood dwells with thee ! Ah! faithless is the race of man, And harsh a father’s heart can prove ; But thee, the gentle and the mild, The grief of love can move !
“ Within these hated walls of stone, Should I, repining, mourn alone, And fade in ceaseless care,
* This notes the time of year—not the the time of day—yviz., about the 23rd of September.—HorrMEIsTER. + Hecate, as the mysterious Goddess of Nature.—-HorrMerrstTEr.
186 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
But thou, though o’er thy giant tide,
Nor bridge may span, nor boat may glide, Dost safe my lover bear.
And darksome is thy solemn deep, And fearful is thy roaring wave ;
But wave and deep are won by love— Thou smilest on the brave !
‘Nor vainly, Sovereign of the Sea,
Did Eros send his shafts to thee : What time the Ram of Gold,
Bright Helle, with her brother bore,
How stirr'd the waves she wander'd o’er, How stirr’d thy deeps of old!
Swift, by the maiden’s charm subdued, Thou cam’st from out the gloomy waves,
And, in thy mighty arms she sank Into thy bridal caves.
* A goddess with a god, to keep
In endless youth, beneath the deep, Her solemn ocean-court !
And still she smooths thine angry tides,
Tames thy wild heart, and favouring guides The sailor to the port !
Leautiful Helle, bright one, hear Thy lone adoring suppliant pray !
And guide, O goddess—guide my love Along the wonted way !”
Now twilight dims the water’s flow,
And from the tower, the beacon’s glow Waves flickering o’er the main.
Ah, where athwart the dismal stream,
Shall shine the Beacon’s faithful beam The lover’s eyes shall strain !
Hark! sounds moan threat’ning from afar— From heaven the blessed stars are gone—
More darkly swells the rising sea-- The tempest labours on !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 187
Along the ocean’s boundless plains
Lies Night—in torrents rush the rains From the dark-bosom’d cloud—
Red lightning skirs the panting air,
And, loosed from out their rocky lair, Sweep all the storms abroad.
Huge wave on huge wave tumbling o’er, The yawning gulf is rent asunder,
And shows, as through an opening pall, Grim earth—the ocean under !
Poor maiden! bootless wail or vow— “‘Have mercy, Jove—he gracious, Thou! Dread prayer was mine before ! What if the gods have heard—and he, Lone victim of the stormy sea, Now struggles to the shore ! There’s not a sea-bird on the wave— Their hurrying wings the shelter seek ; The stoutest ship the storms have proved, Takes refuge in the creek,
“ Ah, still that heart, which oft has braved The danger where the daring saved, Love lureth o’er the sea ;— For many a vow at parting morn, That nought but death should bar return, Breathed those dear lips to me ; And whirl’d around, the while I weep, Amid the storm that rides the wave, The giant gulf is grasping down The rash one to the grave!
‘False Pontus! and the calm I hail’d,
The awaiting murder darkly veil’d— The lull’d pellucid flow,
The smiles in which thou wert array’d,
Were but the snares that Love betray’d To thy false realm below !
188 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Now in the midway of the main, Return relentlessly forbidden, Thou loosenest on the path beyond
The horrors thou hadst hidden.”
Loud and more loud the tempest raves,
In thunder break the mountain waves, White-foaming on the rock-—
No ship that ever swept the deep
Its ribs of gnarled oak could keep Unshatter’d by the shock.
Dies in the blast the guiding torch To light the struggler to the strand ;
Tis death to battle with the wave, And death no less to land !
On Venus, daughter of the seas,
She calls the tempest to appease— To each wild-shrieking wind
Along the ocean-desert borne,
She vows a steer with golden horn— Vain vow—trelentless wind !
On every goddess of the deep, On all the gods in heaven that be,
She calls—to soothe in calm, awhile, The tempest-laden sea !
‘* Hearken the anguish of my cries ! From thy green halls, arise—arise, Leucothoe the divine ! Who, in the barren main afar, Oft on the storm-beat mariner Dost gently-saving shine. Oh, reach to him thy mystic veil, To which the drowning clasp may cling, And safely from that roaring grave, To shore my lover bring!”
And now the savage winds are hushing, And o’er the arch’d horizon, blushing, Day’s chariot gleams on high !
a). eh ee
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 189
Back to their wonted channels roll’d, In erystal calm the waves behold— One smile on sea and sky ! All softly breaks the rippling tide, Low-murmuring on the rocky land, And playful wavelets gently float A Corpse upon the strand !
*Tis he !—who ev’n in death would still Not fail the sweet vow to fulfil ; She looks—sees—know him there ! From her pale lips no sorrow speaks, No tears glide down the hueless cheeks, Cold—numb’d in her despair— She look’d along the silent deep, She look’d upon the bright’ning heaven, Till to the marble face the soul Its light sublime had given!
“ Ye solemn Powers men shrink to name, Your might is here, your rights ye claim— Yet think not I repine : Soon closed my course, yet I can bless The life that brought me happiness— The fairest lot was mine! Living have I thy temple served, Thy consecrated priestess been— My last glad offering now receive, Venus, thou mightiest queen !”
Flash’d the white robe along the air, And from the tower that beetled there She sprang into the wave ; Roused from his throne beneath the waste, Those holy forms the god embraced— A god himself their grave ! Pleased with his prey, he glides along— More blithe the murmur’d music seems, As gush from unexhausted urns His Everlasting Streams !
190 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
THE PLAYING INFANT.
Pxuay on thy mother’s bosom, Babe, for in that holy isle
The error cannot find thee yet, the grieving, nor the guile ; Held in thy mother’s arms above Life’s dark and troubled waye, Thou lookést with thy fearless smile upon the floating grave. Play, loveliest Innocence !—Thee, yet Arcadia circles round, A charmed power for thee hast set the lists of fairy ground ; Each gleesome impulse Nature now can sanction and befriend, Nor to that willing heart as yet the Duty and the End.
Play, for the haggard Labour soon will come to seize its prey, Alas! when Duty grows thy lay—Enjoyment fades away !
CASSANDRA.
[There is peace between the Greeks and Trojans—<Achilles is to wed Polyxena, Priam’s daughter. On entering the Temple, he is shot through his only vulnerable part by Paris.—The time of the following Poem is during the joyous preparations for the marriage. ]
Awp mirth was in the halls of Troy, Before her towers and temples fell ;
High peal’d the choral hymns of joy, Melodious to the golden shell.
The weary hand reposed from slaughter—— The eye forgot the tear it shed ;
This day King Priam’s lovely daughter Shall great Pelides wed !
Adorn’d with laurel boughs, they come, Crowd after crowd—the way divine, Where fanes are deck’d—for gods the home And to the Thymbrian’s * solemn shrine. The wild Bacchantic joy is madd’ning The thoughtless host, the fearless guest ; And there, the unheeded heart is sadd’ning One solitary breast !
* Apollo.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 191
Unjoyous in the joyful throng,
Alone, and linking life with none, Apollo’s laurel groves among,
The still Cassandra wander’d on! Into the forest deep recesses.
The solemn Prophet-Maiden pass’d And, svornful, from her loosen’d tresses,
The sacred fillet cast !
“To all, its arms doth Mirth unfold, And every heart foregoes its cares— And Hope is busy in the old— The bridal-robe my sister wears— And I alone, alone am weeping ; The sweet delusion mocks not me— Around these walls destruction sweeping, More near and near I see!
“ A torch before my vision glows,
But not in Hymen’s hand it shines, A flame that to the welkin goes,
But not from holy offering-shrines ; Glad hands the banquet are preparing,
And near, and near the halls of state I hear the God that comes unsparing,
I hear the steps of Fate.
“ And men my prophet-wail deride ! The solemn sorrow dies in scorn ; And lonely in the waste, I hide The tortured heart that would forewarn. Amidst the happy, unregarded, Mock’d by their fearful joy, I trod ; Oh, dark to me the lot awarded, Thou evil Pythian god !
“ Thine oracle, in vain to be, Oh, wherefore am I thus consign’d With eyes that every truth must see, Lone in the City of the Blind ?
192 POHMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Cursed with the anguish of a power To view the fates I may not thrall, The hovering tempest still must lower— The horror must befall !
“ Boots it the veil to lift, and give
To sight the frowning fates beneath ? For error is the life we live,
And, Oh, our knowledge is but death ! Take back the clear and awful mirror,
Shut from mine eyes the blood-red glare ; Thy truth is but a gift of terror
When mortal lips declare.
“ My blindness give to me once more *— The gay dim senses that rejoice ; The Past’s delighted songs are o’er For lips that speak a Prophet’s voice. To me the future thou hast granted ; I miss the moment from the chain— The happy Present-Hour enchanted ! Take back thy gift again !
“‘ Never for me the nuptial wreath The odour-breathing hair shall twine ; My heavy heart is bow’d beneath The service of thy dreary shrine. My youth was but by tears corroded,— My sole familiar is my pain, Each coming ill my heart foreboded, And felt it first—in vain !
“ How cheerly sports the careless mirth,— The life that loves, around I see ;
Fair youth to pleasant thoughts gives birth— The heart is only sad to me.
* «Kverywhere,” says Hoffmeister truly, ‘“‘ Schiller exalts Ideal Belief over real wisdom ;—everywhere this modern Apostle of Christianity advocates that Ideal, which exists in Faith and emotion, oe the wisdom of worldly intellect, the barren experience of ife,” &e, ,
waa
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Not for mine eyes the young spring gloweth, When earth her happy feast-day keeps ; The charm of life who ever knoweth That looks into the deeps ?
“‘ Wrapt in thy bliss, my sister, thine The heart’s inebriate rapture-springs ;— Longing with bridal arms to twine The bravest of the Grecian kings. High swells the joyous bosom, seeming Too narrow for its world of love, Nor envies, in its heaven of dreaming, The heaven of gods above!
“TI too might know the soft controul Of one the longing heart could choose, With look which love illumes with soul— -The look that supplicates and wooes. And sweet with him, where love presiding Prepares our hearth, to go—but, dim, A Stygian shadow, nightly gliding, Stalks between me and him !
“Forth from the grim funereal shore,
The Hell-Queen sends her ghastly bands ; Where’er I turn—behind—before—
Dumb in my path—a Spectre stands ! Wherever gayliest, youth assembles—
T see the shades in horror clad, Amidst Hell’s ghastly People trembles
One soul for ever sad !
“ T see the steel of Murder gleam— I see the Murderer’s glowing eyes— To right—to left, one gory stream— One circling fate—my flight defies ! I may not turn my gaze—all seeing, Foreknowing all, I dumbly stand— To close in blood my ghastly being In the far strangers’ land !”
193
194. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Hark ! while the sad sounds murmur round, Hark, from the Temple-porch, the eries !—
A wild, confused, tumultuous sound !— Dead the divine Pelides lies !
Grim Discord rears her snakes devouring— The last departing god hath gone !
And womb’d in cloud the thunder, lowering, Hangs black on Ilion.
Nore.—Upon this poem, Madame de Staél makes the following just and striking criticism.—Z’ Allemagne, Part II. ¢. 13. ‘* One sees in this ode, the curse inflicted on a mortal by the prescience of a god. Is not the grief of the Prophetess that of all who possess a superior intellect with an impassioned heart? Under a shape wholly poetic, Schiller has embodied an idea grandly moral—yviz., that the true genius (that of the sentiment) is a victim to itself, even when spared by others. ‘There are no nuptials for Cassandra: not that she is insen- sible—not that she is disdained, but the clear penetration of her soul passes in an instant both life and death, and can only repose in Heaven.”
THE VICTORY FEAST.
[In this Lyric, Schiller had a notion of raising the popular social song from the prosaic vulgarity common to it—into a higher and more epic dignity.] .
THE stately walls of Troy had sunken, Her towers and temples strew’d the soil ;
The sons of Hellas, victory-drunken, Richly laden with the spoil,
Are on their lofty barks reclin’d Along the Hellespontine strand ;
A gleesome freight the favouring wind Shall bear to Greece’s glorious land ; And gleesome chaunt the choral strain,
As towards the household altars, now, Each bark inclines the painted prow— For Home shall smile again !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
And there the Trojan women weeping, Sit ranged in many a length’ning row ; Their heedless locks, dishevell’d, sweeping Adown the wan cheeks worn with woe. No festive sounds that peal along, Their mournful dirge can overwhelm ; Through hymns of joy one sorrowing song Commingled, wails the ruined realm. ‘* Farewell, beloved shores !” it said, * From home afar behold us torn, By foreign lords as captives borne—
Ah, happy are the Dead !”
And Calchas, while the altars blaze, Invokes the high gods to their feast !
On Pallas, mighty or to raise Or shatter cities, call’d the Priest—-
And Him, who wreathes around the land The girdle of his watery world,
And Zeus, from whose almighty hand The terror and the bolt are hurl’d. Success at last awards the crown—
The long and weary war is past ; Time’s destined circle ends at last— And fall?’n the Mighty Town !
The Son of Atreus, king of men, The muster of the hosts survey’d, How dwindled from the thousands, when Along Scamander first array’d ! With sorrow and the cloudy thought, The Great King’s stately look grew dim— Of all the hosts to Ilion brought, How few to Greece return with him ! Still let the song to gladness call,
195
- For those who yet their home shall greet !—
For them the blooming life is sweet : Return is not for all!
02
196 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Nor all who reach their native land May long the joy of welcome feel— Peside the household gods may stand Grim Murther with awaiting steel ; And they who ’seape the foe, may die Beneath the foul familiar glaive. Thus He * to whose prophetic eye Her light the wise Minerva gave :— ‘* Ah! blest whose hearth, to memory true, The goddess keeps unstain’d and pure— “For woman’s guile is deep and sure, And Falsehood loves the New !”
The Spartan eyes his Helen’s charms, By the best blood of Greece recaptured ; Round that fair form his glowing arms— (A second bridal)—wreathe enraptured. “Woe waits the work of evil birth— Revenge to deeds unblest is given ! For watchful o’er the things of earth, The eternal Council-Halls of Heaven. Yes, ill shall ever ill repay— Jove to the impious hands that stain The Altar of Man’s Hearth, again The doomer’s doom shall weigh !”
“Well they, reserved for joy to-day,” Cried out Oileus’ valiant son,
“* May laud the favouring gods who sway Our earth, their easy thrones upon ; With careless hands they mete our doom, Our woe or welfare Hazard gives—
Patroclus slumbers in the tomb, And all unharm’d Thersites lives. If Fate, then, showers without a choice The lots of luck and life on all, Let him on whom the prize may fall,— Let him who lives—rejoice !
* Ulysses.
POEMS AND BALILADS OF SCHILLER: 197
* Yes, war will still devour the best !— Brother, remember’d in this hour ! His shade should be in feasts a guest, Whose form was in the strife a tower ! What time our ships the Trojan fired, Thine arm to Greece the safety gave— The prize to which thy soul aspired, _ The crafty wrested from the brave.* Peace to thine ever-holy rest— Not thine to fail before the foe! Ajax alone laid Ajax low: Ah—wrath destroys the best !”
To his dead sire—(the Dorian king)— The bright-hair’d Pyrrhus f pours the wine :— “ O’er every lot that life can bring, My soul, great Father, prizes thine. Whate’er the goods of earth, of all, The highest and the holiest—Famz ! For when the Form in dust shall fall, O’er dust triumphant lives the Name! Brave Man, thy light of glory never Shall fade, while song to man shall last ; The Living soon from earth are pass’d, ‘Tue DrsD—ENDURE FOR EVER!’”
“ Since all are mute to mourn and praise In Victory’s hour, the vanquished Man— Be mine at least one voice to raise For Hector,” Tydeus’ son began : “ A tower before his native town ; He stood—and fell as fall the brave. The conqueror wins the brighter crown, The conquer’d has the nobler grave !
* Need we say to the general reader, that allusion is here made to the strife between Ajax and Ulysses, which has furnished a subject to the Greek tragic poet, who has depicted, more strikingly than any historian, that intense emulation for glory, and that mortal agony in Cefeat, which constituted the main secret of the prodigious cnergy of the Greek character? The Tragic poet, in taking his hero from the IIomeric age, endowcd him with the feelings of the Athenian re- publicans he addressed.
t Neoptolemus, the son of Achilles,
198 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER
He who brave life shall bravely close, For Home and Hearth, and Altar slain, If mourn’d by Friends, shall glory gain Out of the lips of Foes !”
Lo, Nestor now, whose stately age Through threefold lives of mortals lives !— The laurel’d bowl, the kingly sage To Hector’s tearful mother gives, “ Drink—in the draught new strength is glowing, The grief it bathes forgets the smart ! O Bacchus ! wond’rous boons bestowing, Oh how thy balsam heals the heart ! Drink—in the draught new vigour gloweth, The grief it bathes forgets the smart— And balsam to the breaking heart, The healing god bestoweth.
“ As Niobe, when weeping mute, To angry gods the scorn and prey, But tasted of the charmed fruit, And cast despair itself away ; So, while unto thy lips, its shore, This stream of life enchanted flows, Rememiber’d grief, that stung before, Sinks down to Lethée’s calm repose. So, while unto thy lips, its shore, The stream of life enchanted flows— Drown’d deep in Lethe’s calm repose, The grief that stung before !”
Seized by the god, behold the dark And dreaming prophetess arise, She gazes from the lofty Bark Where Home’s dim vapours wrap the skies— ** A vapour all of human birth Like mists ascending, seen and gone, So fade Earth’s great ones from the Earth And leave the changeless gods alone.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Dehind the steed that skirs away ; And on the galley’s deck—sits Care, To-morrow comes, and we are where ? At least we'll live to-day !”
THE CRANES OF IBYCUS.
From Rhegium to the Isthmus, long
Hallow’d to steeds and glorious song,
Where, link’d awhile in holy peace,
Meet all the sons of martial Greece—
Wends Ibycus—whose lips the sweet And ever-young Apollo fires ;
~ The staff supports the wanderer’s feet—
The God the Poet’s soul inspires !
Soon from the mountain-ridges high, The tower-crown’d Corinth greets his eye ; In Neptune’s groves of darksome pine, He treads with shuddering awe divine ; Nonght lives around him, save a swarm Of Cranes, that still pursued his way-— Lured by the South, they wheel and form In ominous groups their wild array.
And “ Hail! beloved Birds!” he cried ; “ My comrades on the ocean tide, Sure signs of good ye bode to me; Our lots alike would seem to be; From far, together borne, we greet A shelter now from toil and danger ; And may the frierdly hearts we meet Preserve from every ill—the Stranger!” THis step more light, his heart more gay, Along the mid-wood winds his way,
199
200 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
When, where the path the thickets close, Burst sudden forth two ruffian foes ; Now strife to strife, and foot to foot! Ah! weary sinks the gentle hand ; The gentle hand that wakes the lute Has learn’d no lore that guides the brand.
He calls on men and Gods—in vain!
His cries no blest deliverer gain ;
Feebler and fainter grows the sound,
And still the deaf life slumbers round—
“In the far land I fall forsaken, Unwept and unregarded, here ;
By death from caitiff hands o’ertaken, Nor ev’n one late avenger near!”
Down to the earth the death-stroke bore him— Hark, where the Cranes wheel dismal o’er him! He hears, as darkness veils his eyes, Near, in hoarse croak, their dirgelike cries. ““Ye whose wild wings above me hover, (Since never voice, save yours alone, The deed can tell)—the hand discover-— Avenge !”——He spoke, and life was gone.
Naked and maim’d the corpse was found—
And, still through many a mangling wound,
The sad Corinthian Host could trace
The loved—too well-remember’d face.
** And must I meet thee thus once more? Who hoped with wreaths of holy pine,
Bright with new fame—the victory o’er— The Singer’s temples to entwine !”
And Joud lamented every guest Who held the Sea-God’s solemn feast— As in a single heart prevailing, Throughout all Hellas went the wailing.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 01:
Wild to the Council Hail they ran— In thunder rush’d the threat’ning Flood— ** Revenge shall right the murder’d man, The last atonement—hblood for blood !”
Yet ’mid the throng the Isthmus claims, Lured by the Sea-God’s glorious games— The mighty many-nation’d throng— How track the hand that wrought the wrong ?— How guess if that dread deed were done, By ruffian hands, or secret foes? He who sees all on earth—+the Sun— Alone the gloomy secret knows.
Perchance he treads in careless peace,
Amidst your Sons, assembled Greece—
Hears with a smile revenge decreed —
Gloats with fell joy upon the deed—
His steps the avenging gods may mock Within the very Temple’s wall,
Or mingle with the crowds that flock To yonder solemn scenic* hall.
Wedg’d close, and serried, swarms the crowd— Beneath the weight the walls are bow’d— Thitherwards streaming far, and wide, Broad Hellas flows in mingled tide— A tide like that which heaves the deep ’ When hollow-sounding, shoreward driven ; On, wave on wave, the thousands sweep Till arching, row on row, to heayen !
The tribes, the nations, who shall name, That guest-like, there assembled came ? From Theseus’ town, from Aulis’ strand— From Phocis, from the Spartans’ land—
* The theatre,
202. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. .
From Asia’s wave-divided clime, The Isles that gem the Agzean Sea, To hearken on that Stage Sublime, The Dark Choir’s mournful melody !
True to the awful rites of old, In long and measured strides, behold The Chorus from the hinder ground, Pace the vast circle’s solemn round, So this World’s women never strode, Their race from Mortals ne’er began, Gigantic, from their grim abode, They tower above the Sons of Man!
Across their loins the dark robe clinging, Tn fleshless hands the torches swinging, — Now to and fro, with dark red glow— No blood that lives the dead cheeks know ! Where flow the locks that woo to love
On human temples— ghastly dwell The serpents, coil’d the brow above,
And the green asps with poison swell.
Thus circling, horrible, within That space—doth their dark hymn begin, And round the sinner as they go, Cleave to the heart their words of woe, Dismally wails, the senses chilling,
The hymn—the Furiss’ solemn song ; And froze the very marrow thrilling
As roll’d the gloomy sounds along.
‘¢ And weal to him—from crime secure— Who keeps his soul as childhood's pure ; Life’s path he roves, a wanderer free— We near him not—Ture AVENGERS, Wr! But woe to him for whom we weave
The doom for deeds that shun the light ; Fast to the murderer’s feet we cleave,
The fearful Daughters of the Night.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 203
‘* And deems he flight from us can hide him ? Still on dark wings We sail beside him ! The murderer's feet the snare enthralls— Or soon or late, to earth he falls ! Untiring, hounding on, we go ; For blood can no remorse atone ! On, ever—to the Shades below, And there—we grasp him, still our own !”
So singing, their slow dance they wreathe,
And stillness, like a silent death,
Heavily there lay cold and drear,
As if the Godhead’s self were near.
Then, true to those strange rites of old, Pacing the circle’s solemn round,
In long and measured strides—behold, They vanish in the hinder ground !
Confused and doubtful—half between The solemn truth and phantom scene, The crowd revere the Power, presiding O’er secret deeds, to justice guiding— The Unfathom’d and Inscrutable
By whom the web of doom is spun ; Whose shadows in the deep heart dwell,
Whose form is seen not in the sun !
Just then, amidst the highest tier, Breaks forth a voice that starts the ear ; “¢ See there—see there, Timotheus ; Behold the Cranes of Ibycus!” A sudden darkness wraps the sky ; Above the roofless building hover Dusk, swarming wings ; and heavily Sweep the slow Cranes—hoarse-murmuring, over !
“Of Ibycus ?”—that name so dear
Thrills through the hearts of those who hear! Like wave on wave in eager seas,
From mouth to mouth the murmur flees—
904 PORMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
“Of Ibyeus, whom we bewail?
The murder’d one! What mean those words ? Who is the man—knows he the tale?
Why link that name with those wild birds 1”
Questions on questions louder press— Like lightning flies the inspiring guess— Leaps every heart—‘‘ The truth we seize ; Your might is here, Eumpnipes ! The murderer yields himself confest— Vengeance is near—that voice the token— Ho !—him who yonder spoke, arrest !— And him to whom the words were spoken !”
Scarce had the wretch the words let fall,
Than fain their sense he would recall.
In vain ; those whitening lips, behold !
The secret have already told.
Into their Judgment Court sublime The Scene is changed ;—their doom is scal’d !
Behold the dark unwitness’d Crime, Struck by the light’ning that reveal’d!
The principal sources whence Schiller has taken the story of Ibycus (which was well known to the ancients, and indeed gave rise to a ee are Suidas and Plutarch. Ibycus is said by some to have
een the Inventor of the Sambuca or triangular Cithera. We must observe, however—(though erudite investigation on such a subject were ‘misplaced here,) that Atheneeus and Strabo consider the Sambuca to have originated with the Syrians, and this supposition is rendered the more probable by the similarity of the Greek word with the Hebrew, which in our received translation of the Bible is rendered by the word “‘Sackbut.” The tale, in its leading incidents, is told very faithfully by Schiller: it is the moral, or interior meaning, which he has heightened and idealized. Plutarch is contented to draw from the sto a moral against loquacity. ‘‘ It was not,” says he, “the Cranes that betrayed the Murderers, but their own garrulity.” With Schiller the garrulity is produced by the surprise of the Conscience, which has been awakened by the Apparition and Song of the Furies. His own con- ceptions as to the effect he desired to create areadmirable. ‘‘ It is not precisely that the Hymn of the Furies’? (remarks the poet) ‘has roused the remorse of the murderer, whose exclamation betrays himself and his accomplice ; that was not my meaning—but it has reminded him of his deed: his sense is struck with it. In this moment the appearance of the Cranes must take him by surprise; he is a rude,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 205
dull churl, over whom the impulse of the moment has all power. His _ loud exclamation is natural in such circumstances.” ‘That he feels * no great remorse, in this thoughtless exclamation, is evident by the quick, snappish nature of it: ‘See there, see there!’ &c.”—“ In any other state of mind,” observes Hoffmeister, “ perhaps the Audience might not have attended to this ejaculation—but at that moment of deep inward emotion, produced by the representation of the fearful Goddesses, and an siaitod dalich in their might, the name of the newly-murdered man must have struck them as the very voice of Fate, in which the speaker betrayed himself.’’—In fact the poem is an illustration of Schiller’s own lines in ‘‘ The Artists,” written eight years before :—
‘© Here secret Murder, pale and shuddering, sees Sweep o’er the stage the stern Eumenides ; Owns, where law fails, what powers to art belong, And, screened from justice, finds its doom in song!”
In the foregoing ballad Porrry (that is, the Dirge and dramatic representation of the Furies) acts doubly—first on the Murderer, next on the Audience ; it surprises the one into self-betrayal, it prepares in the other that state of mind in which, as by a divine instinct, the quick perception seizes upon the truth. In this double effect is nobly typified the power of Poetry on the individual and on the multitude... Rightly did Schiller resolve to discard from his design whatever might seem to
artake of marvellous or supernatural interposition. The appearance of the Cranes is purely accidental. . . . Whatever is of diviner agency in the punishment of crime is found not in the outer circum- stances, but in the heart within—the true realm in which the gods work their miracles. As it has been finely said—‘‘ The bad conscience (in the Criminal) is its own Nemesis, the good conscience in the Many —the audience—drags at once the bad before its forum and adjudges it.” The history of the composition of this Poem affords an instance of the exquisite art of Goethe, to which it islargely indebted. In the first sketch of the ballad, it was only one Crane that flew over Ibycus at the time he was murdered, and moreover this was only mentioned at the end of the piece. But Goethe suggested the enlargement of this leading incident—into “the long and broad phenomenon” of the swarm of Cranes, corresponding in some degree with the long and ample pageant of the Furies. Schiller at once perceived how not only the truthfulness, but the grandeur, of his picture was heightened by this simple alteration. . . . According to Goethe’s suggestions, the swarm of Cranes were now introduced as the companions of Ibycus in his voyage. . . . The fine analogy between the human wan- derer and his winged companions, each seeking a foreign land, was dimly outlined. . . . And the generous criticism of the one Poet finally gave its present fullness and beauty to the masterpiece of the other.—See GoxrTHn’s CoRRESPONDENCE WITH SCHILLER. Horr- MEISTER. HINRICHS.
206 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
THE HOSTAGE. A BALLAD.
THE tyrant Dionys to seek, Stern Mcerus with his poniard crept ; The watchful guards upon him swept ; The grim king mark’d his changeless cheek : “ What wouldst thou with thy poniard ? Speak !”— “The city from the tyrant free !”— “The death-cross shall thy guerdon be.”
“‘T am prepared for death, nor pray,” Replied that haughty man, ‘‘to live; Enough, if thou one grace wilt give :
For three brief suns the death delay
To wed my sister—leagues away ;
I boast one friend whose life for mine,
If I should fail the cross, is thine.”
The tyrant mused,—and smil’d,—and said With gloomy craft, ‘So let it be ; Three days I will vouchsafe to thee.
But mark—if, when the time be sped,
Thou fail’st—thy surety dies instead.
His life shall buy thine own release ;
Thy guilt atoned, my wrath shall cease.”
He sought his friend—* The king’s decree Ordains my life the cross upon Shall pay the deed I would have done ; Yet grants three days’ delay to me, My sister’s marriage-rites to see ; If thou, the hostage, wilt remain Till I—set free—return again !”
TOEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 207
His friend embraced—No word he said, But silent to the tyrant strode— The other went upon his road. Ere the third sun in heaven was red, The rite was o’er, the sister wed ; And back, with anxious heart unquailing, He hastes to hold the pledge unfailing.
Down the great rains unending bore, Down from the hills the torrents rush’d, In one broad stream the brooklets guslid. —The wanderer halts beside the shore, The bridge was swept the tides before— The shatter’d arches o’er and under Went the tumultuous waves in thunder,
Dismay’d, he takes his idle stand— Dismay’d, he strays and shouts around ; His voice awakes no answering sound.
No boat will leave the sheltering strand,
To bear him to the wish’d-for land ;
No boatman will Death’s pilot be ;
The wild stream gathers to a sea!
Sunk by the banks, awhile he weeps, Then raised his arms to Jove, and cried, ‘Stay thou, oh stay the madd’ning tide ! Midway behold the swift sun sweeps, And, ere he sinks adown the deeps, If I should fail, his beams will see My friend’s last anguish—slain for me !”
More fierce it runs, more broad it flows, * And wave on waye succeeds and dies— And hour on hour remorseless flies ; Despair at last to daring grows— Amidst the ‘flood his form he throws ; With vigorous arms the roaring waves Cleaves—and a God that pities, saves.
208 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
He wins the bank—he scours the strand, He thanks the God in breathless prayer ; When from the forest’s gloomy lair,
With ragged club in ruthless hand,
And breathing murder—rush’d the band
That find, in woods, their savage den,
And savage prey in wandering men,
“ What,” cried he, pale with generous fear ; ‘What think to gain ye by the strife ? All I bear with me is my life—
I take it to the King !”—and here
He snatch’d the club from him most near:
And thrice he smote, and thrice his blows
Dealt death—hbefore him fly the foes!
The sun is glowing as a brand ;
And faint before the parching heat,
The strength forsakes the feeble feet : “Thou hast saved me from the robbers’ hand, Through wild floods given the blessed land ; And shall the weak limbs fail me now?
And he /—Divine one, nerve me, thou!”
Hark! like some gracious murmur by, Babbles low music, silver-clear The wanderer holds his breath to hear ;
And from the rock, before his eye,
Laughs forth the spring delightedly ;
Now the sweet waves he bends him o’er,
And the sweet waves his strength restore,
Through the green boughs the sun gleams dying, O’er fields that drink the rosy beam, The trees’ huge shadows giant seem. Two strangers on the road are hieing ; ' And as they fleet beside him flying, These mutter’d words his ear dismay : ‘* Now——now the cross has claim’d its prey!”
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 209
Despair his wingtd path pursues, The anxious terrors hound him on— There, red(’ning in the evening sun, From far, the domes of Syracuse !— When towards him comes Philostratiits, (His leal and trusty herdsman he,) And to the master bends his knee.
* Back—thou canst aid thy friend no more, The niggard time already flown— His life is forfeit—save thine own !
Hour after hour in hope he bore,
Nor might his soul its faith give o’er ;
Nor could the tyrant’s scorn deriding,
Steal from that faith one thought confiding !”
Too late! what horror hast thou spoken ! Vain life, since it can not requite him! But death with me can yet unite him ;
No boast the tyrant’s scorn shall make—
How friend to friend can faith forsake.
But from the double-death shall know,
That Truth and Love yet live below!”
The sun sinks down—the gate ’s in view,
The cross looms dismal on the ground—
The eager crowd gape murmuring round, His friend is bound the cross unto . . . Crowd—guards—all—hbursts he breathless through * Me! Doomsman, me!” he shouts, ‘alone ! His life is rescued—lo, mine own!”
Amazement seized the circling ring ! Link’d in each other’s arms the pair— Weeping for joy—yet anguish there !
Moist every eye that gazed ;—they bring
The wondrous tidings to the king —
His breast Man’s heart at last hath known,
And the Friends stand before his throne,
210 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Long silent, he, and wondering long, Gaz’d on the Pair—“ In peace depart,
Victors, ye have subdued my heart !
Truth is no dream !—its power is strong.
Give grace to Him who owns his wrong !
"Tis mine your suppliant now to be,
Ah, let the band of Love—be Tarezz !”
This story, the heroes of which are more popularly known to us under the names of Damon and Pythias, (or Phintias), Schiller took from Hyginus, in whom the friends are called Mcerus and Selinuntius. Schiller has somewhat amplified the incidents in the original, in which the delay of Mcerus is occasioned only by the swollen stream—the other hindrances are of Schiller’s invention. The subject, like ‘“‘ The Ring of Polycrates,’’ does not admit of that rich poetry of descrip- tion with which our author usually adorns some single passage in his narratives. The poetic spirit is rather shown in the terse brevity with which picture after picture is not only sketched, but finished—and in the great thought at the close. Still it is not one of Schiller’s best ballads. His additions to the original story are not happy. The inci- dent of the Robbers is commonplace and poor, The delay occasioned by the thirst of Morus is clearly open to Goethe’s objection (an obj ection showing very nice perception of nature)-—that extreme thirst was not likely to happen to a man who had lately passed through a stream, on a rainy day, and whose clothes must have been saturated with moisture—nor in the traveller’s preoccupied state of mind, is it probable that he would have so much felt the mere physical want. ‘With less reason has it been urged by other Critics, that the sudden relenting of the Tyrant is contrary to his character. The Tyrant here has no individual’ character at all. He is the mere personation of Disbelief in Truth and Love—which the spectacle of sublime self- abnegation at once converts. In this idea lies the deep Philosophical Truth, which redeems all the defects of the piece—for Poetry, in its highest form, is merely this—‘‘ Truth made beautiful.”
THE COMPLAINT OF CERES.
It op be scarcely necessary to treat, however briefly, of the mytho- logical legend on which this exquisite elegy is founded; -yet we venture to do so rather than that the forgetfulness of the reader should militate against his enjoyment of the poem. Proserpine, according to the Homeride (for'the story is not without variations), when gather- ing flowers with.the Ocean Nymphs, is carried off by Aidoneus, or Viuto,. Mer mother, Ceres, wanders over the carth for her in vain,
POBMS AND BALLADS “OF SCHILLER. 211
and refuses to return to Heaven till her daughter is restored to her. . Finally, Jupiter commissions Hermes to persuade Pluto to render up his bride, who rejoins Ceres at Eleusis. Unfortunately she has swallowed a pomegranate seed in the Shades below, and is thus mys- teriously doomed to spend one-third of the year with her husband in Hades, though for the remainder of the year she is permitted to dwell with Ceres and the Gods. This is one of the very few mythological fables of Greece which can be safely interpreted into an Allegory. Proserpine denotes the seed corn one-third of the year below the earth ; two-thirds (that is, dating from the appearance of the ear) above it. Schiller has treated this story with admirable and artistic beauty ; and, by an alteration in its symbolical character, has preserved the pathos of the external narrative, and heightened the beauty of the interior meaning—associating the productive principle of the earth with thé immortality of-the soul. Proserpine here is not the symbol of the buried seed, but the buried seed is the symbol of her—that is, of the Dead. The exquisite feeling of this poem consoled Schiller’s friend, Sophia La Roche, in her grief for her son’s death.
I.
Doss pleasant Spring return once more? — Does Earth her happy youth regain ? Sweet suns green hills-are shining o’er ; Soft brooklets burst their icy chain : Upon the blue translucent river Laughs down an all-unclouded day, The winged west winds gently quiver, The buds are bursting from the spray; . While birds are blithe on every tree ; The Oread from the mountain-shore Sighs “ Lo. thy flowers come back to thee— Thy Child, sad Mother, comes no more!”
IL,
Alas ! how long an age it seems Since all the Earth I wander’d over,
And vainly, Titan, task’d thy beams, The lov’d—the lost one—to discover !
Though all may seek—yet none can call Her tender presence back to me!
The Sun, with eyes detecting all,
- -  Is-blind one vanish’d form to see,
P2
912 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Hast thou, O Zeus, hast thou away : From these sad arms my Daughter torn ?
Has Pluto, from the realms of Day, Enamour’d—to dark rivers borne ?
Ill.
Who to the dismal Phantom-Strand
The Herald of my Grief will venture ? The Boat for ever leaves the Land,
But only Shadows there may enter.— Veil’d from each holier eye repose
The realms where Midnight wraps the Dead, And, while the Stygian River flows,
No living footstep there may tread ! A thousand pathways wind the drear
Descent ;—none upward lead to day ;-— No witness to the Mother’s ear
The Daughter’s sorrows can betray.
IV.
Mothers of happy Human clay
Can share at least their children’s doom ; And when the loved ones pass away,
Can track—can join them—in the tomb! The race alone of Heavenly birth
Are banish’d from the darksome portals ; The Fates—have mercy on the Earth,
And death is only kind to mortals ! * Oh, plunge me in the Night of Nights,
From Heaven’s ambrosial halls exil’d! Oh, let the Goddess lose the rights
That shut the Mother from the Child!
Vv. Where sits the Dark King’s joyless bride, Where midst the Dead her home is made 3 Oh that my noiseless steps might glide, Amidst the shades myself a shade !
* What a beautiful vindication of the shortness of human life
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 213
I see her eyes, that search thro’ tears, In vain the golden light to greet ; That yearn for yonder distant spheres,
That pine the Mother's face to meet! Till some bright moment shall renew
The severed Hearts’ familiar ties ; And softened pity steal in dew,
From Pluto’s slow-relenting eyes !
VL
Ah, vain the wish, the sorrow are !
Calm in the changeless paths above Rolls on the Day God’s golden Car—
Fast are the fix’d decrees of Jove! Far from the ever gloomy Plain,
He turns his blissful looks away. Alas! Night never gives again
What once it seizes as its prey! Till over Lethe’s sullen swell,
Aurora’s rosy hues shall glow ; And arching thro’ the midmost Hell
Shine forth the lovely Ivis-Bow !
VII.
And is there nought of Her ;—no token— No pledge from that beloved hand ?
To tell how Love remains unbroken, How far soever be the land?
Has love no link, no lightest thread, The Mother to the Child to bind?
Between the Living and the Dead, Can Hope no holy compact find ?
No! every bond is not yet riven ; We are not yet divided wholly ;
To us the eternal Powers have given A symbol language, sweet and holy
214 POEMS AND. BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
VIII.
When Spring’s fair children pass away,
When, in the Northwind’s icy air, The leaf and flower alike decay,
And leave the rivell’d branches bare, Then from-Vertumnus’ lavish horn
I take Life’s seeds to strew below— And bid the gold that germs the corn
An offering to the Styx to go! Sad in the earth the seeds I lay.
Laid at thy heart, my Child—to be . The mournful tokens which convey
My sorrow and my love to Thee! -
IX.
But, when the Hours, in measured dance,
The happy smile of Spring restore, Rife in the Sun-god’s golden glance
The buried Dead revive once more ! The germs that perish’d to thine eyes,
Within the cold breast of the earth, Spring up to bloom in gentler skies,
The brighter for the second birth ! The stem its blossom rears above—
Its roots in Night’s dark womb repose--- The plant but by the equal love
Of light and darkness fostered—grows !
z= = If half with Death the germs may sleep, Yet half with Life they share the beams ; My heralds from the dreary deep, Soft voices from the solemn streams,— Like her, so them, awhile entombs, Stern Oreus, in his disinal reign, Yet Spring sends forth their tender blooms With such sweet messages again, To tell,—how far from light above, Where only mournful shadows meet,. Memory is still alive to love, And still the faithful Heart can beat !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 215.
XI. Joy to ye children of the Field! Whose life each coming year renews, To your sweet cups the Heaven shall yield The purest of its nectar-dews ! Steep’d in the light’s resplendent streams, The hues that streak the Iris-Bow Shall trim your blooms as with the beams The looks of young Atirora know, The budding life of happy Spring, The yellow Autumm’s faded leaf, Alike to gentle Hearts shall bring The symbols of my joy and grief
THE ELEUSINIAN FESTIVAL.
This, originally called the ‘‘Burger-Lay,” is one of the poems zich Schiller has devoted to his favourite subject—the Progress of ociety.
Winp in a garland the ears of gold, Azure Cyanes * inwoven be! Oh how gladly shall eye behold The Queen who comes in her majesty. Man with man in communion mixing, Taming the wild ones where she went ; Into the peace of the homestead fixing Lawless bosom and shifting tent.
II. Darkly hid in cave and cleft Shy, the Troglodyte abode ; Earth, a waste, was found and left Where the wandering Nomad strode :
* The corn-flowers.
+ ‘‘This first strophe,” observes Hoffmeister, ‘‘is “opened by the chorus of the whole festive assembly. A smaller chorus, or a single narrator, passes then to the recitative, and traces the ess of man- kind through Agriculture.”
916 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Deadly with the spear and shaft,
Prowl’d the Hunter through the land ; Woe the Stranger, waves may walt
On an ever-fatal strand !
Iil.
Thus was all to Ceres, when
Searching for her ravish’d child, (No green culture smiling then,)
O’er the drear coasts bleak and wild, Never shelter did she gain,
Never friendly threshold trod ; All unbuilded then the Fane,
All unheeded then the God!
IV. Not with golden corn-ears strewed Were the ghastly altar stones ; Bleaching there, and gore-embrued, Lay the unhallow’d Human hones ! Wide and far, where’er she roved, Still reigned Misery over all ; And her mighty soul was moved At Man’s universal fall.
ieee: “What! can this be Man—to whom Our own godlike form was given— Likeness of the shapes that bloom In the Garden-Mount of Heaven ? Was not Earth on Man -bestow’d? Earth itself his kingly home ! Roams he thro’ his bright abode, Homeless wheresoe’er he roam ?
VI. “ Will no God vouchsafe to aid }— None of the Celestial choir— Lift the Demigod we made From the slough and from the mire ?
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 21%
No, the grief they ne’er have known, Calmly the Celestials scan ! I—The Mother—TI, alone Have a heart that feels for Man !
VIL.
“ Let—that Men to Man may soar—
Man and Earth with one another Make a compact evermore—
Man the Son, and Earth the Mother,
Let their laws the Seasons show,
Time itself Man’s teacher be ; And the sweet Moon moving slow
To the starry Melody!”
VIII. Gently brightening from the cloud, Round her image, veil-like, thrown ; On the startled savage crowd Lo! the Goddess-glory shone ! Soft, the Goddess-glory stole On their war-feast o’er the Dead ; Fierce hands offered her the bowl With the blood of foemen red.
IX. Loathing, turned the gentle Queen, Loathing, shuddering, turned—and said, “‘ Ne’er a Godhead’s lips have been With the food of tigers fed. Offering pure that ne’er pollutes, Be to purer Beings given, Summer flowers and autumn fruits Please the Family of Heaven.”
Xs And the wrathful spear she takes From the Hunter’s savage hand, With the shaft of Murder,—breaks Into furrows the light sand ;
218 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
From her spiked wreath she singles Out a golden seed of corn,
With the earth the germ she mingles, And the mighty birth is born !
xs
Robing now the rugged ground—
Glints the budding lively green, Now—a Golden Forest—round
Waves the Mellow Harvest’s Sheen !— And the Goddess bless’d the Earth,
Bade the earliest sheaf be bound— Chose the landmark for a hearth,
And serenely smiling round,
XIL Spoke in prayer—‘ O Father King, On thine Ether-Hill divine— Take, O. Zeus, this offering, Let it soften Thee to thine ! From thy People’s eyes—away, Roll the vapour coil’d below ; Let the Hearts untaught to pray Learn the Father-God to know !”
XII. And his gentle Sister’s prayer, To the High Olympian came ; Thundering thro’ a cloudless air Flashed the consecrating Flame ;— On the holy sacrifice, . Bright the wreathéd lightning leaps ; And in circles thro’ the skies, Jove’s good-omened Eagle sweeps.
XIV. Low at the feet of the great Queen, low* Fall the crowd in a glad devotion ; First then, first the rude souls know Human channels of sweet emotion— “ Here the full chorus chime in again. . . The Art of Husbandry
once commenced, the chorus proceed to deduce from. it the improve- ments of all social life. —HorrmzistEr.
POEMS AND. BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 219
Cast to the Earth is the gory spear, Wakened a soft sense blind before ;
Hush’d in delight, from her lips they hear Mildest accents and wisest lore !
XV. * Thither from their thrones descending,
All the Blest ones brightly draw ; Sceptred Themis, order-blending,
Metes the right and gives the law :* Teaches each one to respect
What his Neighbour’s landmarks girth ; Bids attesting Styx protect
What the mortal owns on earth.
XVI. Hither limps the God, whom allt -Life’s inventive Arts obey, Highly skill’d is he to call Shape from metal, use from clay ! Heave the bellows, rings the clamour Of the heavy Anvil, now ; Fashion’d from the Forge-God’s hammer O’er the Furrow speeds the Plough!
; se XVII. ‘And Minerva, towering proudly Over all, with lifted spear, Calls in accents ringing loudly O’er the millions far and near— tf Calls the scattered tribes around ;— Soars the rampart—spreads the wall, And the scattered tribes have found Bulwark each, and union all!
* Property begins with the culture of the Earth, Law with Leper? weet xh + Vulcan. Then follow the technical Arts, t Now come the Arts of Polity.
220 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
XVIII. Forth she leads her lordly train, O’er the wide earth ;—and where’er Prints her conquering step the plain, Springs another Landmark there ! O’er the Hills her empire sweeps ; O’er their heights her chain she throws, Stream that thundered to the deeps Curb’d in green banks, gently flows,
SEX. Nymph and Oread, all who follow The fleet-footed Forest-Queen, O’er the hill, or through the hollow ; Swinging light their spears are seen. With a merry clamour trooping, With bright axes—one and all Round the doomed forest grouping, Down the huge pines crackling fall!
XX.
At the hest of Jove’s high daughter, Heavy load and groaning raft
O’er his green reed-margined Water Deth the River Genius waft.
In the work, glad hands have found, Hour on hour, light-footed, flies,
From the rude trunk, smooth and round, Till the polish’d mast arise !
Rik
Up leaps now the Ocean God,
Riving ribbed Earth asunder ; With his wondrous Trident-rod ;—
And the granite falls in thunder. High he swings the mighty blocks,
As an Infant swings a ball— Help’d by active Hermes, rocks
Heap’d on rocks—construct the wall.*
* This refers to the building of Troy.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
to bo
1
XXII.
Then from golden strings set free
(Young Apollo’s charmed boon) Triple flows the harmony,
And the Measure, and the Tune! With their ninefold symphonies
There the chiming Muses throng, Stone on stone the walls arise
To the Choral Music-song.*
XXIIL By Cybele’s cunning hand Set the mighty Portals are ; And the huge Lock’s safety-band, And the force-defying Bar. Swift from those divinest hands Does the Wondrous City rise— Bright, amidst, the Temple stands In the pomp of sacrifice.
XXIV.
With a myrtle-garland—-there
Comes the Queen, f by Gods obey’d, And she leads the Swain most fair
To the fairest Shepherd-maid ! Venus and her laughing Boy
Did that earliest pair array ; All the Gods, with gifts of joy
Bless’d the earliest Marriage Day !
RAV: Thro’ the Hospitable Gate Flock’d the City’s newborn sons, Marshall’d in harmonious state By that choir of Holy ones.
* A felicitous allusion to the Walls of Thebes, built according to the fable to the sound of the Muses, t Juno, the Goddess presiding over marriage.
bo: wo bo
POEMS. AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
At the Altar-shrine of Jove High—the Priestess Ceres stands
Folding, the mute Crowd above, Blessed and all-blessing hands !
XXVI. ‘In the waste the Beast is free, And the God upon his throne ! Unto each the curb must be But the nature each doth own. Yet the Man—(betwixt the two) Must to man allied, belong ;- Only Law and Custom thro’ Is the Mortal free and strong! ”
XXVIL
Wind in a garland the ears of gold,
Azure Cyanes inwoyen be ; Oh how gladly shall eye behold
The Queen who comes in her majesty ! Man to man in communion bringing,
Hers are the sweets of Home and Hearth, Honour and praise, and hail her, singing,
“ Hail to the Mother and Queen of Earth !”
PARABLES AND RIDDLES.
JL,
From Pearls her lofty bridge she weaves,
A grey sea arching proudly over ; A moment’s toil the work achieves,  ~
And on the height behold her hover ! Beneath that arch securely go
The tallest barks that ride the seas, "> : No burthen e’er the bridge may know,
And as thou seek’st to near—it flees !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
First with the floods it came, to fade As roll’d the waters from the land ; Say where that wondrous arch is made, And whose the Artist’s mighty hand ?*
IL,
LeEaGvuE after league it hurrieth thee, Yet never quits its place ;
It hath no wings wherewith to flee, Yet wafts thee over space !
It is the fleetest boat that e’er The wildest wanderer bore :
As swift as thought itself to bear From shore to farthest shore ;
Tis here and there, and everywhere, Ere yet a moments o’er !¢
II,
O’eR a mighty pasture go, Sheep in thousands, silver-white ; As to-day we see them, so In the oldest grandsire’s sight. They drink (never waxing old) Life from an unfailing brook ; There’s a Shepherd to their fold, With a silver-horned crook. From a gate of gold let out, Night by night he counts them over ; Wide “the field “they rove about, Never hath he lost a rover! True the poa, that helps to lead them, One gay RAM in front we see ; What the Flock and who doth heed them, Sheep and Shepherd—tell to me !f
* The Rainbow.  - + The Sight, or perhaps Light. $ The Moon and Stars, |
to
224 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
IV.
THERE is a Mansion vast and fair,
That doth on unseen pillars rest ; No Wanderer leaves the portals there,
Yet each how brief a guest ! The craft by which that mansion rose
No thought can picture to the soul ; "Tis lighted by a Lamp which throws
Its stately shimmer through the whole. As crystal clear, it rears aloof
The single gem which forms its roof, And never hath the eye survey’d
The Master who that Mansion* made.
Vv.
Up and down two buckets ply,
A single well within ; While the one comes full on high,
One the deeps must win ; Full or empty, never ending, Rising now and now descending, Always—while you quaff from this, That one lost in the abyss, From that well the waters living Never both together giving.
VI. THat gentle picture dost thou know, Itself its hues and splendour gaining ? Some change each moment can bestow, Itself as perfect still remaining ; It lies within the smallest space, The smallest framework forms its girth, And yet that picture can embrace The mightiest objects known on Earth :
* The Earth and the Firmament.
+ Day and Night, or Past and Present.
It has also been interpreted as Youth and Age,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Canst thou to me that crystal name (No gem can with its worth compare) Which gives all light, and knows no flame ; Absorbed is all creation there !— That ring can in itself enclose The loveliest hues that light the Heaven, Yet from it light more lovely goes Than all which to i4 can be given !*
VII.
THERE stands a Building vast and wide, Built in eldest times of yore ;
Round it may the Rider ride For a hundred days or more ;
And however fast he speed,
Shall the pile outstrip the steed.
Many a hundred years have fled, ’Gainst it Time and Storm have striven,
Stark and strong it rears its head Underneath the vault of Heaven ;
Soaring here the clouds to meet,
There the ocean laves its feet.
Not some pageant-pomp to lend Vaunting Pride, or flaunting Power,
But to shield and to defend Doth that Mighty Fabric tower.
Ne’er its like hath Earth survey’d,
Tho’ a mortal hand hath made! ¢
VIII.
Amrpst the Serpent Race is one That Earth did never bear ;
In speed and fury there be none That can with it compare,—
With fearful hiss—its prey to grasp It darts its dazzling course ;
' And locks in one destroying clasp
The Horseman and the Horse.
* The Eye. + The Wall of China. Q
226 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
It loves the loftiest heights to haunt— No bolt its prey secures,
In vain its mail may Valour vaunt, For steel its fury lures!
As slightest straw whirl’d by the wind, It snaps the starkest tree ;
It can the might of metal grind, How hard soe’er it be !
Yet ne’er but once the Monster tries The prey it threats to gain,*
In its own wrath consumed it dies, And while it slays is slain.
IX.
Six Sisters, from a wondrous pair, t We take our common birth ;
Our solemn Mother—dark as Care, Our Father bright as Mirth,
Its several virtue each bequeathes ; The soften’d shade—the merry glance ;
In endless youth, around you wreathes Our undulating dance !
We shun the darksome hollow cave, And bask where daylight glows ;
Our magic life to Nature gave The soul her beauty knows.
Blithe messengers of Spring, we lead Her jocund train,—we flee
The dreary chambers of the Dead,— Where life is—there are we !
* ‘Hat zwei mal nur gedroht.” For nw should be read nie.
t Lightning.
t Black and white. Here Schiller adopts Goethe’s theory of colours, and supposes that they are formed from the mixture of Light and Darkness,—i.e. the Children of Night and Day. In his earlier poem of “The Artists,” the noble image which concludes the Poem is taken from the different theory of Newton. According to the former theory, the Colours are six in number—according to the latter, seven HorrMIsTER.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 227
To Happiness essential things, Where Man enjoys we live— Whate’er the Pomp that blazons kings, ’Tis ours the pomp to give !*
x.
Wuat’s that, ike Poor’s most precious Friend, Nor less by kings respected —
Contrived to pierce, contrived to rend, And to the sword connected.
It draws no biood, and yet doth wound ;— Makes rich, but ne’er with spoil ;
It prints, as Earth it wanders round, A blessing on the soil.
Tho’ eldest cities it hath built— Bade mightiest kingdoms rise, it
Ne’er fired to War, nor roused to guilt : Weal to the states that prize it !f
XI.
In a Dwelling of stone I conceal,
My existence obscure and asleep ; But forth at the clash of the steel,
From my slumber exulting I leap ! At first, all too feeble for strife,
As a dwarf I appear to thine eye ; A drop could extinguish my life—
- But my wings soon expand to the sky !
Let the might of my Sister} afford
Its aid to those wings when unfurl’d, And I grow to a terrible Lord,
Whose anger can ravage the world.§
XII. Revouvine round a Disk I go, One restless journey o’er and over ; The smallest field my wanderings know, Thy hands the space could cover ;
* The Colours. + Viz. :—The Air. t+ The Ploughshare, § Fire. Q 2
228 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Yet many a thousand miles are past, In circling round that field so narrow ; My speed outstrips the swiftest blast — The strongest bowman’s arrow !*
XII.
Iv is a Bird—whose swiftness flees,
Fast as an Eagle thro’ the Air ; It is a Fish—and cleaves the seas,
Which ne’er a mightier monster bear : Tt is an Elephant, whose form
Is crownéd with a castle-keep ; And now, all like the spider-worm,
Spinning its white webs—see it creep! It hath an iron fang ; and where
That fang its grappled hold doth gain, It roots its rock-like footing there,
And braves the bafiled Hurricane. .
THE. MIGHT OR SUNG.
[In the two Poems—“ The Might of Song ’’—and that to which, in the translation, we have given the paraphrastic title ‘‘Honour to Woman ”’ (Wiirde der Frauen), are to be found those ideas which are the well-streams of so much of Schiller’s noblest inspirations ;—1st, An intense and religious conviction of the lofty character and sublime ends of the true Poet. 2nd, A clear sense of what is most lovely in woman, and a chivalrous devotion to the virtues of which he regards her as the Personation and Prototype. It is these two articles in his poetical creed, which constitute Schiller so peculiarly the Poet of Gentle- men—not the gentlemen of convention, but the gentlemen of nature— that Aristocracy of feeling and sentiment which are the flower of the social world; chivalrously inclined to whatever is most elevated in Art —chivalrously inclined to whatever is most tender in emotion. The Nobility of the North which Tacitus saw in its rude infancy, has found In Schiller not only the voice of its mature greatness, but the ideal of its great essentials. ]
* The Shade on the Dial. + The Ship.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 229
A RAIN-FLOOD from the Mountain riven,
It leaps in thunder forth to-day ; Before its rush the crags are driven,
The oaks uprooted whirl’d away ! Awed—yet in awe all wildly gladd’ning,
The startled wanderer halts below ; He hears the rock-born waters madd’ning,
Nor wits the source from whence they go,— So, from their high, mysterious Founts, along, Stream on the silenced world the Waves of Song!
Knit with the threads of life, for ever,
By those dread Powers that weave the woof,— Whose art the singer’s spell can sever ?
Whose breast has mail to music proof ? Lo, to the Bard, a wand of wonder
The Herald * of the Gods has given : He sinks the soul the death-realm under,
Or lifts it breathless up to heaven— Half sport, half earnest, rocking its devotion Upon the tremulous ladder of emotion.
As, when in hours the least unclouded Portentous, strides upon the scene— Some Fate, before from wisdom shrouded, And awes the startled souls of Men— Before that Stranger from ANOTHER, Behold how ruts world’s great ones bow ; Mean joys their idle clamour smother, The mask is vanish’d from the brow— And from Truth’s sudden, solemn flag unfurl’d, Fly all the craven Falsehoods of the World!
So, Song—like Fate itself—is given, To scare the idler thoughts away, To raise the Human to the Holy, To wake the Spirit from the Clay ! ¢
* Hermes. ' ' : + This somewhat obscure, but lofty comparison, by which Poetry is likened to some Fate that rouses men from the vulgar littleness of
230 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
One with the Gods the Bard: before him All things unclean and earthly fly— Hush’d are all meaner powers, and o’er him The dark fate swoops unharming by ; And while the Soother’s magic measures flow, Smooth’d every wrinkle on the brows of Wee !
Even as a child, that, after piming
For the sweet absent mother—hears Her voice—and, round her neck entwining
Young arms, vents all his soul in tears ;— So, by harsh Custom far estranged,
Along the glad and guileless track, To childhood’s happy home unchanged,
The swift song wafts the wanderer back— Snatch’d from the cold and formal world, and prest By the Great Mother to her glowing breast !
HONOUR TO WOMAN. [Literally “ Dignity of Women.”’]
Honour to Woman! To her it is given To garden the earth with the roses of Heaven ! All blessed, she linketh the Loves in their choir— In the veil of the Graces her beauty concealing, She tends on each altar that’s hallow’d to Feeling, And keeps ever-living the fire !
From the bounds of Truth careering, Man’s strong spirit wildly sweeps,
With each hasty impulse veering, Down to Passion’s troubled deeps.
sensual joy, levels all ranks for the moment, and appals conventional falsehoods with unlooked-for truth, Schiller had made, though in rugged and somewhat bombastic prose, many years before,—as far back as the first appearance of ‘‘ The Robbers.”
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 231
And his heart, contented never, Greeds to grapple with the Far,
Chasing his own dream for ever, On through many a distant Star !
But Woman with looks that can charm and enchain, Lureth back at her beck the wild truant again, By the spell of her presence beguiled— In the home of the Mother her modest abode, And modest the manners by Nature bestow’d On Nature’s most exquisite child !
Bruised and worn, but fiercely breasting, Foe to foe, the angry strife ;
Man the Wild One, never resting, Roams along the troubled life ;
What he planneth, still pursuing ; Vainly as the Hydra bleeds,
Crest the sever’d crest renewing— Wish to wither’d wish succeeds.
But Woman at peace with all being, reposes, And seeks from the Moment to gather the roses— Whose sweets to her culture belong. Ah! richer than he, though his soul reigneth o’er The mighty dominion of Genius and Lore, And the infinite Circle of Song.
Strong, and proud, and self-depending, Man’s cold bosom beats alone ;
Heart with heart divinely blending, In the love that Gods have known,
Souls’ sweet interchange of feeling, Melting tears—he never knows,
Each hard sense the hard one steeling, Arms against a world of foes.
‘Alive, as the wind-harp, how lightly soever If woo’d by the Zephyr, to music will quiver, Is Woman to Hope and to Fear ;
232 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Ah, tender one ! still at the shadow of grieving, How quiver the chords—how thy bosom is heaving— How trembles thy glance through the tear !
Man’s dominion, war and labour ; Might to right the Statute gave ; Laws are in the Scythian’s sabre ; Where the Mede reign’d—see the Slave! Peace and Meekness grimly routing, Prowls the War-lust, rude and wild ; Eris rages, hoarsely shouting, Where the vanish’d Graces smiled.
But Woman, the Soft One, persuasively prayeth—
Of the life * that she charmeth, the sceptre she swayeth ; She lulls, as she looks from above,
The Discord whose Hell for its victims is gaping,
And blending awhile the for-ever escaping, Whispers Hate to the Image of Love !
THE WORDS OF BELIEF.
TureE Words will I name thee—around and about, From the lip to the lip, full of meaning, they flee ;
But they had not their birth in the being without, And the heart, not the lip, must their oracle be !
_ And all worth in the man shall for ever be o’er
When in those Three Words he believes no more.
Man is made FREE !—Man, by birthright is free,
Thovgh the tyrant may deem him but born for his tool. Whatever the shout of the rabble may be—
Whatever the ranting misuse of the fool— Still fear not the Slave, when he breaks from his chain, For the Man made a Freeman grows safe in his gain.
* Literally, ‘‘the Manners,” The French word meurs corresponds
best with the German.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 233
And Virtvz is more than a shade or a sound, And Man may her voice, in this being, obey ; And though ever he slip on the stony ground, Yet ever again to the godlike way, To the science of Good though the Wise may be blind, Yet the practice is plain to the childlike mind.
And a Gop there is !—over Space, over Time, While the Human Will rocks, like a reed, to and fro, Lives the Will of the Holy—A Purpose Sublime, A Thought woven over creation below ; Changing and shifting the All we inherit, But changeless through all One Immutable Spirit !
Hold fast the Three Words of Belief—though about From the lip to the lip, full of meaning, they flee ; Yet they take not their birth from the being without---
But a voice from within must their oracle be ; And never all worth in the Man can be o’er, Till in those Three Words he believes no more.
THE WORDS OF ERROR.
THREE Errors there are, that for ever are found On the lips of the good, on the lips of the best ; But empty their meaning and hollow their sound— And slight is the comfort they bring to the breast The fruits of existence escape from the clasp Of the seeker who strives but those shadows to grasp—
So long as Man dreams of some Age in this life
When the Right and the Good will all evil subdue ; For the Right and the Good lead us ever to strife,
And wherever they lead us, the Fiend will pursue. And (till from the earth borne, and stifled at length) The earth that he touches still gifts him with strength ! *
* This simile is nobly conceived, but expressed somewhat obscurely. As Hercules contended in vain against Antieus, the Son of Earth, —so
234. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
So long as Man fancies that Fortune will live, Like a bride with her lover, united with Worth ;
For her favours, alas! to the mean she will give— And Virtue possesses no title to earth!
That Foreigner wanders to regions afar,
Where the lands of her birthright immortally are !
So long as Man dreams that, to mortals a gift, The Truth in her fulness of splendour will shine The veil of the goddess no earth-born may lift, And all we can learn is—to guess and divine ! Dost thou seek, in a dogma, to prison her form ? The spirit flies forth on the wings of the storm !
O, Noble Soul! fly from delusions like these, More heavenly belief be it thine to adore ; Where the Ear never hearkens, the Eye never sees, Meet the rivers of Beauty and Truth evermore ! Not without thee the streams—there the Dull seek them;—No! Look within thee—behold both the fount and the flow !
THE MERCHANT.
WHERE sails the ship ?—It leads the Tyrian forth For the rich amber of the liberal North.
Be kind, ye seas—winds, lend your gentlest wing, May in each creek, sweet wells restoring spring !— To you, ye gods, belong the Merchant !—o’er
The waves, his sails the wide world’s goods explore ; And, all the while, wherever waft the gales,
The wide world’s good sails with him as he sails!
long as the Earth gave her giant offspring new strength in every fall,—so the soul contends in vain with evil—the natural earth-born enemy, while the very contact of the earth invigorates the enemy for the struggle. And as Anteus was slain at last, when Hercules lifted him from the earth, and strangled him while raised aloft, so can the soul slay the enemy (the desire, the passion, the evil, the earth’s offspring), when bearing it from earth itself, and stifling it in the higher air.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 235
THE GERMAN ART
By no kind Augustus reared® To no Medici endeared, German Art arose ; Fostering glory smil’d not on her, Ne’er with kingly smiles to sun her, Did her blooms unclose.
No,—she went by Monarchs slighted— Went unhonoured, unrequited,
From high Frederick’s throne ; Praise and Pride be all the greater, That Man’s genius did create her,
From Man’s worth alone.
Therefore, all from loftier mountains, Purer wells and richer Fountains, Streams our Poet-Art ; So no rule to curb its rushing— All the fuller flows it gushing From its deep—The Heart !
THE WALK.
{Tus (excepting only ‘‘ The Artists,” written some years before) is the most elaborate of those Poems which, classed under the name of Culture-Historic, Schiller has devoted to the Progress of Civilisation. Schiller himself esteemed it amongst the greatest of the Poems he had thitherto produced—and his friends, from Goethe to Humboldt, how- ever divided in opinion as to the relative merit of his other pieces, agreed in extolling this one. It must be observed, however, that Schiller had not then composed the narrative poems, which bear the name of Ballads, and which are confessedly of a yet higher order— inasmuch as the Narrative, in itself, demands much higher merits than the Didactic.* It is also reasonably to be objected to all Schiller’s Poems of this Culture-Historic School, (may we be pardoned the use
* Schiller perhaps disclaimed the title of Didactic for this Poem, as for ‘‘ The Artists’’—yet Didactic both Poems unquestionably are.
236 POLMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
of the German Barbarism), that the leading idea of the Progress of Civilisation, however varied as to form in each, is essentially repeated in all. Nor can we omit this occasion of inculcating one critical Doctrine, which seems to us highly important, and to which the theories of Schiller’s intimate and over-refining friend, William Von Humboldt, were strongly opposed. The object of Poetry, differing essentially from that of abstract wisdom, is not directly to address the Reasoning faculty—but insensibly to rouse it through the popular medium of the emotions. Science aims at Truth, and through Truth may arrive at Beauty. Poetry or Art aims at Beauty, and through Beauty it cannot fail to arrive at Truth. The fault of “The Walk,” of ‘‘'The Artists,”’—more than all of “The Ideal and the Actual Life,”’ not to specify some other Poems, less elaborately scholastic— is, that they strain too much the faculty with which Poetry has least to do, viz., the mere Reason. Poetry ought, it is true, to bear aloft and to sustain the mind in a state of elevation—but through the senti- ment or the passion. It fails in something when it demands a high degree of philosophy or knowledge in the reader to admire—nay to comprehend it. It ought not to ask a prepared Audience, but to raise any audience it may address. Milton takes the sublimest theme he can find—he adorns it with all his stately genius, and his multiform learning ; but, except in two or three passages, (which are really defects in his great whole,) he contrives to keep within reach of very ordinary understandings. Because the Poet is wise, he is not for that reason to demand wisdom from his readers. In the Poem of ‘*The Walk,” it is only after repeated readings that we can arrive at what seems to us its great and distinctive purpose—apart from the mere recital of the changes of the Social State. According to our notion, the purpose is this—the intimate and necessary connection between Man and Nature—the Social State and the Natural. The Poet com- mences with the actual Landscape, he describes the scenery of his Walk: Rural Life, vyiz.—Nature in the Fields—suggests to him the picture of the Early Pelasgian or Agricultural life—Nature is then the Companion of Man. A sudden turn in the Landscape shows him the poplar avenues which in Germany conduct to cities. He beholds the domes and towers of the distant Town—and this suggests to him the alteration from the rural life to the civic—still Nature is his guide. But in cities Man has ceased to be the companion of Nature —he has become her ler (der Herrscher). In this altered condition the Poet depicts the growth of Civilisation, till he arrives at the Invention of Printing. Light then breaks upon the Blind—Man desires not only to be Lord of Nature, but to dispense with her. ‘Instead of Necessity and Nature he would appoint Liberty and Reason.” Reason shouts for Liberty—so do the Passions, and both burst from the wholesome control of Nature. He then reviews the corruption of Civilisation under the old French Régime; he likens Man, breaking from this denaturalised state, to the tiger escaping from its den into the wilderness ; and suggests the great truth, that it is only by a return to Nature, that he can regain his true liberty and redemption. Not, indeed, (as Hoffmeister truly observes), the savage
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 287
Nature to which Rousseau would reduce Man—that, Schiller was too wise to dream of—and too virtuous to desire ; but that Nature which has not more its generous liberty than its holy laws—that Nature which is but the word for Law—God’s Law. He would not lead Man back to Nature in its infancy, but advance him to Nature in its perfection. The moral Liberty of a well-ordered condition of society is as different from the physical liberty lusted after by the French Revolutionists, as (to borrow Cowley’s fine thought) “the solitude of a God from the solitude of a wild beast.” And finally, after this general association of Nature with Mankind, the Poet awakens as from a dream, to find himself individually alone with Nature, and concludes, in some of the happiest lines he ever wrote, by insisting on that eternal vouthfulness of Nature, which links itself with its com- panion Poetry. ‘‘The Sun of Homer smiles upon us still.’’ In the original German, the Poem is composed in the long rhymeless metre, which no one has succeeded, or can succeed, in rendering into English melody. But happily, the true beauty of the composition, like most of Schiller’s (unlike most of Goethe's), is independent of form :—con- sisting of ideas, not easily deprived of their effect, into what mould soever they may he thrown. . . . In the above remarks we have sought to remove the only drawback the general reader may find, to the pleasure to be derived from the Poem in the original—to lighten the weight upon his intellect, and define the purpose of the design. As to execution, even in translation, the sense of beauty must be dull in those who cannot perceive the exquisite merits of the preliminary description—the rapid vigour with which what Herder called “the World of Scenes,’ shifts and shimmers, and the grand divisions of Human History are seized and outlined—and the noble reflections which, after losing himself in the large interests of the multitude, Solitude forces upon the Poet at the close. ]
Hair, mine own hill—ye bright’ning hill-tops, hail!
Hail, sun, that gild’st them with thy looks of love!
Sweet fields !—ye lindens, murmuring to the gale!
And ye gay choristers the boughs above !
And thou, the Blue Immeasurable Cam,
O’er mount and forest, motionless and bright,—
Thine airs breathe through me their reviving balm,
And the heart strengthens as it drinks thy light!
Thou gracious Heaven! man’s prison-home I flee— Loosed from the babbling world, my soul leaps up to thee !
Flowers of all hue are struggling into glow, Along the blooming fields ; yet their sweet strife Melts into one harmonious concord. Lo,
The path allures me through the pastoral green,
238 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
And the wide world of fields !—The labouring bee Hums round me; and on hesitating wing
O’er beds of purple clover quiveringly
Hovers the butterfly.—Save these, all life
Sleeps in the glowing sunlight’s steady sheen— Ev’n from the west, no breeze the lull’d airs bring. Hark—in the calm aloft, I hear the sky-lark sing !
The thicket rustles near—the alders bow Down their green coronals—and as I pass, Waves, in the rising wind, the silvering grass. Come, day’s ambrosial night !—receive me now Beneath the roof by shadowy beeches made, Cool-breathing !_ Lost the gentler landscape’s bloom ! And as the path mounts, snake-like, through the shade, Deep woods close round me with mysterious gloom ; Still, through the trellis-leaves, at stolen whiles, Glints the stray beam, or the meek azure smiles, Again, and yet again, the veil is riven— And the glade opening, with a sudden glare, Lets in the blinding day! Before me, heaven With all its Far-Unbounded !—one blue hill Ending the gradual world—in vapour !
Where I stand upon the mountain-summit, lo, As sink its sides precipitous before me, The stream’s smooth waves in flying crystal flow Through the calm vale beneath. Wide Ether o’er me— Beneath, alike, wide Ether endless still ! Dizzy, I gaze aloft—shuddering, I look below !— A railed path betwixt the eternal height— And the eternal deep allures me on. Still, as I pass—all laughing in delight, The rich shores glide along ; and in glad toil, Glories the pranksome vale with variegated soil, Each feature that divides what labour’s son Claims for his portion from his labouring brother ;— Broidering the veil wrought by the Mighty Mother,*
* Demeter.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 239
Hedge-row and bound—those friendly scrolls of law,— Law, Man’s sole guardian ever since the time When the old Brazen Age, in sadness saw Love fly the world ! Now, through the harmonious meads,
One glimmering path, or lost in forests, leads, Or up the winding hill doth labouring climb— The highway link of lands dissever’d—glide The quiet rafts adown the placid tide ; And through the lively fields, heard faintly, goes The many sheep-bells’ music—and the song Of the lone herdsman, from its vex’d repose, Rouses the gentle echo !—Calm, along The stream, gay hamlets crown the pastoral scene, Or peep through distant glades, or from the hill Hang dizzy down! Man and the soil serene Dwell neighbourlike together—and the still Meadow sleeps peaceful round the rural door— And, all-familiar, wreathes and clusters o’er The lowly casement, the green bough’s embrace, As with a loving arm, clasping the gentle place!
O happy People of the Fields, not yet Waken’d to freedom from the gentle will Of the mild Nature, still content to share With your own fields earth’s elementary law! Calin harvests to calm hopes the boundary set, And peaceful as your daily labour, there, Creep on your careless lives ! *
But ah! what steals
Between me and the scenes I lately saw— A stranger spirit a strange world reveals, A world with method, ranks, and orders rife— And rends the simple unity of life. The vista’d Poplars in their long array The measured pomp of social forms betray.
* Here the Poet (after a slight and passing association of Man’s more primitive state with the rural landscape before him) catches sight of the distant city ; and, proceeding to idealise what he thus surveys, brings before the reader, in a series of striking and rapid images, the progressive changes of Civilisation—See Preniminary Remarks.
210 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
That stately train proclaims the Ruler nigh ;
And now the bright domes glitter to the sky,
And now from out the rocky kernel flowers
The haughty Crry, with its thousand towers !
Yet though the Fauns* back to their wilds have flown, Devotion lends them loftier life in stone.
Man with his fellow-man more closely bound—
The world without begirts and cramps him round ; But in that world within the widening soul,
The unpausing wheels in swifter orbits roll.
See how the iron powers of thoughtful skill
Are shaped and quicken’d by the fire of strife ; Through contest great—through union greater still.
To thousand hands a single soul. gives life—
In thousand breasts a single heart is beating—
Beats for the country of the common cause—
Beats for the old hereditary laws The earth itself made dearer by the dead—
And by the gods (whom mortal steps are meeting), Come from their heaven, large gifts on men to shed. Ceres, the plough—the anchor, Mereury—
Bacchus, the grape—the Sovereign of the sea,
The horse ;—the olive brings the Blue-eyed Maid— While tower’d Cybele yokes her lion-car,
Entering in peace the hospitable gate—
A Goddess-Citizen !
All-blest ye are, Ye Solemn Monuments! ye men and times That did from shore to shore, and state to state, Transplant the beauty of humanity ! Forth send far islands, from the gentler climes, Their goodly freight—the manners and the arts. In simple courts the Patriarchal Wise By social Gates adjudge the unpurchased right. f To deathless fields the ardent hero flies, To guard the hearths that sanctify the fight ;
* The Fauns here are meant generally to denote all the early rural . gods—the primitive Deities of Italy.
t Alluding to the ancient custom of administering Law in the open places near the town gates.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 241
And women from the walls, with anxious hearts
Beating beneath the infants nestled there,
Watch the devoted band, till from their eyes,
In the far space, the steel-clad pageant dies—
Then, falling by the altars, pour the prayer,
Fit for the gods to hear—that worth may earn
The fame which crowns brave souls that conquer, and— return !
And fame was yours and conquest !—yet alone
Fame—and not life return’d : your deeds are known
In words that kindle glory from the stone.
‘Tell Sparta, we, whose record meets thine eye,
Obey’d the Spartan laws—and here we lie !” *
Sleep soft !—your blood bedews the Olive’s bloom,
Peace sows its harvests in the Patriot’s tomb,
And Trade’s great intercourse at once is known
Where Freedom guards what Labour makes its own.
The azure River-God his watery fields
Lends to the raft ;—her home the Dryad yields.
Down falls the huge oak with a thunder-groan ;
Wing’d by the lever soars the quickening stone ;
Up from the shaft the diving Miner brings
The metal-mass with which the anvil rings,
Anvil and hammer keeping measured time
As the steel sparkles with each heavy chime :—
The bright web round the dancing spindle gleams ;
Safe guides the Pilot, through the world of streams,
The ships that interchange, where’er they roam,
- The wealth of earth—-the industry of home ;
High from the mast the garland-banner waves,
The Sail bears life upon the wind it braves ;
Life grows and multiplies where life resorts,
Life crowds the Masts—life bustles through the Ports,
And many a language the broad streets within
Blends on the wondering Ear the Babel and the din.
And all the harvests of all earth, whate’er
Hot Afric nurtures in its lurid air,
* Terodotus. The celebrated epitaph on the Spartan tumulus at
Thermopylie. R
242 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Or Araby, the blest one of the Wild,
Or the Sea’s lonely and abandoned child
Uttermost Thule,—to one mart are borne,
And the rich plenty brims starr’d Amalthzea’s horn. The nobler Genius prospers with the rest :
Art draws its aliment from Freedom’s breast ;
-Flush’d into life, the pictured Image breaks,
Waked by the chisel, Stone takes soul and speaks !
On slender Shafts a Heaven of Art reposes,
And all Olympus one bright Dome encloses.
Light as aloft we see the Iris spring,
Light as the arrow flying from the string,
O’er the wide river, rushing to the Deep,
The lithe bridge boundeth with its airy leap.
But all the while, best pleased apart to dwell, Sits musing Science in its noiseless cell ; Draws meaning circles, and with patient mind Steals to the Spirit that the whole design’d, Gropes through the Realm of Matter for its Laws, Learns where the Magnet or repels or draws, Follows the sound along the air, and flies After the lightning through the pathless skies, Seeks through dark Chance’s wonder-teeming maze The Guiding Law which regulates and sways, Seeks through the shifting evanescent shows The Central Principle’s serene repose.
Now shape and voice—the immaterial Thought Takes from th’ Invented speaking page sublime, The Ark which Mind has for its refuge wrought, Its floating Archive down the floods of Time ! Rent from the startled gaze the veil of Night, O’er old delusions streams the dawning light :— Man breaks his bonds—ah, blest could he refrain, Free from the curb, to scorn.alike the rein !
“‘ Freedom !” shouts Reason, ‘‘ Freedom !” wild Desire— . And light to Wisdom is to Passion fire.
From Nature’s check bursta forth one hurtling swarm—. Ah, snaps the anchor, as descends the storm !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 243
The sea runs mountains—vanishes the shore, The mastless wreck drifts endless ocean o’er ; Lost,—Faith—man’s polar Star !—nought seems to rest, The Heart’s God, Conscience, darkens from the breast—
Yet first the foulness of the slough discern, From which to Freedom Nature seeks return.* Gone Truth from language, and from life, belief ; The oath itself rots blighted to a lie,
On love’s most solemn secrets, on the grief
Or joy that knits the Heart’s familiar tie— Intrudes the Sycophant, and glares the spy. Suspected friendship from the soul is rent,
The hungry treason snares the Innocent—
With rabid slaver, and devouring fangs,
Fast on his prey the foul blasphemer hangs— Shame from the reason and the heart effac’d, The thought is abject, and the love debas’d : Deceit—O Truth, thy holy features steals— Watches emotion in its candid course—
Betrays what Mirth unconsciously reveals,
And desecrates Man’s nature at its source ;
And yet the Tribune justice can debate—
And yet the Cot of tranquil Union prate— And yet a spectre which they call the Law, Stands by the Kingly throne, the crowd to awe! For years—for centuries, may the Mummies there, Mock the warm life whose lying shape they wear, Till Nature once more from her sleep awakes— Till to the dust the hollow fabric shakes Beneath your hands-—Avenging Powers sublime, Your heavy iron hands, Necessity and Time !
Then, as some Tigress from the grated bar, Bursts sudden, mindful of her wastes afar,
* The two lines in brackets are, after much hesitation, interpolated by the Translator, in order to maintain the sense, otherwise obscured, if not lost, by the abruptness of the transition. Schiller has already glanced at the French Revolution, but he now goes back to the time ” preceding it, and the following lines portray the corruption of the old
régime.
R2
244 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Deep in Numidian glooms—Humanity,
Fierce in the wrath of wretchedness and crime, Forth from the City’s blazing ashes breaks,
And the lost Nature it has pined for seeks.
Open ye walls and let the prisoner free !—
Safe to forsaken fields, back let the wild one flee !
But where am I—-and whither would I stray? The path is lost-the cloud-capt mountain-dome, The rent abysses, to the dizzy sense,
Behind, before me! Far and far away,
Garden and hedgerow, the sweet Company
Of Fields, familiar speaking of man’s home—
Yea, every trace of man—lie hidden from the eye. Only the raw eternal Marrer, whence
Life buds, towers round me—the grey basalt-stone, Virgin of human art, stands motionless and Jone. Roaringly, through the rocky cleft, and under Gnarl’d roots of trees, the torrent sweeps in thunder— Savage the scene, and desolate and bare—
Lo! where the eagle, his calm wings unfurl’d, Lone-halting in the solitary air,
Knits* to the vault of heaven this ball—the world ! No plumed wind bears o’er the Deedal soil
One breath of man’s desire, and care, and toil.
Am I indeed alone, amidst thy charms,
O Nature—clasped once more within thine arms /— I dreamed—and wake upon thy heart !—escaped From the dark phantoms which my Fancy shaped ; And sinks each shape of human strife and woe Down with the vapours to the vale below !
Purer I take my life from thy pure shrine, Sweet Nature !—gladlier comes again to me The heart and hope of my lost youth divine ! Both end and means, eternally our will Varies and changes, and our acts are still
* Knits - Knupft. What a sublime image is conveyed in that single word !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
The repetitions, multiplied and stale, Of what have been before us. But with THex One ancient law, that will not wane or fail, Keeps beauty vernal in the bloom of truth! Ever the same, thou hoardest for the man What to thy hands the infant or the youth Trusted familiar ; and since Time began, Thy breasts have nurtured, with impartial love, The many-changing ages !
Look above, Around, below ;—beneath the self-same blue, Over the self-same green, eternally, (Let man’s slight changes wither as they will,) All races which the wide world ever knew, United, wander brother-like !—Ah ! sce, THE SUN OF HOMER SMILES UPON US STILL!
THE LAY OF THE BELL. ‘¢ Vivos yoco—Mortuos plango—Fulgura frango.’’ *
I.
Fast, in its prison-walls of earth, Awaits the mould of baked clay, Up, comrades, up, and aid the birth— Tue Bett that shall be born to-day ! Who would honour obtain, With the sweat and the pain,
The praise that Man gives to the Master must buy ;-—
But the blessing withal must descend from on high !
* «J call the living—I mourn the Dead—I break the lightning.” These words are inscribed on the Great Bell of the Minster of Schaff- haugen—-also on that of the Church of Art near Lucerne. There was an old belief in Switzerland, that the undulation of air, caused by the
sound of a Bell, broke the electric fluid of a thunder-cloud.
246 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
And well an earnest word beseems The work the earnest hand prepares 5 Its load more light the labour deems, When sweet discourse the labour shares. So let us ponder—nor in vain— What strength can work when labour wills ; For who would not the fool disdain Who ne’er designs what he fulfils? And well it stamps our Human Race, And hence the gift To UNDERSTAND, That Man, within the heart should trace Whate’er he fashions with the hand.
ap From the fir the fagot take, Keep it, heap it hard and dry, That the gather’d flame may break Through the furnace, wroth and high. When the copper within : Seethes and simmers—the tin, Pour quick, that the fluid that feeds the Bell May flow in the right course glib and well.
Deep hid within this nether cell, What force with Fire is moulding thus, In yonder airy tower shall dwell, And witness wide and far of us! It shall, in later days, unfailing, Rouse many an ear to rapt emotion ; Its solemn voice with Sorrow wailing, Or choral chiming to Devotion. Whatever Fate to Man may bring, Whatever weal or woe befall, That metal tongue shall backward ring The warning moral drawn from all.
III.
See the silvery bubbles spring ! Good ! the mass is melting now!
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 247
Let the salts we duly bring Purge the flood, and speed the flow. From the dross and the scum, Pure, the fusion must come ; For perfect and pure we the metal must keep, That its voice may be perfect, and pure, and deep.
That voice, with merry: music rife, The cherish’d child shall welcome in ; What time the rosy dreams of life, In the first slumber’s arms begin. As yet in Time’s dark womb unwaming, Repose the days, or foul or fair ; And watchful o’er that golden morning, The Mother-Love’s untiring care !
And swift the years like arrows fly— No more with girls content to play, Bounds the proud Boy upon his way, Storms through loud life’s tumultuous pleasures, With pilgrim staff the wide world measures ; And, wearied with the wish to roam, Again seeks, stranger-like, the Father-Home. And, lo, as some sweet vision breaks
Out from its native morning skies, With rosy shame on downcast cheeks,
The Virgin stands before his eyes. A nameless longing seizes him !
From all his wild companions flown ; Tears, strange till then, his eyes bedim ;
He wanders all alone.
Blushing, he glides where’er she move ; Her greeting can transport him ; To every mead to deck his love, The happy wild flowers court him ! Sweet Hope—and tender Longing—ye The growth of Life’s first Age of Gold ; When the heart, swelling, seems to see The gates of heaven unfold !
248 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
O Love, the beautiful and brief! O prime, Glory, and verdure, of life’s summer time !
IV. Browning o’er, the pipes are simmering, Dip this wand of clay * within ; Tf like glass the wand be glimmering, Then the casting may begin. Brisk, brisk now, and see If the fusion flow free ; If—(happy and welcome indeed were the sign !) If the hard and the ductile united combine,
For still where the strong is betrothed to the weak,
And the stern in sweet marriage is blent with the meek, Rings the concord harmonious, both tender and strong :
So be it with thee, if for ever united,
The heart to the heart flows in one, love-delighted ; Tilusion is brief, but Repentance is long.
Lovely, thither are they bringing, With her virgin wreath, the Bride ! To the love-feast clearly ringing, Tolls the church-bell far and wide ! With that sweetest holyday, Must the May of Life depart ; With the cestus loosed—-away Flies InLuston from the heart ! Yet love lingers lonely, When Passion is mute, And the blossoms may only Give way to the fruit. The Husband must enter The hostile life, With struggle and strife, To plant or to watch, To snare or to snatch,
* A piece of clay-pipe, which becomes vitrified if the metal is sufficiently heated.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 249
To pray and importune, Must wager and venture And hunt down his fortune ! Then flows in a current the gear and the gain, And the garners are fill’d with the gold of the grain, Now a yard to the court, now a wing to the centre ! Within sits Another, The thrifty Housewife ; The mild one, the mother— Her home is her life, In its cirele she rules, And the daughters she schools, And she cautions the boys, With a bustling command, And a diligent hand Employ’d she employs ; Gives order to store, And the much makes the more ; Locks the chest and the wardrobe, with lavender smelling, And the hum of the spindle goes quick through the dwelling ; And she hoards in the presses, well polish’d and full, The snow of the linen, the shine of the wool ; Blends the sweet with the good, and from care and endeayour Rests never ! Blithe the Master (where the while From his roof he sees them smile) Eyes the lands, and counts the gain ; There, the beams projecting far, And the laden store-house are, And the granaries bow’d beneath The blessed golden grain ; There, in undulating motion, Wave the corn-fields like an ocean. Proud the boast the proud lips breathe :— “ My house is built upon a rock, And sees unmoved the stormy shock Of waves that fret below !” What chain so strong, what girth so great, To bind the giant form of Fate }— Swift are the steps of Woe.
250 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Vv.
Now the casting may begin ; See the breach indented there : Ere we run the fusion in, Halt—and speed the pious prayer ! Pull the bung out— See around and about What vapour, what vapour—God help us !—has risen ?— Ha! the flame like a torrent leaps forth from its prison !
What friend is like the might of fire When man can watch and wield the ire? Whate’er we shape or work, we owe Still to that heaven-descended glow. But dread the heaven-descended glow, When from their chain its wild wings go, When, where it listeth, wide and wild Sweeps the free Nature’s free-born Child ! When the Frantic One fleets, While no force can withstand, Through the populous streets Whitling ghastly the brand ;— For the Element hates What Man’s labour creates, And the work of his hand ! Impartially out from the cloud, Or the curse or the blessing may fall ! Benignantly out from the cloud Come the dews, the revivers of all ! Avengingly out from the cloud Come the levin, the bolt, and the ball! Hark—a wail from the steeple !—aloud The’ bell shrills its voice to the crowd ! Look—look—red as blood All on high ! It is not the daylight that fills with its flood The sky ! What a clamour awaking Roars up through the street,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 251
-
What a hell-vapour breaking Rolls on through the street, And higher and higher Aloft moves the Column of Fire ! Through the vistas and rows Like a whirlwind it goes, And the air like the steam from a furnace clows. Eeams are crackling—posts are shrinkinge— Walls are sinking—windows clinking— Children erying— Mothers flying— And the beast (the black ruin yet smouldering under) Yells the howl of its pain and its ghastly wonder ! Hurry and skurry—away—away, The face of the night is as clear as day ! As the links in a chain, Again and again Flies the bucket from hand to hand ; High in arches up-rushing The engines are gushing, And the flood, as a beast on the prey that it hounds, With a roar on the breast of the element bounds, To the grain and the fruits, Through the rafters and beams, Through the barns and the garners it crackles and streams ! As if they would rend up the earth from its roots, Rush the flames to the sky Giant-high ; And at length, Wearied out and despairing, man bows to their strength! With an idle gaze sees their wrath consume, And submits to his doom ! Desolate The place, and dread For storms the barren bed. In the blank voids that cheerful casements were, Comes to and fro the melancholy air, And sits despair ; And through the ruin, blackening in its shroud Peers, as it flits, the melancholy cloud.
252 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
One human glance of grief upon the grave Of all that Fortune gave The loiterer takes—Then turns him to depart, And grasps the wanderer’s staff and mans his heart : Whatever else the element bereaves One blessing more than all it reft—it leaves, The faces that he loves !—He counts them o’er, See—not one look is missing from that store !
VI.
Now clasp’d the bell within the clay— The mould the mingled metals fill— Oh, may it, sparkling into day, Reward the labour and the skill ! Alas! should it fail, For the mould may be frail-— And still with our hope must be mingled the fear— And, ev’n now, while we speak, the mishap may be near ! To the dark womb of sacred earth This labour of our hands is given, As seeds that wait the second birth, And turn to blessings watch’d by heaven ! Ah seeds, how dearer far than they We bury in the dismal tomb, Where Hope and Sorrow bend to pray That suns beyond the realm of day May warm them into bloom!
From the steeple Tolls the bell, Deep and heavy, The death-knell ! Guiding with dirge-note—solemn, sad, and slow, To the last home earth’s weary wanderers know. It is that worship’d wife— It is that faithful mother ! *
* The translator adheres to the original, in forsaking the rhyme in these lines and some others.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 253
Whom the dark Prince of Shadows leads benighted, From that dear arm where oft she hung delighted. Far from those blithe companions, born
Of her, and blooming in their morn ;
On whom, when couch’d her heart above,
So often look’d the Mother-Love !
Ah! rent the sweet Home’s union-band, And never, never more to come— She dwells within the shadowy land, Who was the Mother of that Home! How oft they miss that tender guide, The care—the watch—the face—the Motamr— And where she sate the babes beside, Sits with unloving looks—ANoTHER !
VII.
While the mass is cooling now, Let the labour yield to leisure, As the bird upon the bough, Loose the trayail to the pleasure. When the soft stars awaken, Each task be forsaken ! And the vesper-bell lulling the earth into peace, If the master still toil, chimes the workman’s release !
Homeward from the tasks of day,
Thro’ the greenwood’s welcome way Wends the wanderer, blithe and cheerly, To the cottage loved so dearly !
And the eye and ear are meeting,
Now, the slow sheep homeward bleating— Now, the wonted shelter near,
Lowing the lusty-fronted steer ; Creaking now the heavy wain,
Reels with the happy harvest grain. While, with many-coloured leaves, Glitters the garland on the sheaves ;
Yor the mower’s work is done,
And the young folks’ dance begun !
254 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Desert street, and quiet mart ;— Silence is in the city’s heart ;
And the social taper lighteth
Each dear face that Home uniteth ; While the gate the town before Heavily swings with sullen roar !
Though darkness is spreading O’er earth—the Upright And the Honest, undreading, Look safe on the night— Which the evil man watches in awe, For the eye of the Night is the Law! Bliss-dower’d ! O daughter of the skies, Hail, holy ORDER, whose employ Blends like to like in light and joy— Builder of cities, who of old Call’d the wild man from waste and wold. And, in his hut thy presence stealing, Roused each familiar household feeling ; And, best of all the happy ties, The centre of the social band,— The Instinct of the Fatherland !
United thus—each helping each, Brisk work the countless hands for ever ; For nought its power to Strength can teach, ‘Like Emulation and Endeavour! Thus link’d the master with the man, Each in his rights can each revere, And while they march in freedom’s yan, Scorn the lewd rout that dogs the rear ! To freemen labour is renown ! Who works—gives blessings and commands ; Kings glory in the orb and crown— Be.ours the glory of our hands.
Long in these walls—long may we greet Your footfalls, Peace and Concord sweet Distant the day, Oh ! distant far,
When the rude hordes of trampling War
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 255
Shall scare the silent vale ; And where, Now the sweet heayen, when day doth leave The air, Limns its soft rose-hues on the veil of Eve ; Shall the fierce war-brand tossing in the gale, From town and hamlet shake the horrent glare !
VIII.
Now, its destin’d task fulfill’d, Asunder break the prison-mould ; Let the goodly Bell we build, Eye and heart alike behold. The hammer down heave, Till the cover it cleave :— For not till we shatter the wall of its cell Can we lift from its darkness and bondage the Bell.
To break the mould, the master may,
If skill’d the hand and ripe the hour ; But woe, when on its fiery way
The metal seeks itself to pour. Frantic and blind, with thunder-knell,
Exploding from its shattered home, And glaring forth, as from a hell,
Behold the red Destruction come ! When rages strength that has no reason, There breaks the mould before the season ; When numbers burst what bound before, Woe to the State that thrives no more ! Yea, woe, when in the City’s heart,
The latent spark to flame is blown ; And Millions from their silence start,
To claim, without a guide, their own! Discordant howls the warning Bell,
Proclaiming discord wide and far, And, born but things of peace to tell,
Becomes the ghastliest voice of war:
256 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
“ Freedom ! Equality !”—to blood, Rush the roused people at the sound ! Through street, hall, palace, roars the flood, And banded murder closes round ! The hyzna-shapes, (that women were !) Jest with the horrors they survey ; They hound—they rend—they mangle there—- As panthers with their prey ! Nought rests to hallow—burst the ties Of life’s sublime and reverent awe ; Before the Vice the Virtue flies, And Universal Crime is Law ! Man fears the lion’s kingly tread ; Man fears the tiger’s fangs of terror ; And still the dreadliest of the dread, Is Man himself in error ! No torch, though lit from Heaven, illumes The Blind !—Why place it in his hand ? It lights not him—it but consumes The City and the Land !
IX.
Rejoice and laud the prospering skies ! The kernel bursts its husk—behold From the dull clay the metal rise, Pure-shining, as a star of gold ! Neck and lip, but as one beam, It laughs like a sun-beam. | And even the scutcheon, clear-graven, shall tell That the art of a master has fashion’d the Bell !
Come in—come in My merry men—we ’1] form a ring The new-born labour christening ; And “ Concord” we will name her !— To union may her heart-felt call In brother-love attune us all! May she the destined glory win For which the master sor.ght to frame her—
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 257
Aloft—(all earth’s existence under,) In blue-pavilion’d heaven afar To dwell—the Neighbour of the Thunder, The Borderer of the Star ! Be hers above a voice to raise Like those bright hosts in yonder sphere, Who, while they move, their Maker praise, And lead around the wreathéd year ! To solemn and eternal things We dedicate her lips sublime !— As hourly, calmly, on she swings— Fann’d by the fleeting wings of Time !— No pulse—no heart—no feeling hers ! She lends the warning voice to Fate ; And still companions, while she stirs, The changes of the Human State ! So may she teach us, as her tone But now so mighty, melts away— That earth no life which earth has known From the last silence can delay ! * Slowly now the cords upheave her ! From her earth-grave soars the Bell ; Mid the airs of Heaven we leave her ! In the Music-Realm to dwell ! Up—upwards—yet raise— She has risen—she sways. Fair Bell to our city bode joy and increase, And oh, may thy first sound be hallow’d to—Pxracu ! *
In “The Walk” we haye seen the progress of Society—in ‘‘ The Bell” we have the Lay of the life of Man. This is the crowning Flower of that garland of Humanity, which, in his Culture-Historic | poems, the hand of Schiller has entwined. In England, “ The Lay of the Bell” has been the best known of the Poet’s compositions—out of the Drama. It has been the favourite subject selected by his translators ; to say nothing of others (more recent, but with which, we own we are unacquainted), the elegant version of Lord Francis Egerton has long since familiarised its beauties to the English public; and had it been possible to omit from our collection a poem of such importance,
* Written in the time of the French war,
258 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
we would willingly have declined the task which suggests comparisons disadvantageous to ourselves. The idea of this poem had long been revolved by Schiller.* He went often to a bell-foundry, to make himself thoroughly master of the mechanical process, which he has applied to purposes so ideal. Even from the time in which he began the actual composition of the poem, two years elapsed before it was completed. The work profited by the delay, and as the Poet is gene- rally clear in proportion to his entire familiarity with his own design, so of all Schiller’s moral poems this is the most intelligible to the ordinary understanding ; perhaps the more so, because, as one of his Commentators has remarked, the principal ideas and images he has already expressed in his previous writings, and his mind was thus free to give itself up more to the form than to the thought. Still we think that the symmetry and onencss of the composition have been indis- criminately panegyrised. As the Lay of Life, it begins with Birth, and when it arrives at Death, it has reached its legitimate conclusion. The reader will observe, at the seventh. strophe, that there is an abrupt and final break in the individual interest which has hitherto connected the several portions. ‘Tull then, he has had before him the prominent figure of -a single man—the one representative of human life—whose baptism the Bell has celebrated, whose youth, wanderings, return to his father’s house, love, marriage, prosperity, misfortunes, to . the death of the wife, have carried on the progress of the Poem; and this leading figure then recedes altogether from the scene, and the remainder of the Poem, till the ninth stanza, losing sight altogether of individual life, merely repeats the purpose of ‘‘ The Walk,” and con- founds itself in illustrations of socia? life in general. The picture of the French Revolution, though admirably done, is really not only an episode in the main design, but is merely a copy of that alread puintel, and set in its proper place, in the Historical Poem of “The alk.’
But whatever weight may be attached, whether to this objection or to others which we have seen elsewhere urged, the “non Ego paucis offendar maculis’’ may, indeed, be well applied to a Poem so replete with the highest excellences,—so original in conception—so full of pathos, spirit, and variety in its plan—and so complete in its mastery over form and language. . . . Much of its beauty must escape in translation, even if an English Schiller were himself the translator. For that beauty which belongs to form—the ‘‘ curiosa felicitas ver- borum ”—is always untranslateable. Witness the Odes of Horace, the greater part of Goethe’s Lyrics, and the Choruses of Sophocles.’ Though the life of man is pourtrayed, it is the life of a German man. The wanderings, or apprenticeship, of the youth, are not a familiar feature in our own civilisation; the bustling housewife is peculiarly German; so is the incident of the fire—a misfortune very common in parts of Germany, and which the sound of the church-bell proclaims. Thus that peculiar charm which belongs to the recognition of familiar and household images, in an ideal and poetic form, must be in a great
* Sce Life of Schiller, by Madame yon Wolzogen,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 259
measure lost to a foreigner.” The thought, too, at the end—the prayer for peace—is of a local and temporary nature. It breathed the wish of all Germany, during the four years’ war with France, and was, at the date of publication—like all temporary allusions—a’ strong and effective close, to become, after the interest of the allusion ceased, comparatively feeble and non-universal. These latter observations are made, not in depreciation of the Poem, but on behalf of it; to show that it has beauties peculiar to the language it was written in, and the people it addressed, of which it must be despoiled in translation,
THE POETRY OF LIFE.
‘Wao would himself with shadows entertain,
Or gild his life with lights that shine in vain,
Or nurse false hopes that do but cheat the true /— Though with my dream my heaven should be resign’d— Though the free-pinion’d soul that once could dwell In the large empire of the Possible,
This work-day life with iron chains may bind,
Yet thus the mastery o’er ourselves we find,
And solemn duty to our acts decreed,
Meets us thus tutor’d in the hour of need,
With a more sober and submissive mind !
How front Necessity—yet bid thy youth
Shun the mild rule of life’s calm sovereign, Truth.”
So speak’st thou, friend, how stronger far than I; As from Experience—that sure port serene—
Thou Jook’st ;—and straight, a coldness wraps the sky, The summer glory withers from the scene,
Scared by the solemn spell ; behold them fly,
The godlike images that seem’d so fair !
Silent the playful Muse—-the rosy Hours
Halt in their dance ; and the May-breathing flowers Fall from the sister-Graces’ waving hair. Sweet-mouth’d Apollo breaks his golden lyre, Hermes, the wand with many a marvel rife ;—
The veil, rose-woven, by the young Desire
With dreams, drops from the hueless cheeks of Life.
53
260 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
The world seems what it is—-A Grave ! and Love Casts down the bondage wound his eyes above,
And sees !—He sees but images of clay
Where he dream’d gods; and sighs—and glides away. The youngness of the Beautiful grows old,
And on thy lips the bride’s sweet kiss seems cold ; And in the crowd of joys—upon thy throne
Thou sitt’st in state, and hardenest into stone.
THE ANTIQUE AT PARIS.
(FREE TRANSLATION.)
Wuat the Greek wrought, the vaunting Frank may gain, And waft the pomp of ‘Helix: to the Seine ; 4
His proud museums may with the marble ev oan,
And Gallia gape on Glories not her own ;
But ever silent in the ungenial Halls
Shall stand the Statues on their pedestals,
But him alone the Muses are possest,
Who warms them from the marble—at his breast ; Bright, to the Greek, from stone each goddess gre;w— Vandals, each goddess is but stone to you!
THE MAID OF ORLEANS.
To flaunt the fair shape of Humanity,
Lewd Mockery drage’d thee through the mire it trod,* Wit wars with Beauty ‘everlastingly —
Yearns for no Angel—worships to no God— Views the heart’s wealth, to steal it as the thief— Assails Delusion, but to kill Belief,
* Voltaire, in ‘ The Pucelle.”
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 261
Yet the true Poetry—herself, like thee,
Sprung from the younger race, a shepherd maid, Gives thee her birthright of Divinity,
Thy wrongs in life in her star-worlds repaid, - Sweet Virgin-Type of Thought, pure, brave, and high-— The Heart created thee—thou canst not die.
The mean world loves to darken what is bright, To see to dust each loftier image brought ; But fear not—souls there are that can delight In the high Memory and the stately Thought ; To ribald mirth let Momus rouse the mart, But forms more noble glad the noble heart.
THEKLA.
(A SPIRIT VOICE.)
[Ir was objected to Schiller’s ‘‘ Wallenstein,’’ that he had suffered Thekla to disappear from the play without any clear intimation of her fate. These stanzas are his answer to the objection. ]
WHERE am 1; whither borne? From thee As soars my fleeting shade above?
Is not all being closed for me, And over life and love ?—
Wouldst ask, where wing their flight away The Nightbirds that enraptured air With Music’s soul in happy May ? But while they loved—they were !
And have I found the Lost again ? Yes, I with him at last am wed ; Where hearts are never rent in twain,
And tears are never shed,
% *
262 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
There, wilt thou find us welcome thee, When thy life to our life shall glide : My father,* too, from sin set free, Nor Murther at his side—
Feels there, that no delusion won His bright faith to the starry spheres ; Each faith (nor least the boldest one) Still towards the Holy nears.
There word is kept with Hope ; to wild Belief a lovely truth is given!
O dare to err and dream “the child Has instincts of the Heaven !
WILLIAM TELL.
[Lines accompanying the copy of Schiller’s Drama of William Tell, to the Arch-Chancellor You Dalberg. ]
I.
In that fell strife, when force with force engages,
And Wrath stirs bloodshed—Wrath with blindfold eyes— When, midst the war which raving Faction wages,
Lost in the roar—the voice of Justice dies, When but for license, Sin the shameless, rages
Against the Holy, when the Wilful rise, When lost the Anchor which makes nations strong Amidst the storm,—there is no theme for song.
II. But when a Race, tending by vale and hill Free flocks, contented with its rade domain— Bursts the hard bondage with its own great will, Lets fall the sword when once it rends the chain,
* Wallenstein :—the next stanza alludes to his belief in Astrolo of which such beautiful uses have been made by Schiller in his so emn
aor,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 263
And, flush’d with Victory, can be human still— There blest the strife, and then inspired the strain.
Such is my theme—to thee not strange, ’tis true,
Thou in the Great canst never find the New!*
‘ARCHIMEDES.
To Archimedes once a scholar came,
“Teach me,” he said, ‘‘the Art that won thy fame ;—- The godlike Art which gives such boons to toil, And showers such fruit upon thy native soil ;— The godlike Art that girt the town when all Rome’s vengeance burst in thunder on the wall!” Thou call’st Art godlike—it is so, in truth, And was,” replied the Master to the youth,
“* Ere yet its secrets were applied to use—
Ere yet it served beleaguered Syracuse :—
Ask’st thou from Art, but what the Art is worth? The fruit —for fruit go cultivate the Earth.— He who the goddess would aspire unto,
Must not the geddess as the woman woo !”
CARTHAGE.
Tou, of the nobler Mother Child degenerate ;—all the while That with the Roman’s Might didst match ne Tyrian’s crafty
utile ; The a thro’ strength subdued the earth—that by its strength it ruled— Thro’ cunning earth the other stole, and by the cunning school’d—
With iron as the Roman, thou (let History speak) didst gain The empire which with gold thou as the Tyrian didst maintain.
* The concluding point in the original requires some i cea in translation.—Schiller’s lines are— Und solch ein Bild darf ich dir freudig zeigen Du kennst’s—denn alles Grosse ist dein eigen. a
264 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
COLUMBUS.
StrEer on, bold Sailor—Wit may mock thy soul that sees the land,
And hopeless at the helm may droop the weak and weary hand,
YET EVER—EVER 10 THE West, for there the coast must lie,
And dim it dawns and glimmering dawns before thy reason’s eye; ;
Yea, trust the guiding God—and go along the floating grave,
Though hid till now—yet now, behold the New World o’er the wave !
With Genius Nature ever stands in solemn union still,
And ever what the One foretels the Other shall fulfil.
NAGNIA.*
THE Beautiful, that men and gods alike subdues, must perish ;
For pity ne’er the iron breast of Stygian Jovef shall cherish !
Once only—Love, by aid of Song, the Shadow-Sovereign thrall’d,
And at the dreary threshold he again zhe boon recall’d.
Not Aphrodite’s heavenly tears to love and life restored
Her own adored Adonis, by the griely monster gored !
Not all the art of Thetis saved her god-like hero-son,
When, falling by the Sczan gate, his race of glory run !
But forth she came, with all the nymphs of Nereus, from the deep,
Around the silence of the Dead to sorrow and to weep.
See tears are shed by every god and goddess, to survey
How soon the Beautiful is past, the Perfect dies away !
Yet noble sounds the voice of wail—and woe the Dead can grace ;
For never wail and woe are heard to mourn above the Base !
* Nenia was the goddess of funerals—and funeral songs were called Neenive. | + Pluto,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER... 265:
JOVE TO HERCULES.
*T was not my nectar made thy strength divine, But ’t was thy strength which made my nectar thine !
THE IDEAL AND THE ACTUAL LIFE.
[Ix Schiller’s Poem of ‘‘ The Ideal,” a translation of which has already been presented to the reader, but which was composed subse- quently to ‘‘ The Ideal and the Actual,” the prevailing sentiment is of that simple pathos which can come home to every man who has mourned for Youth, and the illusions which belong to it—
for the hour Of glory in the grass, and splendour in the flower.
But ‘‘ The Ideal and the Actual”’ is purely philosophical; a poem ‘‘in which,” says Hoffmeister, ‘‘every object and every epithet has a metaphysical background.’’ Schiller himself was aware of its obscu- rity to the general reader ; he desires that even the refining Humboldt ‘should read it in a kind of holy stillness—and banish, during the meditation it required, all that was profane.” Humboldt proved himself worthy of these instructions, by the enthusiastic admiration with which the poem inspired him. Previous 1o its composition, Schiller had been employed upon philosophical inquiries, especially his ‘¢ Letters on the Asthetic Education of Man;” and of these Letters it is truly observed, that the Poem is the crowning Flower. To those acquainted with Schiller’s philosophical works and views, the poem is therefore less obscure ; in its severe compression such readers behold but the poetical epitome of thoughts the depth of which they have already sounded, and the coherence of which they have already ascer- tained—they recognise a familiar symbol, where the general reader only perplexes himself in a riddle. ,
Without entering into disquisitions, out of place in this translation, and fatiguing to those who desire in a collection of poems to enjoy the poetical—not to be bewildered by the abstract—we shall merely preface the poem, with the help of Schiller’s commentators, by a short analysis of the general design and meaning, so at least as to facilitate the reader’s study of this remarkable poem—study it will still require, and well ce ag
The Poem begins, Stanza 1st, with the doctrine which Schiller has often inculcated, that to Man there rests but the choice between the pleasures of sense, and the peace of the soul; but both are united in the life of the Immortals, viz., the higher orders of being. Stanza 2nd. —Still it may be ours to attain, even on earth, to this loftier and
266 POLMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
holier life—provided we can raise ourselves beyond material objects. Stanza 8rd.— The Fates can only influence the body, and the things of time and matter, But, safe from the changes of matter and of life, the Platonic Archetype, Form, hovers in the realm of the Ideal. If we can ascend to this realm—in other words, to the domain of Beauty -—we attain (Stanza 4th) to the perfection of Humanity—a perfection only found in the immaterial forms and shadows of that realm—yet in which, as in the Gods, the sensual and the intellectual powers are united. In the Actual Life we strive for a goal we cannot reach; in the Ideal, the goal is attainable, and there effort is victory. With Stanza 5th begins the antithesis, which is a key to the remainder—an antithesis constantly balancing before us the conditions of the Actual and the privileges of the Ideal. The Ideal is not meant to relax, but to brace us for the Actual Life. From the latter we cannot escape ; but when we begin to flag beneath the sense of our narrow limits, and the difficulties of the path, the eye, steadfastly fixed upon the Ideal Beauty aloft, beholds there the goal. Stanza 6th.—In Actual Life. Strength and Courage are the requisites for success, and are doomed to eternal struggle; but (Stanza 7th) in the Ideal Life, struggle exists not; the stream, gliding far from its rocky sources, is smoothed to repose. Stanza 8th.—In the Actual Life, as long as the Artist still has to contend with matter, he must strive and labour. ‘Truth is only elicited by toil—the statue only wakens from the block by the stroke of the chisel; but when (Stanza 9th) he has once achieved the idea of Beauty—when once he has elevated the material marble into form—all trace of his human neediness and frailty is lost, and his work seems the child of the soul. Stanza 9th.—Again, in the Actual world, the man who strives for Virtue, finds every sentiment and every action poor compared to the rigid standard of the abstract moral law. But if (Stanza 9th) instead of striving for Virtue, merely from the cold sense of duty, we live that life beyond the senses, in which Virtue becomes as it were natural to us—in which its behests are served, not through duty but inclination—then the gulf between man and the moral law is filled up; we take the Godhead, so to speak, into our will; and Heaven ceases its terrors, when man ceases to resist it. Stanza 10th.—Finally, in Actual Life, sorrows, whether our own, or those with which we sympathise, are terrible and powerful; but (Stanza 11th) in the Ideal World even Sorrow has its pleasures. We contemplate the writhings of the Laocoon in marble, with delight in the greatness of Art—not with anguish for the suffering, but with veneration for the grandeur with which the suffering is idealised by the Artist, or expressed by the subject. Over the pain of Art smiles the Heaven of the Moral world. Stanzas 11th and 12th.—Man thus aspiring to the Ideal, is compared to the Mythical Hercules. In the Actual world he must suffer and must toil; but when once he can cast aside the garb of clay, and through the Ethereal flame separate the Mortal from the Immortal, the material dross sinks downward, the spirit soars aloft, and Hebe (or Eternal Youth) pours out nectar as to the Gods. If the reader will have the patience to compare the above analysis with the subjoined version (in which the Translator has also sought to render the general sense as intelligible as possible), he will probably find little difficulty in clearing up the Author’s meaning. ]
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 267
I.
For ever fair, for ever calm and bright, Life flies on plumage, zephyr-light,
For those who on the Olympian hill rejoice— Moons wane, and races wither to the tomb, And ’mid the universal ruin, bloom
The rosy days of Gods—
With Man, the choice, Timid and anxious, hesitates between
The sense’s pleasure and the soul’s content; While on celestial brows, aloft and sheen,
The beams of both are blent.
Il.
Seek’st thou on earth the life of Gods to share, Safe in the Realm of Death ?—beware
To pluck the fruits that glitter to thine eye ; Content thyself with gazing on their glow— Short are the joys Possession can bestow,
And in Possession sweet Desire will die. ’Twas not the ninefold chain of waves that bound
Thy daughter, Ceres, to the Stygian river— She pluck’d the fruit of the unholy ground,
And so—was Hell’s for ever !
Til,
The Weavers of the Web—The Fates—hut sway The matter and the things of clay ; Safe from each change that Time to Matter gives, Nature’s blest playmate, free at will to stray With Gods a god, amidst the fields of Day, The Form, the ARCHETYPE,* serenely lives. Would’st thou soar heavenward on its joyous wing ? Cast from thee, Earth, the bitter and the real, High from this cramp’d and dungeon being, spring Into the Realm of the Ideal!
* “Die Gestalt’’—Form, the Platonic Archetype.
268 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
Iv. Here, bathed, Perfection, in thy purest ray, Free from the clogs and taints of clay, Hovers divine the Archetypal Man ! Dim as those phantom ghosts of life that gleam And wander voiceless by the Stygian stream: — Fair as it stands in fields Elysian, Ere down to Flesh the Immortal doth descend :— If doubtful ever in the Actual life Each contest—here a victory crowns the end Of every nobler strife.
Vv. Not from the strife itself to set thee free, But more to nerve—doth Victory Wave her rich garland from the Ideal clime. Whate’er thy wish, the Earth has no repose— Life still must drag thee onward as it flows, Whirling thee down the dancing surge of Time. But when the courage sinks beneath the dull Sense of its narrow limits—on the soul, Bright from the hill-tops of the Beautiful, Bursts the attained goal !
<ieG If worth thy while the glory and the strife Which fire the lists of Actual Life— The ardent rush to fortune or to fame, In the hot field where Strength and Valour are, And rolls the whirling thunder of the car, And the world, breathless, eyes the glorious game— Then dare and strive—the prize can but belong To him whose valour o’er his tribe prevails ; In life the victory only crowns the strong— He who is feeble fails,
vil.
But Life, whose source, by crags*around it pil’d, - Chafed while confin’d, foams fierce and wild,
Glides soft and smooth when once its streams expand,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 269
When its waves, glassing in their silver play, Aurora blent with Hesper’s milder ray,
Gain the still Beaurirut—that Shadow-Land ! Here, contest grows but interchange of Love,
All curb is but the bondage of the Grace ; Gone is each foe,—Peace folds her wings above
Her native dwelling-place.
VIII.
When, through dead stone to breathe a’ soul of light, With the dull matter to unite
The kindling genius, some great sculptor glows ; Behold him straining every nerve intent— Behold how, o’er the subject element,
The stately THoucut its march laborious goes ! For never, save to Toil untiring, spoke
The unwilling Truth from her mysterious well—- The statue only to the chisel’s stroke
Vakes from its marble cell.
TX
But onward to the Sphere of Beauty—go Onward, O Child of Art! and, lo,
Out of the matter which thy pains control The Statue springs !—not as with labour wrung From the hard block, but as from Nothing sprung—
Airy and light—the offspring of the soul ! The pangs, the cares, the weary toils it cost
Leave not a trace when once the work is done— The Artist’s human frailty merged and lost
In Art’s great victory won !*
oe If human Sin confronts the rigid Jaw Of perfect Truth and Virtue,t awe Seizes and saddens thee to see how far
_* More literally translated thus by the Author of the Article cn Schiller in the Foreign and Colonial Review, July, 1843— ; -. **Thence-all witnesses for ever banished Pe eran e Of poor Human Nakedness.”’ % ¢ The Law, i.e. the Kantian Ideal of Truth and Virtue. This
270 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Beyond thy reach, Perfection ;—if we test By the Ideal of the Good, the best, How mean our efforts and our actions are ! This space between the Ideal of man’s soul And man’s achievement, who hath ever past ? An ocean spreads between us and that goal, Where anchor ne’er was cast !
XI.
But fly the boundary of the Senses—live The Ideal life free Thought can give ;
And, lo, the gulf shall vanish, and the chill Of the soul’s impotent despair be gone ! And with divinity thou sharest the throne,
Let but divinity become thy will! Scorn not the Law—permit its iron band
The sense (it cannot chain the soul) to thrall. Let man no more the will of Jove withstand,*
And Jove the bolt lets fall !
XII.
If, in the woes of Actual Human Life— If thou could’st see the serpent strife
Which the Greek Art has made divine in stone— Could’st see the writhing limbs, the livid check, Note every pang, and hearken every shriek
Of some despairing lost Laocoon, The human nature would thyself subdue
To share the human woe before thine eye—— Thy cheek would pale, and all thy soul be true
To Man’s ereat Sympathy.
XIII. But in the Ideal Realm, aloof and far, Where the calm Art’s pure dwellers are, Lo, the Laocoon writhes, but does not groan,
stanza and the next embody, perhaps with some exaggeration, the Kantian doctrine of morality.
* “But in God’s sight submission is command.’’ “Jonah,” by the Rev. F. Hodgson. Quoted in Foreign and Colonial Review, July, 1843; Art. Schiller, p. 21, :
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 271
Here, no sharp grief the high emotion knows— Here, suffering’s self is made divine, and shows The brave resolve of the firm soul alone : Here, lovely as the rainbow on the dew Of the spent thunder-cloud, to Art is given, Gleaming through Grief’s dark veil, the peaceful blue Of the sweet moral Heaven.
XIV.
So, in the glorious parable, behold How, bow’d to mortal bonds, of old Life’s dreary path divine Alcides trod : The hydra and the lion were his prey, And to restore the friend he loved to-day, He went undaunted to the black-brow’d God ; And all the torments and the labours sore Wroth Juno sent—the meek majestic One, With patient spirit and unquailing, bore, Until the course was run—
XY.
Until the God cast down his garb of clay,
And rent in hallowing flame away The mortal part from the divine—to soar
To the empyreal air! Behold him spring
Blithe in the pride of the unwonted wing, And the dull matter that confined before
Sinks downward, downward, downward as a dream. Olympian hymins receive the escaping soul,
And smiling Hebe, from the ambrosial stream, Fills for a God the bowl]!
272 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
- THE FAVOUR OF THE MOMENT.
OncE more, then, we meet In the circles of yore; Let our song be as sweet In its wreaths as before. Who claims the first place In the tribute of song ? The God to whose grace ~ All our pleasures belong. Though Ceres may spread All her gifts on the shrine, Though the glass may be red With the blush of the vine, What boots—if the while Fall no spark on the hearth ? If the heart do not smile With the instinct of mirth ?-— From the clouds, from God’s breast Must our happiness fall, Mid the blessed, most blest Is the Moment of all! Since Creation began All that mortals have wrought, All that’s godlike in Man Comes—the flash of a Thought ! For ages the stone In the quarry may lurk, An instant alone Can suflice to the work ; An impulse gave birth To the child of the soul, A glance stamp the worth And the fame of the whole.*
* The idea diffused by the translator through this and the preceding stanza, is more forcibly condensed by Schiller in four lines,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
On the arch that she buildeth From sunbeams on high, As Tris just gildeth, And fleets from the sky, So shineth, so gloometh Each gift that is ours ; The lightning ilumeth— The darkness devours ! *
THE FORTUNE-FAVOURED,
[Tux first five verses in the original of this Poem are placed as a
Lo
motto on Goethe’s statue in the Library at Weimar. The Poet does not here mean to extol what is vulgarly meant by the Gifts of Fortune; he but developes a favourite idea of his, that, whatever is really sub- lime and beautiful, comes freely down from Heaven; and vindicates the seeming partiality of the Gods, by implying that the Beauty and the Genius given, without labour, to some, but serve to the delight of
those to whom they are denied. ]
Au! happy He, upon whose birth each God Looks down in love, whose earliest sleep the bright Idalia cradles, whose young lips the rod
Of eloquent Hermes kindles—to whose eyes, Scarce waken’d yet, Apollo steals in light,
While on imperial brows Jove sets the seal of might !
Godlike the lot ordain’d for him to share,
He wins the garland ere he runs the race ;
He learns lifé’s wisdom ere he knows life’s care, And, without labour vanquish’d, smiles the Grace.
Great is the man, I grant, whose strength of mind,
Self-shapes its objects and subdues the Fates— Virtue subdues the Fates, but cannot bind The fickle Happiness, whose smile awaits
* « And ere a man hath power to say, ‘behold,’ ‘The jaws of Darkness do deyour it up,
So quick bright things come to confusion,”—SHAkrsPEARE.
T
274. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Those who scarce seek it ; nor can courage earn What the Grace showers not from her own free urn! From aught wnworthy, the determined will Can guard the watchful spirit—there it ends ;— The all that’s glorious from the heaven descends ; As some sweet mistress loves us, freely still Come the spontaneous gifts of Heaven !— Above Favour rules Jove, as it below rules Love! The Immortals have their bias !—Kindly they See the bright locks of youth enamour’d play, And where the glad one goes, shed gladness round the way. It is not they who boast the best to see, Whose eyes the holy Apparitions bless ; The stately light of their divinity Hath oft but shone the brightest on the blind ;— And their choice spirit found its calm recess In the pure childhood of a simple mind. Unask’d they come—delighted to delude The expectation of our baffled Pride ; No law can call their free steps to our side. Him whom He loves, the Sire of men and gods, (Selected from the marvelling multitude,) Bears on his eagle to his bright abodes ; And showers, with partial hand and lavish, down, The minstrel’s laurel or the monarch’s crown ! Before the fortune-favour’d son of earth, Apollo walks—and, with his jocund mirth, The heart-enthralling Smiler of the skies ; For him grey Neptune smooths the pliant wave— Harmless the waters for the ship that bore The Cesar and his fortunes to the shore ! Charm’d at his feet the crouching lion lies, To him his back the murmuring dolphin gave ; His soul is born a sovereign o’er the strife— The lord of all the Beautiful of Life ; Where’er his presence in its calm has trod, It charms—it sways as some diviner God. Scorn not the Fortune-favour’d, that to him The light-won victory by the gods is given,
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 273
Or that, as Paris, from the strife severe, The Venus draws her darling—Whom the heaven So prospers, love so watches, I revere ! And not the man upon whose eyes, with dim And baleful night, sits Fate. Achaia boasts, No less the glory of the Dorian Lord * That Vulcan wrought for him the shield and sword— That round the mortal hover’d all the hosts Of all Olympus—that his wrath to grace, The best and bravest of the Grecian race Untimely slaughtered, with resentful ghosts Awed the pale people of the Stygian coasts !
Scorn not the Darlings of the Beautiful, If without labour they Life’s blossoms cull ; If, like the stately lilies they have won ~ wae aa A crown for which they neither toil’d nor spun ;— If without merit, theirs be Beauty, still Thy sense, unenvying, with the Beauty fill. Alike for thee no merit wins the right, To share, by simply seeing, their delight. Heaven breathes the soul into the Minstrel’s breast, But with that soul he animates the rest ; The God inspires the Mortal—but to God, In turn, the Mortal lifts thee from the sod. Oh, not in vain to Heaven the Bard is dear ; Holy himself—he hallows those who hear!
The busy mart let Justice still control, Weighing the guerdon to the toil !—What then ? A God alone claims joy—all joy is his, Flushing with unsought light the cheeks of men. + Where is no miracle, why there no bliss! Grow, change, and ripen all that mortal be, Shapen’d from form to form, by toiling time ; The Blissful and the Beautiful are born Full grown, and ripen’d from Eternity— No gradual changes to their glorious prime, No childhood dwarfs them, and no age has worn.—
as Achilles. t+ Nur ein Wunder kann dich tragen In das schone Wunderland. iia tiblen Sehiiouoke.
bya»
276 POEMS.AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
Like Heaven’s, each earthly Venus on the sight
Comes, a dark birth, from out an endless sea ;
Like the first Pallas, in maturest might,
Arm’d, from: the Thunderer’s brow, leaps forth each Thought. of Light.
THE SOWER.
Sure of the Spring that warms them into birth,
The golden seeds thou trustest to the Earth ;
And dost thou doubt the Eternal Spring sublime, For deeds—the seeds which Wisdom sows in Time t
SENTENCES OF CONFUCIUS.
TIME.
THREEFOLD the stride of Time, from first to last! Loitering slow, the FuturE creepeth— Arrow-swift, the PRESENT sweepeth—
And motionless for ever stands the Past,
Impatience, fret howe’er she may, Cannot speed the tardy goer ;
Fear and Doubt—that crave delay— Ne’er can make the Fleet One slower ;
Nor one spell Repentance knows,
To stir the Still One from repose.
If thou would’st, wise and happy, see Life’s solemn journey close for thee,
The Loiterer’s counsel thou wilt heed, Though readier tools must shape the deed ; Not for thy friend the Fleet One know, Nor make the Motionless thy foe !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 277
SPACE.
A threefold measure dwells in Space—
Restless, with never-pausing pace,
Lrneartu, ever stretching ever forth, is found,
And, ever widening, BREADTH extends around And ever DertH sinks bottomless below!
?
In this, a type thou dost possess— On, ever restless, must thou press, No halt allow, no languor know, If to the Perfect thou wouldst go ; Must broaden from thyself, until Creation thy embrace can fill ; Must down the Depth for ever fleeing, Dive to the spirit and the being. The distant goal at last to near, Still lengthening labour sweeps ; The full mind is alone the clear, And Truth dwells in the deeps.
THE ANTIQUE TO THE NORTHERN. WANDERER. |
Anp o’er the river hast thou past, and o’er the mighty sea,
And o’er the Alps, the dizzy bridge hath borne thy steps to me;
To look all near upon the bloom my deathless beauty knows,
And, face to face, to front the pomp whose fame through ages goes—
Gaze on, and touch my relics now! At last thou standest here;=—"" +
But art thou nearer now to me—or I to thee more near ?
578 POEMS AND: BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
' GENIUS. (FREE TRANSLATION. )
[Tux original, and it seems to us the more appropriate, title of this Poem, was ‘‘ Nature and the School.” ]
Do I believe, thou ask’st, the Master’s word,
The Schoolman’s shibboleth that binds the herd? To the Soul’s haven is there but one chart?
Its peace a problem to be learned by art?
On system rest the happy and the good ?
To base the temple must the props be wood ?
Must I distrust the gentle law, imprest,
To guide and warn, by Nature on the breast,
Till, squared to rule the instinct of the soul,— Till the School’s signet stamp the eternal scroll, Till in one mould, some dogma hath confined ~ The ebb and flow—the light waves—of the mind ? Say thou, familiar to these depths of gloom,
Thou, safe ascended from the dusty tomb,
Thou, who hast trod these weird Egyptian cells— Say—if Life’s comfort with yon mummies dwells !— Say—and I grope—with saddened steps indeed— But on, thro’ darkness, if to Truth it lead!
Nay, Friend, thou know’st the golden time—the age Whose legends live in many a poet’s page? ° When heavenlier shapes with Man walked side by side, And the chaste Feeling was itself a guide ; Then the great law, alike divine amid Suns bright in Heaven, or germs in darkness hid ; That silent law—(call’d whether by the name
- Of Nature or Necessity—the same, )
To that deep sea, the heart, its movement gave— Sway’d the full tide, and freshened the free wave. Then sense unerring—because unreproved— True as the finger on the dial moved, Half guide, half-playmate, of Earth’s age of youth, The sportive instinct of Eternal Truth.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 279
Then, nor Initiate nor Profane were known ;
Where the Heart felt—there Reason found a throne : Not from the dust below, but life around
Warm Genius shaped what quick Emotion found. One rule, like light, for every bosom glowed,
Yet hid from all the fountain whence it flowed.
But, gone that blessed Age !—our wilful pride Has lost, with Nature, the old peaceful Guide. FEELING, no more to raise us and rejoice,
Is heard and honoured as a Godhead’s voice ; And disenhallowed in its eldest cell
The Human Heart,—lies mute the Oracle ;* Save where the low and mystic whispers thrill Some listening spirit more divinely still.
There, in the chambers of the inmost heart, There, must the Sage explore the Magian’s art ; There, seek the long-lost Nature’s steps to track, Till, found once more, she gives him Wisdom back ! Hast thou,—(O Blest, if so, whate’er betide)— Still kept the Guardian Angel by thy side ?
Can thy Heart’s guileless childhood yet rejoice In the sweet instinct with its warning voice ? Does Truth yet limn upon untroubled eyes, Pure and serene, her world of Ivis-dies ?
Rings clear the echo which her accent calls Back from the breast, on which the music falls ? In the calm mind is doubt yet hush’d,—and will That doubt to-morrow as to-day be still ?
+ Will all these fine sensations in their play,
No censor need to regulate and sway ?
* Schiller seems to allude to the philosophy of Fichté and Schelling, then on the ascendant, which sought to explain the enigma of the universe, and to reconcile the antithesis between man and nature, by carrying both up into the unity of an absolute consciousness, t.¢. a consciousness anterior to everything which is xow known under the name of consciousness—sed de hac re satius est silere quam parvum dicere.
+ Will this play of fine sensations (or sensibilities) require no censor to control it—i.c. will it always work spontaneously for good, and run into no passionate excess ?
280 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Fear’st thou not in the insidious Heart to find The source of Trouble to the limpid mind?
No !—then thine Innocence thy Mentor be !
Science can teach thee nought—she learns from thee ! Each law that lends lame succour to the Weak— The cripple’s crutch—the vigorous need not seek ! From thine own self thy rule of action draw ;— That which thou dost—what charms thee—is thy Law, And founds to every race a code sublime—
What pleases Genius gives a Law to Time !
The Word—the Deed—All Ages shall command, Pure if thy lip and holy if thy hand !
Thou, thou alone mark’st not within thy heart
The inspiring God whose Minister thou art,
Know’st not the magic of the mighty ring
Which bows the realm of Spirits to their King ; -But meek, nor conscious of diviner birth, -
Glide thy still footsteps thro’ the conquered Earth !
ULYSSES.
To gain his home all oceans he explored—
Here Scylla frown’d—and there Charybdis roar’d ; - Horror on sea—and horror on the land—
In hell’s dark boat he sought the spectre land, Till borne—a slumberer—to his native spot
He woke—and sorrowing, knew his country not !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 281
VOTIVE TABLETS.
[Unper this title Schiller arranged that more dignified and philo- sophical portion of the small Poems published as Epigrams in the “* Musen Almanach ;”’ which rather sought to point a general thought, than a personal satire-—Many of these, however, are either wholly without interest for the English reader, or express in almost un- translateable laconism what, in far more poetical shapes, Schiller has elsewhere repeated and developed. We, therefore, content ourselves with such a selection as appears to us best suited to convey a fair notion of the object and spirit of the class. ]
MOTTO TO THE VOTIVE TABLETS,
What the God taught—what has befriended all Life’s ways, I place upon the Votive Wall.
THE GOOD AND THE BEAUTIFUL. (ZWEIERLEL WIRKUNGSARTEN.)
Tue Good’s the Flower to Earth already given— The Beautiful—on Earth sows flowers from Heayen !
VALUE AND WORTH.
Ir thow hast something, -bring thy goods—a fair return be thine ;
If thou art something, bring thy soul and interchange with mine.
THE DIVISION OF RANKS.
Yes, in the moral world, as ours, we see Divided grades—a Soul’s Nobility ;
282 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
By deeds their titles Commoners create— The loftier order are by birthright great.*
TO THE MYSTIC.
SpreADS Life’s true mystery round us evermore Seen by no eye, it lies all eyes before.
THE KEY.
To know thyself—in others self discern ; Wouldst thou know others? read thyself—and learn !
WISDOM AND PRUDENCE.
Woutpst thou the loftiest height of Wisdom gain ? On to the rashness, Prudence would disdain ;
The purblind see but the receding shore,
Not that to which the bold wave wafts thee o’er !
THE UNANIMITY.
TrutH seek we both—Thou, in the life without thee and around ; I in the Heart within—by both can Truth alike be found ;
* This idea is often repeated, somewhat more clearly, in the haughty philosophy of Schiller. Ie himself says, elsewhere—“ In a fair soul each single action is not properly moral, but the whole character is moral. ‘Ihe fair soul has no other service than the instincts of its own beauty.’’ ‘‘Common Natures,” observes Hoffmeister, ‘‘can only act as it were by rule and law; the Noble are of themselves morally good, and humanly beautiful.”
+ Query ?—the Law of Creation, both physical and moral.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 283
The healthy eye can through the world the great Creator track The healthy heart is but the glass which gives creation back.
THE SCIENCE OF POLITICS.
Au that thou dost be right—to that alone confine thy view,
And halt within the certain rule—the All that’s right to do!
True zeal the what already is would sound and perfect see,
False zeal would sound and perfect make the something that’s to be!
TO ASTRONOMERS.
Or the Nebule * and planets do not babble so to me;
What ! is Nature only mighty inasmuch as you can see ?
Inasmuch as you can measure her immeasurable ways ?
As she renders world on world, sun and system to your gaze?
Though thro’ space your object be the Sublimest to embrace,
Never the Sublime abideth—where you vainly search—in space !
THE BEST GOVERNED STATE.
How the best state to know ?—it is found out ; Like the best woman—that least talked about.
* Nebelflecke; z.e. the nebulous matter which puzzles astronomers. Is Nature, then, only great inasmuch as you can compute her almost incalculable dimensions, or inasmuch as she furnishes almost in- calculable subjects for your computations? Your object is, indeed, the sublimest in space; but the Sublime does not dwell in space—i.e, the Moral Law is the only Sublime, and its Kingdom is where Time and Space are not.
284 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
MY BELIEF.
Wnaat thy religion? those thou namest—none ? None why—because I have religion !
FRIEND AND FOE.
Duar is my friend—yet. from my foe, as from my friend, comes good ;
My friend shows what I can do, and my foe shows what I show’d,
LIGHT AND COLOUR.
Dwett, Light, beside the changeless God—God spoke and Light began ;
Come, thou, the ever-changing one—come, Colour, down to Man!
FORUM OF WOMEN.
WomEen—to judge man rightly—do not scan Each separate act ;—pass judgment on the Man!
GENIUS.
INTELLECT can repeat what’s been fulfill’d, And, aping Nature, as she buildeth—build ; O’er Nature’s base can haughty Reason dare To pile its lofty castle—in the air.
But only thine, O Genius, is the charge,
In Nature’s kingdom Nature to enlarge!
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 285
THE IMITATOR,
Goop out of good—that art is known to all But Genius from the bad the good can call ; Thou, Mimic, not from leading-strings escaped, Work’st but the matter that’s already shaped ; ~ The already shaped a nobler hand awaits,
All matter asks a Spirit that creates !
CORRECTNESS,
(FREE TRANSLATION. )
Tue calm correctness, where no fault we see, Attests Art’s loftiest or its least degree ;
Alike the smoothness of the surface shows
The Pool’s dull stagner—the great Sea’s repose.
THE MASTER.
Tue-herd of scribes, by what they tell us, Show all in which their wits excel us ; But the True Master we behold,
In what his art leaves—just untold.
EXPECTATION AND FULFILMENT.
O’er Ocean, with a thousand masts, sails forth the stripling bold—
One boat, hard rescued from the deep, draws into port the:
pant: Peale : ;
286 POEMS AND. BALLADS OF SCHILLER
THE EPIC HEXAMETER.
(TRANSLATED BY COLERIDGE.)
SrRoNGLY it bears us along in swelling and limitless billows, Nothing before and nothing behind but the sky and the ocean,
THE ELEGIAC METRE. (TRANSLATED BY COLERIDGE.)
“I the hexameter rises the fountain’s silvery column, In the pentameter aye falling in melody back.*
OTHER EPIGRAMS, - &c.
Give me that which thou know’st,—I’1l receive and attend ; But thou givest me thyself—prithee, spare me, my friend!
THE PROSELYTE MAKER.
“ A tirrLE earth from out the Earth—and I ~ The Earth will move :” so spake the Sage divine. Out of myself one little moment—try
Myself to take :—succeed, and I am thine !
* We have ventured to borrow these two translations from Cole- ridge’s poems, not only because what Coleridge did well, no living man could have the presumptuous hope to improve, but because they adhere to the original metre, which Germany has received from Greece, and show, we venture to think, that not even Coleridge could have made that metre agreeable to the English ear and taste in poems of any length, nor even in small poems tf often repeated. It is, however, in their own language, the grandest which the Germans possess, and has been used. by Schiller with signal success in his ‘‘ Walk,’’ and other poems.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 287
THE CONNECTING MEDIUM.
Wauat to cement the lofty and the mean Does Nature }—what ?—place vanity between !
THE MORAL POET.
[Tus is an Epigram on Lavater’s work, called ‘‘ Pontius Pilatus, oder der Mensch in allen Gestalten,” &c.—HorrMeisren. |
“How poor a thing is man !” alas, ’tis true I'd half forgot it—when I chanced on you!
THE SUBLIME THEME.
[Atso on Lavater, and alluding to the ‘‘Jesus Messias, oder die Evangelien und Apostelgedichte in gesang, &c.’’]
How God compassionates Mankind, thy muse, my friend, rehearses—
Compassion for the sins of Man!—What comfort for thy verses !
SCIENCE.
To some she is the Goddess great, to some the milch-cow of the field ; Their care is but to caleulate—what butter she will yield,
KANT AND HIS COMMENTATORS.
How many starvelings one rich man can nourish ! When monarchs build, the rubbish-carriers flourish.
2988 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
TO
TIE HEREDETARY PRINCE OF “SAXE ‘WEIMAR,
ON HIS JOURNEY TO PARIS, WRITTEN FEBRUARY, 1802. [Sung in a friendly circle. ]
To the Wanderer a bowl to the brim! This Vale om his infancy smil’d ;
Let the Vale send a blessing to him, Whom it cradled to sleep asachild! =
He goes from his Forefather’s halls—
From the arms that embraced him at birth— To the City that trophies its walls
With the spoils it has ravish’d_from earth !
The thunder is silent, and now
~The war and the Discord are ended 3 And man o’er the crater may bow,
Whence the stream of the lava descended.
O fair be the fate to secure } Thy way through the perilous track ;
The heart Nature gave thee is pure, Bring it pure, as it goes from us, back.
Those lands the wild hoofs of the steeds, War yoked for the carnage, have torn ;
But Peace, laughing over the meads, Comes, strewing the gold of the corm, ~ > ~~~
Thou the old Father Rhine wilt be greeting, By whom thy great Father * shall be Remembered go long as is fleeting His stream to the beds of the Sea ;—
* Duke Bernard of Weimar, one of the great Generals of the Thirty Years’ War, '
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 289
There, honour the Heroes of old,
And pour to our Warden, the Rhine, Who keeps on our borders his hold,
A cup from his own merry wine ;
That thou may’st, as a guide to thy youth, The soul of the Fatherland find,
When thou passest the bridge where the Truth Of the German, thou leavest behind.
TO
A YOUNG FRIEND DEVOTING HIMSELF TO PHILOSOPHY.
Severe the proof the Grecian youth was doom’d to undergo,
Before he might what lurks beneath the Eleusinia know—
Art thow prepared and ripe, the shrine—that inner shrine-— to win,
Where Pallas guards from vulgar eyes the mystic prize within ?
Know’st thou what bars thy way? how dear the bargain thou dost make,
When but to buy uncertain good, sure good thou dost fer- sake ?
Feel’st thou sufficient strength to brave the dealiest human fray-——
When Heart from Reason—-Sense from Thought, shall rend themselves away ?
Snfficient valour, war with Doubt, the Hydra-shape, to wage ;
And that worst Foe within thyself with manly soul engage ?
With eyes that keep their heavenly health-——the innocence of youth
To guard from every falsehood, fair beneath the mask of Truth ?
v
990 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Fly, if thou can’st not trust thy heart to guide thee on the way—
Oh, fly the charméd margin ere th’ abyss engulf its prey.
Rourd many a step that seeks the light, the shades of mid- night close ;
But in the glimmering twilight, see—how safely Childhood goes !
THE PUPPET-SHOW OF LIFE. (DAS SPIEL DES LEBENS.) A PARAPHRASE.
[A Ziteral version of this Poem, which possibly may have been sug- gested by some charming passages in Wilhelm Meister, would be incompatible with the spirit which constitutes its chief merit. And perhaps, therefore, the original may be more faithfully rendered (like many of the Odes of Horace) by paraphrase than translation.—-In the general idea, as in all Schiller’s Poems of this kind, something more is implied than expressed, He has treated, elsewhere, the Ideal or Shadowy life in earnest. He here represents the Actual as a game; the chief images it brings to view are those of strife and contest; to see it rightly you must not approach too near; and regard the ‘Actual Stage only by the lights of Love. True to his chivalry to the sex even in sport, as in earnest, Schiller places the prize of life in the hand of Woman. }
Ho—ho—my puppet-show !
Ladies and gentlemen see my show !
Life and the world—look here, in troth,
Though but in parvo, I promise ye both!
The world and life—they shall both appear ; But both are best seen when yow’re not too near ; And every lamp from the stage to the porch, ' Must be lighted by Venus, from Cupid’s torch ; Never a moment, if rules can tempt ye,
Never a moment my scene is empty !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 291.
Here is the babe in his leading-strings— Here is the boy at play ;
Here is the passionate youth with wings,
Like a bird’s on a stormy day, To and fro, waving here and there, Down to the earth and aloft through the air ; Now see the man, as for combat enter— Where is the peril he fears to adventure?
_See how the puppets speed on to the race, Each his own fortune pursues in the chase ; How many the rivals, how narrow the space ! j But, hurry and scurry, O mettlesome game ! The cars roll in thunder, the wheels rush in flame. How the brave dart onward, and pant and glow! How the craven behind them come creeping slow— Ha! ha! see how Pride gets a terrible fall ! See how Prudence, or Cunning, out-races them all! See how at the goal, with her smiling eyes, Eyer waits Woman to give the prize!
THE MINSTRELS OF OLD.
WHERE now the minstrel of the large renown, Rapturing with living words the heark’ning throng? Charming the Man to Heaven, and earthward down Charming the God !—who wing’d the soul with song? Yet lives the minstrel, not the deeds—the lyre Of old demands ears that of old believed it— Bards of bless’d time—how flew your living fire From lip to lip! how race from race received it ! As if a God, men hallow’d with devotion— What Genius, speaking, shaping, wrought below, The glow of song inflamed the ear’s emotion, ‘The ear’s emotion gave the song the glow ; Each nurturing each—back on his soul—its tone Whole nations echoed with a rapture-peal ; Then all around the heavenly splendour shone Which now the heart, and scarce the heart’ can feel.
Tae
~
292 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE NEW CENTURY.
WueneE can Peace find a refuge ?—whither, say, Can Freedom turn?—lo, friend, before our view The Century rends itself in storm away, And, red with slaughter, dawns on earth the New. The girdle of the lands is loosen’d ;*—hurl’d To dust the forms old Custom deem’d divine,—-- Safe from War’s fury not the watery world ;— Safe not the Nile-God nor the antique Rhine. Two mighty nations make the world their field, Deeming the world is for their heirloom given— Against the freedom of all lands they wield This—Neptune’s trident ; that—the Thund’rer’s leyin. Gold to their scales each region must afford ; And, as fierce Brennus in Gaul’s early tale, The Frank casts in the iron of his sword, . To poise the balance, where the right may fail-—— Like some huge Polypus, with arms that roam Outstretch’d for prey—-the Briton spreads his reign ; And, as the ocean were his household home, Locks up the chambers of the liberal main. On to the Pole where shines, unseen, the Star, Onward his restless course unbounded flies ; Tracks every isle and every coast afar, And undiscover’d leaves but—-Paradise ! Alas, in vain on earth’s wide chart, I ween, Thou seek’st that holy realm beneath the sky— Where Freedom dwells in gardens ever green— And blooms the Youth of fair Humanity | Q’er shores where sail ne’er rustled to the wind, O’er the vast universe, may rove thy ken ; But in the universe thou canst not find _ A space sufficing for ten happy men !
* That is-—the settled political system—the balance of power.
eae.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 293
In the heart’s holy stillness only beams
The shrine of refuge from life’s stormy throng ; Freedom is only in the land of Dreams ;
And only blooms the Beautiful in Song !
We have now concluded the Poems composed in the third or maturest period of Schiller’s life . .-. From this portion, only have been omitted in the Translation (besides some of the moral or epi- grammatic sentences to which we have before alluded) a very few pieces, which, whatever their merit in the original, would be wholly without interest for the general English reader, viz., the satirical lines on Shakspeare’s Translators,—‘‘the Philosopher,’ ‘the Rivers,” ‘‘the Jeremiad,” the Remonstrance, addressed to Goethe on producing Voltaire’s ‘‘ Mahomet’’ on the Stage, in which the same ideas have been already expressed by Schiller in poems of more liberal and general application; and three or four occasional pieces in albums, &c.
The ‘Farewell to the Reader,’’ which properly belongs to this division of the Poems, has beem transferred, as the fitting conclusion, to the last place in the entire translation.
294 POLMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
SECOND PERIOD.
Tur Poems included in the Second Period of Schiller’s literary career are few, but remarkable for their beauty, and deeply interesting from the struggling and anxious state of mind which some of them depict. It was, both to his taste and to his thought, a period of visible transition. He had survived the wild and irregular power which stamps, with fierce and somewhat sensual characters, the pro- ductions of his youth; but he had not attained that serene repose of strength—that calm, bespeaking depth and fulness, which is found in the best writings of his maturer years. In point of style, the Poems in this division have more facility and sweetness than those of his youth, and perhaps more evident vigour, more popular verve and gusto than many composed in his riper manhood: in point of thought, they mark that era through which few men of inquisitive and adventurous genius—of sanguine and impassioned temperament—and of education chiefly self-formed, undisciplined, and wee have failed to pass— the era of doubt and gloom, of self-conflict, and of self-torture.—In the “Robbers,” and much of the poetry written in the same period of Schiller’s life, there is a bold and wild imagination, which attacks rather than questions—innoyates rather than examines—seizes upon subjects of vast social import, that float on the surface of opinion, and assails them with a blind and half-savage rudeness, according as they offend the enthusiasm of unreasoning youth. But now this eager and ardent mind had paused to contemplate; its studies were turned to philosophy and history—a more practical knowledge of life (though in this last, Schiller, like most German authors, was ever more or. less deficient in variety and range) had begun to soften the stern and fiery spirit which had hitherto sported with the dangerous elements of social revolution. And while this change was working, before its feverish agitation subsided into that Kantism which is the antipodes of sceptism, it was natural that, to the energy which had asserted, denounced, and dogmatised, should succeed the reaction of despondency and distrust. Vehement indignation at “the solemn plausibilities”’ of the world pervades the “ Robbers.” In ‘‘ Don Carlos,’’ the passion is no longer vehement indignation, but mournful sorrow—not indignation that hypocrisy reigns, but sorrow that honesty cannot triumph—not indignation that formal Vice usurps the high places of the world, but sorrow that, in the world, warm and generous Virtue glows, and feels, and suffers—without reward. So, in the poems of this period, are two that made a considerable sensation at their first appearance—‘‘ The Conflict,’’ published originally under the title of ‘The Frecthinking of Passion,” and “Resignation.” They presented a melancholy view of the moral struggles in the heart of a noble and virtuous man. From the first of these poems, Schiller, happily and wisely, at a later period of his life, struck out the passages most calcu-
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 295
lated to offend. What hand would dare to restore them? The few stanzas that remain still suggest the outline of dark and painful thoughts which is filled up in the more elaborate, and, in many respects, most exquisite, poem of ‘ Resignation.’? Virtue exacting all sacrifices, and giving no reward—Belief which denies enjoyment, and has no bliss save its own faith ; such is the sombre lesson of the melancholy poet—the more impressive because so far it is truth—deep and ever- lasting truth—but only, to a Christian, a part of truth. Resignation, so sad if not looking beyond the earth, becomes joy, when assured and confident of heaven. Another poemin this intermediate collection was no less subjected to severe animadyersion. We mean ‘‘ The Gods of Greece.”” As the Poem however now stands, though one or two expressions are not free from objection, it can only be regarded as a Poet’s lament for the Mythology which was the Fount of poetry, and certainly not as a Reasoner’s defence of Paganism in disparagement of Christianity. But the fact is, that Schiller’s mind was so essentially religious, that we feel more angry, when he whom we would gladly hail as our light and guide, only darkens us or misleads, than we should with the absolute infidelity of a less grave and reverent genius. Yeta period—a transition state—of doubt and despondency is perhaps com- mon to men in proportion to their natural dispositions to faith and veneration. With them, it comes from keen sympathy with undeserved sufferings—from grief at wickedness triumphant—from too intense a brooding over the mysteries involved in the government of the world. Scepticism of this nature can but little injure the frivolous, and will be charitably regarded by the wise. Schiller’s mind soon outgrew the state which, to the mind of a poet, above all men, is most ungenial, but the sadness which the struggle bequeathed seems to have wrought a complete revolution in all his preconceived opinions. The wild creator of the ‘‘ Robbers,” drunk with liberty, and audacious against all restraint, becomes the champion of ‘‘ Holy Order,’’—the denouncer of the French Republic—the extoller of an Ideal Life, which should entirely separate Genius the Restless from Society the Settled. And as his impetuous and stormy vigour matured into the lucent and tranquil art of ‘ Der Spaziergang,” ‘‘ Wallenstein,” and ‘‘ Die Braut yon Messina,’’ so his philosophy threw itself into calm respect for all that custom Ba tncd. and conyention hallowed.
But even during the painful transition, of which, in his minor poems, glimpses alone are visible, Scepticism, with Schiller, never insults the devoted, or mocks the earnest mind. It may have sadness —hbut never scorn. It is the question of a traveller who has lost his way in the great wilderness, but who mourns with his fellow-seekers, and has no bitter laughter for their wanderings from the goal. This Division begins, indeed, with a Hymn which atones for whatever
ains us in the two Poems whose strain and spirit so gloomily contrast it, yiz., the matchless and immortal ‘‘ Hymn to Joy’’—a poem steeped in the very essence of all-loving and all-aiding Christianity—breathing the enthusiasm of devout yet gladsome adoration, and ranking amongst the most glorious bursts of worship which grateful Genius ever rendered to the benign Creator.
296 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
And it is peculiarly noticeable, that, whatever Schiller’s state of mind upon theological subjects at the time that this hymn was com- posed, and though all doctrinal stamp and mark be carefully absent from it, it is yet a poem that never could have been written but in a Christian age, in a Christian land—but by a man whose whole soul ‘and heart had been at one time (nay, was at the very moment of com- position) inspired and suffused with that firm belief in God’s goodness and His justice—that full assurance of rewards beyond the grave— that exulting and seraphic cheerfulness which associates Joy with the Creator—and that animated affection for the Brotherhood of Mankind, which Christianity—and Christianity alone, in its pure, orthodox, gospel form, needing no aid from schoolman or philosopher—taught and teaches.
HYMN TO JOY.
[The origin of the following Hymn is said to be this:—Schiller when at Leipsic, or its vicinity, saved a poor student of theology impelled by destitution and the fear of starvation, from drowning himself in the river Pleisse. Schiller gave him what money he had; obtained his promise to relinquish the thought of suicide, at least while the money lasted ; and a few days afterwards, amidst the con- vivialities of a marriage feast, related the circumstance so as to affect all present. A subscription was made, which enabled the student to complete his studies, and ultimately to enter into an official situation. Elated with the success of his humanity, it is to Humanity that Schiller consecrated this Ode-]
Spark from the fire that Gods have fed— Joy—thou Elysian Child divine,
Fire-drunk, our airy footsteps tread, O Holy One ! thy holy shrine.
Strong custom rends us from each other— Thy magic all together brings ;
And man in man but hails a brother, © Wherever rest thy gentle wings.
Chorus—Embrace ye millions—let this kiss, Brothers, embrace the earth below ! Yon starry worlds that shine on this, One common Father know !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 297
He who this lot from fate can grasp—— Of one true friend the friend to be— He who one faithful maid can clasp, Shall hold with us his jubilee ; Yes, each who but one single heart In all the earth can claim his own !— Let him who cannot, stand apart, And weep beyond the pale, alone !
Chorus—Homage to holy Sympathy, Ye dwellers in our mighty ring ; ~ Up to yon star-pavilions—she Leads to the Unknown King!
All being drinks the mother-dew Of joy from Nature’s holy bosom ; And Vice and Worth alike pursue Her steps that strew the blossom. Joy in each link—to us * the treasure Of Wine and Love ;—beneath the sod, The worm has instincts fraught with pleasure ; In Heaven the Cherub looks on God !
Chorus—} Why bow ye down—why down—ye millions? O World, thy Maker’s throne to see, Look upward—search the Star-pavilions : There must His mansion be!
Joy is the mainspring in the whole Of endless Nature’s calm rotation ; Joy moves the dazzling wheels that roll In the great Timepiece of Creation ; Joy breathes on buds, and flowers they are ; Joy beckons—suns come forth from heaven ; Joy rolls the spheres in realms afar, Ne’er to thy glass, dim Wisdom, given !
* To ws, emphatically. Schiller means to discriminate the measure of bliss assigned to ws, to the worm, and to the cherub.
+ The original is obscure here; and the translator is doubtful whether he has seized the meaning, which may simply be—‘‘ Have you an innate feeling of Deity—then look for Him above the starry yault!”
298 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Chorus—Joyous as Suns careering gay Along their royal paths on high, March, Brothers, march your dauntless way, As Chiefs to Victory !
Joy, from Truth’s pure and lambent fires, Smiles out upon the ardent seeker 5 Joy leads to Virtue Man’s desires, And cheers as Suffering’s step grows weaker. High from the sunny slopes of Faith, The gales her waving banners buoy ; And through the shattered vaults of Death, Lo, mid the choral Angels—Joy !
Chorus—Bear this life, millions, bravely bear— Bear this life for the Better One ! See ye the Stars ?—a life is there, Where the reward is won.
Men like the Gods themselves may be, Tho’ Men may not the Gods requite ; Go soothe the pangs of Misery— Go share the gladness with delight.— Revenge and hatred both forgot, Have nought but pardon for thy foe ; May sharp repentance grieve him not, No curse one tear of ours bestow !
Chorus—Let all the world be peace and love— Cancel thy debt-book with thy brother ; For God shall judge of us above, As we shall judge each other !
Joy sparkles to us from the bowl— Behold the juice whose golden colour To meekness melts the savage soul, And gives Despair a Hero’s valour. Up, brothers !—Lo, we crown the cup! Lo, the wine flashes to the brim ! Let the bright Fount spring heavenward !— Up! To Tux Goop Spirit this glass !—To Hix !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 299
Chorus— Praised by the ever-whirling ring Of Stars, and tuneful Seraphim-— To Tur Goop Srrrit—the Father-King In Heaven !—This glass to Him!
Firm mind to bear what Fate bestows ; Comfort to tears in sinless eyes ;
Faith kept alike with Friends and Foes ; Man’s Oath eternal as the skies;
Manhood—the thrones of Kings to girth, Tho’ bought by limb or life, the prize ;
Success to Merit’s honest worth ; Perdition to the Brood of Lies !
Chorus—Draw closer in the holy ring, Swear by the wine-cup’s golden river — Swear by the Stars, and by their King, To keep our vow for ever !
THE INVINCIBLE ARMADA.
SHE comes, she comes—the Burthen of the Deeps ! Beneath her wails the Universal Sea! With clanking chains and a new God, she sweeps, And with a thousand thunders, unto thee ! The ocean-castles and the floating hosts— Ne’er on their like, look’d the wild waters !—Well May man the monster name “ Invincible.” O’er shudd@’ring waves she gathers to thy coasts ! The horror that she spreads can claim Just title to her haughty name. The trembling Neptune quails Under the silent and majestic forms ; The Doom of Worlds in those dark sails ;— Near and more near they sweep! and slumber all the Storms !
300 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Before thee, the array, Blest island, Empress of the Sea ! The sea-born squadrons threaten thee, And thy great heart, Brirannta ! Woe to thy people, of their freedom proud— She rests, a thunder heavy in its cloud ! Who, to thy hand the orb and sceptre gave, That thou should’st be the sovereign of the nations ? To tyrant kings thou wert thyself the slave, Till Freedom dug from Law its deep foundations ; The mighty Cuart thy citizens made kings, And kings to citizens sublimely bow’d ! And thou thyself, upon thy realm of water, Hast thou not render’d millions up to slaughter, When thy ships brought upon their sailing wings The sceptre—and the shroud ? What should’st thou thank ?—Blush, Earth, to hear and feel: What should’st thou thank /—Thy genius ead thy steel ! ! Behold the hidden and the giant fires ! Behold thy glory trembling to its fall! Thy coming doom the round “earth shall appal, And all the hearts of freemen beat for thee, And all free souls their fate in thine foresee— Theirs is thy glory’s fall ! One look below the Almighty gave, Where stream’d the lion-flags of thy proud foe ; And near and wider yawn’d the horrent grave. “And who,” saith Hx, ‘shall lay mine England low— The stem that blooms with hero-deeds— The rock when man from wrong a refuge needs— The stronghold where the tyrant comes in vain ? Who shall bid England vanish from the main ? Ne’er be this only Eden Freedom knew, Man’s stout defence from Power, to Fate consign’d,” God the Almighty blew, And the Armada went to every wind !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 301
THE CONFLICT.
No! I this conflict longer will not wage,
The conflict Duty claims—the giant task ;— Thy spells, O Virtue, never can assuage
The heart’s wild fire—this offering do not ask !
True, I have sworn—a solemn vow have sworn, That I myself will curb the self within ;
Yet take thy wreath, no more it shall be worn— Take back thy wreath, and leave me free to sin.
Rent be the contract I with thee once made ;— She loves me, loves me—forfeit be thy crown !
Blest he who, lull’d in rapture’s dreamy shade, Glides, as I glide, the deep fall gladly down.
She sees the worm that my youth’s bloom decays, She sees my springtime wasted as it flees ; And, marv’ling at the rigour that gainsays The heart’s sweet impulse, my reward decrees,
Distrust this angel purity, fair soul! It is to guilt thy pity armeth me ; Could Being lavish its unmeasured whole, It ne’er could give a gift to rival Thee !
Thee-—the dear guilt I ever seek to shun, O tyranny of fate, O wild desires ! My virtue’s only crown can but be won In that last breath—when virtue’s self expires !
302 POEMS AND BALLADS OF. SCIWILLER.
RESIGNATION.
Awnp I, too, was amidst Arcadia born, And Nature seem’d to woo me ; And to my cradle such sweet joys were sworn ; And I, too, was amidst Arcadia born, Yet the short spring gave only tears unto me ! Life but one blooming holiday can keep— For me the bloom is fled ; The silent Genius of the Darker Sleep Turns down my torch—and weep, my brethren, weep— Weep, for the light is dead ! Upon thy bridge the shadows round me press, O dread Eternity ! And I have known no moment that can bless ;— Take back this letter meant for Happiness— The seal’s unbroken—see ! Before thee, Judge, whose eyes the dark-spun veil Conceals, my murmur came ; On this our orb a glad belief prevails, That, thine the earthly sceptre and the scales, REQUITER is thy name.
Terrors, they say, thou dost for Vice prepare, And joys the good shall know;
Thou canst the crooked heart unmask and bare ;
Thou canst the riddle of our fate declare, And keep account with Woe.
With thee a home smiles for the exiled one— There ends the thorny strife.
Unto my side a godlike vision won,
Called TrurH, (few know her, and the many shun,) And check’d the reins of life,
“T will repay thee in a holier land— Give thou to me thy youth ;
All I can grant thee lies in this command.”
I heard, and, trusting in a holier land, Gave my young joys to Truth.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 303
“Give me thy Laura—give me her whom Love To thy heart’s core endears ; The usurer, Bliss, pays every grief—above !” I tore the fond shape from the bleeding love, And gave—albeit with tears ! “What bond can bind the Dead to life once more ? Poor fool,” (the scoffer cries ;) ¢ Gull’d by the despot’s hireling lie, with lore That gives for Truth a shadow ;—life is o’er When the delusion dies !” * Tremblest thou,” hiss’d the serpent-herd in scorn, ‘“€ Before the vain deceit ? Made holy but by custom, stale and worn, The phantom Gods, of craft and folly born— The sick world’s solemn cheat ? What is this Future underneath the stone ? But for the veil that hides, revered alone ; The giant shadow of our Terror, thrown On Conscience’ troubled glass— Life’s lying likeness—in the dreary shroud Of the cold sepulchre— Embalm’d by Hope—Time’s mummy,—which the proud Delirium, driv’ling through thy reason’s cloud, Calls ‘ Immortality !? Giv’st thou for hope (corruption proves its lie) Sure joy that most delights us ? Six thousand years has Death reign’d tranquilly !— Nor one corpse come to whisper those who die What after death requites us!” Along Time’s shores I saw the Seasons fly ; Nature herself, interr’d Among her blooms, lay dead ; to those who die There came no corpse to whisper Hope! Still I Clung to the Godlike Word. Judge !—All my joys to thee did I resign, All that did most delight me ; And now I kneel—man’s scorn I scorn’d—thy shrine Have I adored—Thee only held divine— Requiter, now requite me!
304 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
“For all my sons an equal love I know, And equal each condition,”
Answer’d an unseen Genius—“ See below,
Two flowers, for all who rightly seek them, blow — The Hopz and the Fruitron.
He who has pluck’d the one, resign’d must see The sister’s forfeit bloom :
Let Unbelief enjoy—Belief must be
All to the chooser ;—the world’s history Is the world’s judgment doom.
Thou hast had Horr—in thy belief thy prize-—— Thy bliss was centred in it:
Eternity itself—(Go ask the Wise !)
Never to him who forfeits, resupplies The sum struck from the Minute!”
THE GODS OF GREECE.
I.
YE in the age gone by, Who ruled the world---a world how lovely then !—- And guided still the steps of happy men In the light leading-strings of careless joy ! Ah, flourish’d then your service of delight ! How different, oh, how different, in the day When thy sweet fanes with many a wreath were bright, O Venus Amathusia !
II.
Then, through a veil of dreams
Woven by Song, Truth’s youthful beauty glow’d, And life’s redundant and rejoicing streams
Gave to the soulless, soul—where’er they flow’d. Man gifted Nature with divinity
To lift and link her to the breast of Love; All things betray’d to the initiate eye
The track of gods above !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Il,
Where lifeless—fix’d afar,
A flaming ball to our dull sense is given, Phebus Apollo, in his golden car,
In silent glory swept the fields of heaven ! On yonder hill the Oread was adored,
In yonder tree the Dryad held her home ; And from her Urn the gentle Naiad pour’d
The wavelet’s silver foam.
Iv. Yon bay, chaste Daphné wreathed, Yon stone was mournful Niobe’s mute cell, Low through yon sedges pastoral Syrinx breathed,
305
And through those groves wail’d the sweet Philomel ;
The tears of Ceres swell’d in yonder rill— Tears shed for Proserpine to Hades borne ; And, for her lost Adonis, yonder hill Heard Cytherea mourn !—
v. Heaven’s shapes were charm’d unto The mortal race of old Deucalion ; Pyrrha’s fair daughter, humanly to woo, Came down, in shepherd-guise, Latona’s son. Between Men, Heroes, Gods, harmonious then Love wove sweet links and sympathies divine ; Blest Amathusia, Heroes, Gods, and Men, Equals before thy shrine!
Vi. Not to that culture gay, Stern self-denial, or sharp penance wan ! Well might each heart be happy in that day— For Gods, the Happy Ones, were kin to Man ! The Beautiful alone the Holy there !
No pleasure shamed the Gods of that young race ;
So that the chaste Camcenze favouring were, And the subduing Grace !
'306 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
VII. A palace every shrine ; Your very sports heroic ;—Yours the crown Of contests hallow’d to-a power divine, As rush’d the chariots thund’ring to renown. Fair round the altar where the incense breathed, Moved your melodious dance inspired ; and fair Above victorious brows, the garland wreathed Sweet leaves round edorous hair !
VIL.
The lively Thyrsus-swinger,
And the wild car the exulting Panthers bore, Announced the Presence of the Rapture-Bringer—
Bounded the Satyr and blithe Faun before ; And Mienads, as the frenzy stung the soul,
Hymn’d in their madding dance, the glorious wine— As ever beckon’d to the lusty bowl
The ruddy Host divine !
IX.
Before the bed of death
No ghastly spectre stood—but from the porch Of life, the lip—one kiss inhaled the breath,
And the mute graceful Genius lower’d a torch. The judgment-balance of the Realms below,
A judge, himself of mortal lineage, held ; The very Furies at the Thracian’s woe,
Were moved and music-spell’d.
ate
In the Elysian grove
The shades renew’d the pleasures life held dear : The faithful spouse rejoin’d remember’d love,
And rush’d along the meads the charioteer ; There Linus pour’d the old accustom’d strain ;
Admetus there Alcestis still could greet ; his Friend there once more Orestes could regain,
His arrows—Philoctetes !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
xI.
More glorious then the meeds
That in their strife with labour nerved the brave To the great doer of renownéd deeds,
The Hebe and the Heaven the Thunderer gave. Before the rescued Rescuer* of the dead,
Bow’d down the silent and Immortal Host ; And the Twin Stars} their guiding lustre shed,
On the bark tempest-tost !
?
XII.
Art thou, fair world, no more ? Return, thou virgin-bloom on Nature’s face ; Ah, only on the Minstrel’s magic shore, Can we the footstep of sweet Fable trace ! The meadows mourn for the old hallowing life ; Vainly we search the earth of gods bereft ; Where once the warm and living shapes were rife, Shadows alone are left !
xUL
Cold, from the North, has gone Over the Flowers the Blast that kill’d their May ; And, to enrich the worship of the Onz, A Universe of Gods must pass away ! Mourning, I search on yonder starry steeps, But thee no more, Selene, there I see! And through the woods I call, and o’er the deeps, And—EKcho answers me!
30
* Hercules, who recoyered from the Shades Alcestis, after she had
given her own life to save her husband Admetus.
Alcestis in the
hands of Euripides (that woman-hater as he is called!) becomes the
Joyeliest female creation in the Greek Drama.
+ z.e. Castor and Pollux are transferred to the Stars, Hercules to
Olympus, for their deeds on earth. x2
308 PORMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
XIV.
Deaf to the joys she gives— Blind to the pomp of which she is possest— Unconscious of the spiritual Power that lives Around, and rules her—by our bliss unblest— Dull to the Art that colours or creates, Like the dead timepiece, Godless NaTuRE creeps Her plodding round, and, by the leaden weights, The slavish motion keeps.
XV.
To-morrow to receive New life, she digs her proper grave to-day ; And icy moons with weary sameness weave From their own light their fulness and decay. Home to the Poets’ Land the Gods are flown, Light use in them that later world discerns, Which, the diviner leading-strings outgrown, On its own axle turns.
XVI.
Home ! and with them are gone
The hues they gaz’d on and the tones they heard ; Life’s Beauty and life’s Melody :—alone
Broods o’er the desolate void the lifeless Word ; Yet rescued from Time’s deluge, still they throng
Unseen the Pindus they were wont to cherish : Ah, that which gains immortal life in Song,
To mortal life must perish !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 309
THE ARTISTS.
Tuts justly ranks amongst Schiller’s noblest Pocms. Tle confessed ‘that he had hitherto written nothing that so much pleased him— nothing to which he had given so much time.’’* It forms one of the many Pieces he has devoted tothe progressof Man. ‘The Eleusinian Festival” records the social benefits of Agriculture; ‘‘The Four Ages” panegyrises the influence of Poetry in alltimes; ‘‘The Walk” traces, in a series of glowing pictures, the developement of general civilisation; the “Lay of the Bell’? commemorates the stages of Life; and ‘‘ The Artists,” by some years the earliest of the Series, is an elaborate exposition of the effect of Art upon the Happiness and Dignity of the Human Species—a lofty Hymn in honour of Intellectual Beauty. Herein are collected into a symmetrical and somewhat argumentative whole, many favourite ideas of Schiller, which the reader will recognise as scattered throughout his other effusions. About the time when this Poem.was composed, the narrow notions of a certain School of miscalled Utilitarians were more prevalent than they deserved ; and this fine composition is perhaps the most eloquent answer ever given to those thinkers, who have denied the Morality of Fiction, and considered Poets rather the Perverters than the Teachers of the World. Perhaps in his just Defence of Art, Schiller has some- what underrated the dignity of Science ; but so many small Philosophers have assailed the divine uses of Poetry, that it may be pardoned to the Poet to vindicate his Art in somewhat too arrogant a tone of retalia- tion. And it may be fairly contended that Fiction (the several forms of which are comprehended under the name of Art) has exercised an earlier, a more comprehensive, and a more genial influence over the Civilisation and the Happiness of Man, that nine-tenths of that myestigation of Facts which is the pursuit of Science.
The Poem, in the original, is written in lines of irregular length, the imitation of which—considering the nature and the length of the piece—would probably displease in an English version. Occasionally too (for Schiller in all his philosophical Poems is apt to incur the fault of obscurity, from which his poems of sentiment and narrative are generally free,) it has been judged necessary somewhat to expand and paraphrase the sense—to translate the idea as well as the words. But though, verbally, the Translation may be more free than most others in this collection, yet no less pains have been taken to render the yersion true to the spirit and intention of the Author. for the clearer exposition of the train of thought which Schiller pursues, the Poem has been divided into sections, and the Argument of the whole pre- fixed. Ii any passages in the version should appear obscure to those
* Hinrichs.
310 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
readers who find the mind of Schiller worth attentive Study, even when deprived of the melodious language which clothed its thoughts, by referring to the Argument the sense will perhaps become sufficiently clear,
ARGUMENT.
Sror. 1.—Man regarded in his present palmy state of civilisation— free through Reason, strong through Law—the Lord of Nature. (2) But let him not forget his gratitude to Art, which found him the Savage, and by which his powers have been developed—his soul refined. Let him not degenerate from serving Art, the Queen—to a preference for her handmaids (the Sciences). ‘The Bee and the Worm excel him in diligence and mechanical craft—the Seraph in knowledge —but Art is Man’s alone. (3) It is through the Beautiful that Man gains the Intuition of Law and Knowledge. (4) The supposed dis- coveries of Philosophy were long before revealed as symbols to Feeling. Virtue charmed and Vice revolted, before the Lawsof Solon. (5) That Goddess which in Heaven is Urania—the great Deity whom only pure Spirits can behold, descends to earth as the earthly Venus—vyiz., the Beautiful. She adapts herself to the childlike understanding. But what we now only adore as Beauty we shall, one day, recognise as Truth. (6) After the Fallof Man, this Goddess—viz. the Beautiful— (comprehending Poetry and Art) alone deigned to console him, and pet on the walls of his Dungeon the Shapes of Elysium. (7)
While Men only worshipped the Beautiful, no Fanaticism hallowed Persecution and Homicide—without formal Law, without compulsion, they obeyed Virtue rather as an instinct than a Duty. (8) Those dedicated to her service (viz. the Poet and the Artist) hold the highest intellectual rank Man can obtain. (9) Before Art introduced its own symmetry and method into the world, all was chaos. (10) You, the Artists, contemplated Nature, and learned to imitate; you observed the light shaft of the cedar, the shadow on the wave. (11) Thus rose the first Column of the Sculptor—the first Design of the Painter—and the wind sighing through the reed suggested the first Music. (12) Art’s first attempt was in the first choice of flowers for a posy; its second, the weaving of those flowers into a garland—i.e. Art first observes and selects—next blends and unites—the column is ranged - with other columns—the individual Hero becomes one of an heroic army —the rude Song becomes an Iliad. (13) The effect produced by Homeric Song, in noble emulation,—nor in this alone ; Man learns to live in other woes than his own—to feel pleasures beyond animal enjoyments. (14) And as this diviner intellectual feeling is developed, are developed also Thought and Civilisation. (15) In the rudest state of Man, you, the Artists, recognise in his breast the spiritual germ, and warm it into life—true and holy Love awoke with the first Shepherd’s love song. (16) It is you, the Artists, who generalising, and abstract- ing, gather all several excellences into one ideal,—You thus familiarize
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 311
Man to the notion of the Unknown Powers, whom you mvest with the attributes Man admires and adores.—He fears the Unknown, but he loves its shadow.—You suffered the Nature around him to suggest the Prototype of all Beauty. (17) You make subject to your ends—the passion, the duty, and the instinct—All that is scattered through creation you gather and concentrate, and resolve to Song or to the Stage— Even the murderer who has escaped justice, conscience- stricken by the Eumenides on the scene, reveals himself—Long before Philosophy hazarded its dogmas an Iliad solved the riddles of Fate— And with the wain of Thespis wandered a Providence. (18) Where your s etry, your design fail in this world, they extend into the world beyond the grave—If life be over too soon for the brave and good, Poetry imagined the Shades below, and placed the hero Castor amongst the Stars.* (19) Not contented with bestowing immortality on Man—you furnish forth from Man, the ideal of the Immortals— Virgin Beauty grows into a Pallas—manly Strength into a Jove. (20) As the world without you is thus enlarged and the world within you agitated and enriched, your Art extends to Philosophy :—For as the essentials of Art are symmetry and design, so the Artist extends that symmetry and that design into the system of Creation, the Laws of Nature, the Government of the World ;—Lends to the spheres its own harmony—to the Universe its own symmetric method. (21) The Artist thus recognising Contrivance every where, feels his life sur- rounded with Beauty—He has before him in Nature itself an eternal model of the Perfect and Consummate—Through joy—grief—terror— wherever goes his course—one stream of harmony murmurs by his side— The Graces are his companions—his life glides away amidst airy shapes of Beauty—His soul is merged in the divine ocean that flows around him. Fate itself which is reduced from Chance and Providence, and which furnishes him with themes of pleasurable awe, does not daunt him. (22) You, Artists, are the sweet and trusty companions of life —You gave us what life has best—Your reward is your own immortality and the gratitude of Men’s hearts. (23) You are the imitators of the Divine Artist, who accompanies power with sweetness, terror with splendour, who adorns himself even in destroying—As a brook that reflects the evening landscape, so on the niggard stream of life shimmers Poetry. You lead us on, in marriage garments, to the Unknown Bourne—As your Urns deck our bones your fair semblances deck our cares.—Through the history of the world, we find that Humanity smiles in your presence and mourns in your absence. (24) Humanity came young from your hands, and when it grew old and decayed, you gaye it a second youth.—Time has bloomed twice from seeds sown by Art. (25) When the Barbarians chased Civilisation from Greece, you transplanted it to Italy—and, with Civilisation, freedom and gentle manners—Yet you sought not public rewards for your public benefits
* To the Poet we are indebted for the promise of another life (fore- shadowing Divine Revelation) long before the Philosopher bewildered _us by arguing for it.
312 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
—In obscurity you contemplated the blessings you had diffused. _ (26) If the Philosopher now pursues his course without obstacles—if he now would arrogate the crown, and hold Art but as the first Slave to Science—pardon his vain boast.—Completion and Perfection in reality rest with you.—With you dawned the Spring, in you is matured the Harvest, of the Moral World. (27) For although Art sprung first from physical materials, the clay and the stone—it soon also embraced in its scope the spiritual and intellectual—Eyen what Science discovers only ministers to Art.—The Philosopher obtains his first hints from the Poet or Artist—and when his wisdom flowers, as it were, into beauty—it but returns to the service, and is applied to the uses of its instructor.— When the Philosopher contemplates the Natural World, side by side with the Artist—the more the Latter accumulates images of beauty, and unites the details of the great design, the more the Former enriches the sphere of his observation—the more profound his research—the more bold his speculations—The Imagination always assists the Reason—And Art which teaches Philosophy to see Art (i.e. Symmetry and Design) everywhere, may humble the Philosopher's pride, but augments his love.—Thus scattering flowers, Poetry leads on through tones and forms, ever high and higher, pure and purer, till it shall at last attain that point when Poetry becomes but sudden inspiration and the instantaneous intuition of Truth ;—when in fact the Art sought by the Poet, the Truth sought by the Philosopher, become one. (28) Then this great Goddess, whom we have hitherto served as the earthly Venus, the Beautiful—shall re-assume her blazing crown—and Man, to whose earlier and initiatory probation she has gently familiarized her splendour, shall behold her without a veil—not as the Venus of Earth, but as the Urania of Heaven—Her beauty comprehended by him in proportion to the beauty his soul took from her—So from the Mentor of his youth shone forth Minerva to Tele- machus. (29) To you, O Artists, is committed the dignity of Man— It sinks with you, it revives with you. (30) In those Ages when Truth is persecuted by the Bigotry of her own time, she seeks refuge in Song.—The charm she takes from the Muse but renders her more fearful to her Foes. (31) Aspire then constantly, O Artists, to the Beautiful—covet no meaner rewards.—If Art escape you, search for her in Nature.—Remember that the excellent and the perfect ever must be found in whatsoever fair souls esteem fair.—Do not bound yourselves to your own time—Let your works reflect the shadow of the coming Age—It matters not what paths you select—You have before you the whole labyrinth of being—but all its paths for you unite at one throne—As the white breaks into seven tints, as the seven tints re-dissolve into white—so Truth is the same, whether she dazzles us with the splendour of variegated colours, or pervades the Universe in one Stream of Light.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
I.
Uron the century’s verge, O Man, how fair
Thou standest, stately as a silent palm
With boughs far-spreading through the solemn air, In the full growth of mellowest years sublime ; Thro’ mildness earnest, thro’ achievement calm, Each sense unfolded, all the soul matured—-
The crowning work and ripest born of Time ! Free in the freedom reason has secured,
Strong in the strength that Law bestows, thou art, Great in thy meekness—rich with countless stores, Which slept for ages silent in thy heart ;
The Lord of Nature, who thy chains adores,
Who in each strife but disciplines thy skill,
And shines from out the desert at thy will!
IL
O not, inebriate with thy victory, scorn—
Scorn not to prize and praise the fostering hand That found thee weeping—orphan’d and forlorn, Lone on the verge of Life’s most barren strand— That seized from lawless Cancer its helpless prey, And early taught thy young heart the control
Of Art—thy guide upon the upward way— The softener and the raiser of the soul,— Cleansing the breast it tutored to aspire,
From the rude passion and the low desire :
The good, the blessed One, who, through sweet play, To lofty duties lured thy toilless youth ;
Who by light parables revealed the ray
That gilds the mystery of each holier Truth ; And but to stranger arms consigned—once more To clasp her darling, riper for her lore.
O fall not back from that high faith serene,
To serve the Handmaids and forsake the Queen. In diligent toil thy master is the bee ;
In craft mechanical, the worm that creeps Through earth its dexterous way, may tutor thee ; In knowledge (couldst thou fathom all its deeps),
313
314 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
All to the seraph are already known : But thine, O Man, is Ant—thine wholly and alone!
Ii.
But through the Morning-Gate of Beauty goes
Thy pathway to the Land of Knowledge! By
The twilight Charm,—Truth’s gradual daylight grows Familiar to the Mind’s unconscious eye ;
And what was first—with a sweet tremulous thrill— Wakened within thee by melodious strings,
Grows to a Power that swells and soars until
Up to the all-pervading God it springs.*
Iv.
What first the reason of the Antique Time Dimly discovered (many a century flown)
Lay in the symbol types of the Sublime
And Beautiful—intuitively known :
True, from the seeker as a lore concealed,
But as an znstenct all to childish sense revealed. Virtue’s fair shape to Virtue love could draw, From Vice a gentler impulse warned away, Ere yet a Solon sowed the formal Law,
Whose fruits warmed slowly to the gradual ray ;— Ere the Idea of Space, the Infinite,
Before Philosophy, the Seeker, stole—
Who ever gazed upon the Starry Light,
Nor guess’d the large truth in the silent soul?
Vv.
She the Urantra, with her wreath of rays,
The glory of Orion round her brow ;
On whom pure Spirits only dare to gaze,
As Heaven’s bright Habitants before her bow ; And round her splendour the stars wink and fade : So awful, reigning on her sunlit throne—
* i.e. Poetry prepared the mind for the knowledge of God.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 315
When she diswreathes her of her fiery crown, Gliding to Earth (Earth’s gentle Venus) down, Smiles on us but as Beauty :*—with the zone Of the sweet Graces girded, the meck youth
Of Infancy she wears, that she may be
By Infants comprehended, and what we
Here, but as Braury gazed on and obey’d,— Will, one day, meet us in her name of Trurm!
Vi.
When the Creator from his presence cast
Man to thy dark abyss—Mortality,
Condemn’d the late return to glory past,
To seek and strive for with a weary sigh,
Amidst the dim paths of the sensual clay,
When every heavenlier Nature from his eye
Veil’d its bright face, and swept in scorn away ; She only—she, in the low Human cell,
Herself made human, deign’d with him to dwell— Stoop’d round her darling, wings soft-brooding ; fann’d With freshening airs, the Sense’s barren land ; And, kind in bright delusions, limn’d with all
The lost Elysium—life’s sad dungeon-wall.
VII,
Ah, in that tender Nurse’s cradling arms—
While yet reposed the mild Humanity—
War deck’d not Murder with Fame’s holy charms, Reek’d not the innocent blood ;—but guided by Those gentle leading-strings, the guileless soul Shunn’d the cold duties, by compulsion taught ; Virtue was instinct—and without control,
Through ways the lovelier for their winding, sought
* i.e. She who, in Heaven, is Urania—the Daughter of Uranus— by Light, is, on Earth, Venus—the Divinity of Love and Beauty, The Beautiful is to Mortals the revelation of Truth. Trath, in its abstract splendour too bright for the eyes of Man in his present state, familiarizes itself to him in the shape of the Beautiful.
316 POLMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
The Moral in the Beautiful,—and won ;—
Each path a ray that guided to the Sun!
Ne’er they who tended her chaste service knew
One meaner impulse—and the frown of Fate
Paled not their courage from its healthy hue,
As in some holier realm, their happy state
Regain’d the freedom while it shunn’d the strife,
And won to Earth once more the spiritual, heavenly life.
VIII.
Oh, happy! and of many millions, they
The purest chosen, whom her service pure
Hallows and claims—whose hearts are made her throne, Whose lips her oracle—ordain’d secure,
To lead a Priestly life, and feed the ray
Of her eternal shrine,—to them alone
Her glorious Countenance unyeil’d is shewn :
Ye, the high Brotherhood she links—rejoice
In the great rank allotted by her choice !—
The loftiest rank the spiritual world sublime,
Rich with its starry thrones, gives to the Sons of Time!
10.¢
Ere yet unto the early world the Law
Of the harmonious Symmetry, which all
Essence and life now joyously obey,
Your Art divinely gave—wall’d round with Night ‘ And Chaos, gloomier for one sickly ray,
Man struggled with the uncouth shapes of awe,
_ That through the Dark came giant on the sight, And chained the senses in a slavish thrall :
Rude as himself press’d round the shadowy throng, Vast without outline, without substance, strong ; So gloom’d Creation on the Savage Breast,
While brutal lusts alone allured the eye,
And unenjoyed, unheeded, and unguess’d,
The lovely soul of Nature pass’d him by,—
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
x. Lo, as it pass’d him, with a noiseless hand, And with a gentle instinct, the fair shade YE seizd ; and link’d in one harmonious band The airy images your eyes survey’d ; Ye felt, surveying, how the cedar gave Its light shaft to the air ;—how sportive, play’d The form reflected on the crystal wave ! How could ye fail the gentle hints to read With which free Nature met ye on the way ? By easy steps did eye observant lead The hand to mimick the fair forms at play, Till from the image on the water glass’d The likeness rose—and Painting grew at last ! Yea, from the substance sever’d, Nature’s fair And phantom shadow—follow’d by the soul, Cast itself on the silver stream, and there Rendered its coyness to the hand that stole !
* So born the craft that imitates and takes Shape from the Shadow ;—so young Art awakes The earliest genius ;—so in clay and sand The shade is snatch’d at by the eager hand ; The sweet enjoyment in the labour grows,
And from your breast the first creation flows.
XI.
Seized by the power of thoughtful contemplation, Snared by the eye that steals what it surveys, Nature, the talisman of each creation
With which her spells enamour you, betrays : Your quicken’d sense, the wonder-working laws, The stores in Beauty’s treasure-house, conceives— Your hand from Nature the light outline draws, And scattered hints in gentle union weaves.
Thus rise—tall Obelisk, and vast Pyramid—
The half-formed Hermes grows—the Column springs ; Music comes lisping from the Shepherd’s reed, And Song the valour and the victory sings.
* See Argument,
317
318 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
XII,
The happier choice of flowers most sweet or fair,
To weave the posy for some Shepherd Maid,
Lo the first Art, from Nature born, is there !—
The next—the flowers the careless tresses braid
In garlands wreath’d :—Thus step by step ascends
The art that notes, and gathers, shapes and blends ! But, each once blent. with each, its single grace
Each offspring of the Beautiful must lose ;
The artful hand according each its place,
Confounds the separate with the common hues.
Charm’d into method by the harmonious word,
Column with column ranged—proud Fanes aspire,
The Hero melts amidst the Hero herd,
And peals the many-stringed Meonian Lyre.
XIII.
Soon round this new Creation in great Song Barbarian wonder gather’d and believed ;
“See,” cried the emulous and kindled throng, “The deeds a Mortal like ourselves achieved !” Grouped into social circles near and far,
Listing the wild tales of the Titan war,
Of giants piled beneath the rocks,—and caves Grim with the lion some stout hero braves,
Still while the Minstrel sung, the listeners grew Themselves the Heroes his high fancy drew.
Then first did Men the soul’s enjoyment find, First knew the calmer raptures of the mind
Not proved by sense—but from the distance brought ; The joy at deeds themselves had never wrought,— The thirst for what possession cannot give,—
The power in nobler lives than life to live !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 319
XIV.
Now from the Sensual Slumber’s heavy chain Breaks the fair Soul, which new-born pinions buoy, And, freed by you, the ancient Slave of Pain Springs from his travail to the breast of Joy ;
Fall the dull Animal-Barriers round him wrought, On his clear front the Human halo glows,
And forth the high Majestic Stranger—Tuoveur, Bright from the startled brain, a Pallas, goes !
Now stands sublime THE Man, and to the star Lifts his unclouded brow—The Kingly One ;
And Contemplation, sweeping to the Far,
Speaks in the eyes commeércing with the Sun.
Fair from his cheeks bloom happy smiles, and all The rich varieties of soulful sound
Unfold in Song—divine emotions call
Sweet tears to feeling eyes ;—and, sister-bound, Kindness and Mirth upon his accents dwell,
Soul, like some happy Nymph, haunting the lips’ pure well !
XY.
Yea, what though buried in the mire and clay Grovels the fleshly instinct of the worm ;
What though the lusts and ruder passions sway And clasp him round—the intellectual germ
You, Sons of Art, in that dark breast behold, Warm from its sleep and into bloom unfold :— Love’s spiritual blossom opened to the day, First—when Man heard the first young Shepherd’s lay, Ennobled by the dignity of Thought,
Passion that blush’d the soft desire to own, Caught chaster language from the Minstrel’s tone ; And Song, the delicate Preacher, while it taught A love outlasting what the senses sought,
Beyond Possession placed the ethereal goal,
And to the Heart proclaimed and linked the Soul !
320 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
XVI.
The wisdom of the wise, the gentleness
The gentle know—the strength that nerves the strong— The grace that gathers round the noble —yes
Ye blend them all to limn the Beautiful,
Each ray on Nature’s brows commixed and grown Into one pomp—a halo.for your own !
Though from the Unknown Divinity, the awe
Of Man shrinks back—to what he knows not dull, Yet with what love his young religion saw The shadow of the Godhead downward thrown ;* Gentle the type—though fearful the Unknown.
The breasts of heroes nobly burn’d to vie
With the bright Gods that rul’d in Homer’s sky ;
Ye did the Ideal from the Nature call—
Ye bade Man learn how on the Earth is given
The immemorial prototype of all Glory and Beauty, dreamed of for the Heaven !
XVII.
The wild tumultuous passions of the soul, The playful gladness of unfetter’d joy,
The duty and the instinet—your controul Grasps at its will—can as its slaves employ To guide the courses, and appoint the goal ; All that in restless Nature’s mighty space Wander divided—world on world afar—
Ye seize—ye gather, fix them into place,
And shew them bright and living as they are, Link’d into order stately and serene,
Limn’d in the song, or mirror’d on the scene !
* j.e. Man shrinks in awe from the notion of a Diviner Power, thoroughly unknown; but the Greek Mythology familiarised Man to the providence of the Gods, and elevated him by the contemplation of attributes in which he rocognised whatever he most admired.—Art
taught Man to see in the Nature round him the prototype—the ideal —ot Diviner Beauty. ;
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 321
Here, secret Murder, pale and shuddering, sees Sweep o’er the stage the stern Eumenides ;*
Owns, where Law fails, what powers to Art belong, And, screen’d from Justice, finds its doom in Song !
Long ere the wise their slow decrees revolved,
A fiery Hliad Fate’s dark riddles solved ;
And Art, the Prophetess, Heaven’s mystic plan
Of doom and destiny reveal’d to Man,
When the rude goat-song spell’d the early Age,
And Providence ¢ spoke low from Thespis’ wandering stage.
XVIII.
Nay, where in this world, Reason paus’d perplext, Ye track’d God onward, and divined the nezt, {Full early wont to comprehend and meet Harmonious systems never incomplete,
What though the vain impatient eye might fail To pierce the dark Fate through the solemn veil— Though the brave heart seem’d prematurely still’d, And life’s fair circle halted unfulfilled,
Yet here, ev’n here, your own unaided might Flung its light Arch across the waves of Night ; Led the untrembling Spirit on to go
Where dark Avernus, wailing, winds below ;
* The Poet here seems to allude to the Story of Ibycus, which at a subsequent period furnished the theme of one of his happiest - narratives.
+ In the Drama the essentials are Providence and Design.
t “ Doch in den grossen Weltenlauf Ward euer Ebenmass zu friih getragen.”’
These lines are extremely obscure. Unless we may construe ‘zu friih,” ‘‘very early,’ or ‘with bold prematurity.” In which case, referring to the conclusion of the preceding stanza, the sense would bo —That the Poet did not confine the operations of a recompensing Providence to the limited exhibitions of the Thespian wain; but, even in the infancy of society, and with a boldness which might be con- yidered premature, ventured to transfer them to the greater stage of the actual world, and to claim compensation beyond the grave for heroic lives inevitably cut short before they had fulfilled their career. ‘The Poet’s necessary be of symmetry and system (of which justice is a part) compels him to carry on the life which fails of result and com- pletion here, to fulfilment in a life hereafter.
¥;
322 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Bade Hope survive the Urn and Charnel, brave
Tn the great faith of Life beyond the grave ;
Shew’d there—how Love the lov’d once more could win— How Dorian Castor gained his starry Twin—
The Shadow in the Moon’s pale glimmer seen,
Ere yet she fills her horns, and rounds her orb serene !
xIx.
High, and more high, the aspiring Genius goes,
And still creation from creation flows ;
What in the natural world but charms the eyes,
In Art’s—to forms which awe the soul must rise :
The Maiden’s majesty, at Art’s commands,
Inspires the marble, and—Athené stands !
The strength that nerves the Wrestler on the sod
Swells the vast beauty which invests a God,
And throned in Elis—wonder of his time— :
With brows that sentence worlds—sits Phidian Jove sublime !
XxX.
Without—the World by diligent toil transformed, Within—by new-born passions roused the heart, (Strengthened by each successive strife that stormed) Wider and wider grows your realm of Art.
Still in each step that Man ascends to light
He bears the Art that first inspired the flight ;
And still the teeming Nature to his gaze,
The wealth he gives her with new worlds repays. Thus the light Victories exercise the mind,
By guess to reach what knowledge fails to find, Practised—throughout the Universe to trace
An Artist-whole of beauty and of grace,
He sets the Columns Nature’s boundary knows, Tracks her dark course, speeds with her where she goes ; Weighs with the balance her own hands extend ; Metes with the gauge her own perfections lend,
Till all her beauty renders to his gaze
The charm that robes it and the law that sways.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 32
In self-delighted Joy the Artist hears
His own rich harmony enchant the spheres, And in the Universal Scheme beholds
The symmetry that reigns in all he moulds.
XXI.
Yes, in all round him can his ear divine The voice that tells of method and design ; He sees the life mid which his lot is thrown, Clasp’d round with beauty as a golden zone ; In all his works, before his emulous eyes, To lead to victory, fair Perfection flies : Where’er he hears, or gay Delight rejoice, Or Care to stillness breathe its whispered voice, Where starry Contemplation lingers slow, Or stream from heavy eyes the tears of Woe, Or Terror in her thousand shapes appal ;— Still one harmonious Sweetness glides through all, Soft to his ear, and freshening to his look, And winding on through earth—one haunting music-brook ! In the refined and still emotion, glide With chastened mirth the Graces to his side ; Round him the bright Companions weave their dance ; And as the curving lines of Beauty flow, Each winding into each, as o’er His glance The lovely apparitions gleam and go In delicate outline—so the dreaming day Of Life, enchanted, breathes itself away. His soul is mingled with the Harmonious Sea That flows around his sense delightedly ; And Thought, where’er with those sweet waves it glide, Bears the all-present Venus on the tide ! At peace with Fate serenely goes his race— Here guides the Muse, and there supports the Grace ; The stern Necessity, to others dim With Night and Terror, wears no frown for him ; Calm and serene, he fronts the threatened dart, Tnyites the gentle bow, and bares the fearless heart.
ae
3
324 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
XXII.
Darlings of Harmony divine,—ali blest Companions of our Beings !—whatsoe’er
Is of this life, the dearest, noblest, best,
Took life from you! If Man his fetters bear With a glad heart that chafes not at the chain, But clings to duty with the thoughts of love ;
If now no more he wander in the reign
Of iron Chance, but with the Power above
Link his harmonious being—what can be
Your bright reward ?—your Immortality,
And your own heart’s high recompense? If round The chalice-fountain, whence, to Mortals, streams The Ideal Freedom, evermore are found
The godlike Joys and pleasure-weaving Dreams ; For this—for these—he yours the grateful shrine, Deep in the Human Heart ye hallow and refine.
XXIII.
Ye are the Imitators, ye the great
Disciples of the Mighty Artist—who
Zoned with sweet grace the iron form of Fate— Gave Heaven its starry lights and tender blue— Whose terror more ennobles than alarms
(Its awe exalts us, and its grandeur charms)— Who, ev’n destroying, while he scathes, illumes, And clothes with pomp the anger that consumes,
As o’er some brook that glides its lucid way
The dancing shores in various shadow play ;
As the smooth wave a faithful mirror yields
To Eve’s soft blush, and flower-enamell’d fields ; So, on life’s stream, that niggard steals along, Shimmers the lively Shadow-World of Song,
Ye, to the Dread Unknown—the dismal goal Where the stern Fates await the trembling soul— Ye lead us on, by paths for ever gay,
And robed with joy as for a marriage-day ; And as in graceful urns your genius decks Our very bones, and beautifies the wrecks :
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
So with appearances divinely fair,
Ye veil the trouble and adorn the care.
Search where I will the ages that have roll’d, The unmeasured Past, Earth’s immemorial lore, How smil’d Humanity, where ye consoled, How smileless mourned Humanity before !
XXIV.
All strong and mighty on the wing, and young And fresh from your creative hands, It* sprung ; And when the Time, that conquers all, prevail’d ; When on its wrinkled cheek the roses fail’d ; When from its limbs the vigour pass’d away,
And its sad age crept on in dull decay,
And tottered on its crutch ;—within your arms
It sought its shelter and regained its charms :
Out from your fresh and sparkling well, ye pour’d The living stream that dying strength restored ; Twice into spring has Time’s stern winter glow’d, Twice Nature blossom’d from the seeds Art sow’d.
XXV,.
Ye snatch’d—when chased Barbarian Hosts before— From sacred hearths the last yet living brand ; From the dishallowed Orient Altar bore,
And brought it glimmering to the Western Land. As from the East the lovely Exile goes,
Fair on the West a young Aurora glows ;
And all the flowers Ionian shores could yield
Blush forth, re-blooming in the Hesperian Field. Fair Nature glass’d its image on the Soul,
From the long Night the mists began to roll ;
And o’er the world of Mind, adorn’d again,
Light’s holy Goddess re-assumed her reign.
Loos’d from the Millions fell the fetters then— Slaves heard the Voice that told their rights as Men,
* i.e, Humanity.
3
9
“
5
326 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
And the Young Race in peace to vigour grew,
In that mild brotherhood they learn’d from you ! And you, averse the loud applause to win,
Still in the joy that overflow’d within,
Sought the mild shade, contented to survey
The World ye brighten’d, basking in the ray.
XXVI.
If on the course of Thought, now barrier-free, Sweeps the glad search of bold Philosophy ; And with self-peans, and a vain renown, Would claim the praise and arrogate the crown, Holding, but as a Soldier in her band,
The nobler Art that did in truth command ; And grants, beneath her visionary throne,
To Art, her Queen—the slave’s first rank alone ;— Pardon the vaunt !—For you Perfection all Her star-gems weaves in one bright coronal ! With you, the first blooms of the Spring, began Awakening Nature in the Soul of Man!
With you fulfil’d, when Nature seeks repose, Autumn’s exulting harvests ripely close.
XXVII.
If Art rose plastic from the stone and clay,
To Mind from Matter ever sweeps its sway ; Silent, but conquering in its silence, lo,
How o’er the Spiritual World its triumphs go! What in the Land of Knowledge, wide and far, Keen Science teaches—for you discovered are : First in your arms the wise their wisdom learn— They dig the mine you teach them to discern ; And when that wisdom ripens to the flower And crowning time of Beauty—to the Power From whence it rose, new stores it must impart, The toils of Science swell the Wealth of Art. When to one height the Sage ascends with you, And spreads the Vale of Matter round his view
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 327
In the mild twilight of serene repose ;—
The more the Artist charms, the more the Thinker knows. The more the shapes—in intellectual joy,
Link’d by the Genii which your spells employ,
The more the thought with the emotion blends— The more up-buoyed by both the Soul ascends
To loftier Harmonies, and heavenlier things ;—
And tracks the stream of Beauty to its springs.
The lovely members of the mighty whole,
Till then confused and shapeless to his soul— Distinct and glorious grow upon his sight,
The fair enigmas brighten from the Night ;
More rich the Universe his thoughts enclose—
More wide the Ocean with whose wave he flows ;
The wrath of Fate grows feebler to his fears,
As from God’s Scheme Chance wanes and disappears ; And as each straining impulse soars above—
How his pride lessens—how augments his love !
So scattering blooms—the still Guide—Poetry
Leads him thro’ paths, tho’ hid, that mount on high— Thro’ forms and tones more pure and more sublime— Alp upon Alp of Beauty—till the time
When what we long as Poetry have nurst,
Shall as a God’s swift inspiration burst,
And flash in glory, on that youngest day—
One with the Truth to which it wings the way !
XXVIII.
She, the soft Venus of the Earth, by Men Worshipp’d but as the Beautiful till then,
Shall re-assume her blazing coronal,
Let the meek veil that shrouds her splendour fall, And to her ripened Son* divinely rise
In her true shape—the Urania of the skies ! Proportioned to the Beauty which Man’s soul Took from her culture while in her controul,
* Miindigen,—her Son, who has attained his majority.
328 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Shall he, with toilless, lightly-wooing ease,
Truth in the Beautiful embrace and seize.
Thus sweet, thus heavenly, was thy glad surprise, Son of Ulysses, when before thine eyes,
Bright from the Mentor whom thy youth had known, Jove’s radiant child—Imperial Pallas—shone !
XXIX.
O Sons of Art! into your hands consign’d (O heed the trust, O heed it and revere !) The liberal dignity of human kind !
With you to sink, with you to re-appear. The hallowed melody of Magian Song Does to Creation as a link belong, Blending its music with God’s harmony, As rivers melt into the mighty sea.
XXX.
Truth, when the Age she would reform, expels ; Flies for safe refuge to the Muse’s cells.
More fearful for the veil of charms she takes, From Song the fulness of her splendour breaks, And o’er the Foe that persecutes and quails Her vengeance thunders, as the Bard prevails !
XXXI.
Rise, ye free Sons of the Free Mother, rise, Still on the Light of Beauty, sun your eyes, Still to the heights that shine afar, aspire, Nor meaner meeds than those she gives, desire. If here the Sister Art forsake awhile,
Elude the clasp, and vanish from the toil,
Go seek and find her at the Mother’s heart— Go search for Nature—and arrive at Art ! Ever the Perfect dwells in whatsoe’er
Fair souls conceive and recognise as fair!
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 329
Borne on your daring pinions soar sublime
Above the shoal and eddy of the Time. Far-glimmering on your wizard mirror, see
The silent shadow of the Age to be.
Thro’ all Life’s thousand-fold entangled maze, One godlike bourne your gifted sight surveys— Thro’ countless means one solemn end, foreshown, The labyrinth closes at a single Throne.
As in seyen tints of variegated light Breaks the lone shimmer of the lucid white ; As the seven tints that paint the Iris bow Into the lucid white dissolving flow—
So Truth in many-coloured splendour plays, Now on the eye enchanted with the rays— Now in one lustre gathers every beam,
And floods the World with light—a single Stream ! *
* There is exquisite skill in concluding the Poem (after insisting so eloquently upon the maxim, that whatever Science discovers, only adds to the stores, or seryes the purpose of Art) with an image borrowed from Science.
330 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
THE CELEBRATED WOMAN.
AN EPISTLE BY A MARRIED MAN—TO A FELLOW-SUFFERER,
- [In spite of Mr. Carlyle’s assertion of Schiller’s ‘‘ total deficiency in Humour,’’* we think that the following Poem suffices to show that he possessed the gift in no ordinary degree, and that if the aims of a genius so essentially earnest had allowed him to indulge it, he would have justified the opinion of the experienced Ifland as to his capacities for original comedy. |
Can I, my friend, with thee condole ?- — Can I conceive the woes that try men, When late Repentance racks the soul Ensnared into the toils of Hymen ? Can I take part in such distress }— Poor Martyr,—most devoutly, “ Yes!” Thou weep’st because thy Spouse has flown To arms preferred before thine own ;— A faithless wife,—I erant the curse,— And yet, my friend, it might be worse! Just hear Another’s tale of sorrow, And, in comparing, comfort borrow !
What! dost thou think thyself undone, Because thy rights are shared with One! O, Happy Man—be more resign’d, My wife belongs to all Mankind! My wife—she’s found abroad—at home ; But cross the Alps and she’s at Rome ; Sail to the Baltic—there you'll find her ; Lounge on the Boulevards —kind and kinder : In short, you’ve only just to drop Where’er they sell the last new tale, And, bound and lettered in the shop, Yow ll find my Lady up for sale !
* Carlyle’s Miscellanies, vol. iii. p. 47.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 331
She must her fair proportions render To all whose praise can glory lend her ;— Within the coach, on board the boat, Let every pedant “take a note;” Endure, for public approbation, Each critic’s “ close investigation,” And braye—nay court it as a flattery— Each spectacled Philistine’s battery. Just as it suits some scurvy carease In which she hails an Aristarchus, Ready to fly with kindred souls, O’er blooming flowers or burning coals, To fame or shame, to shrine or gallows, Let him but lead—sublimely callous ! A Leipsic man—(confound the wretch !)— Has made her Topographic sketch, A kind of Map, as of a Town, Each point minutely dotted down ; Scarce to myself I dare to hint What this d—d fellow wants to print ! Thy wife—howe’er she slight the vows— Respects, at least, the name of spouse ; But mine to regions far too high
For that terrestrial Name is carried ; My wife’s “ Taz ramous Nryon !”—I
“The Gentleman that Ninon married !”
It galls you that you scarce are able To stake a florin at the table— Confront the Pit, or join the Walk, But straight all tongues begin to talk ! O that such luck could me befall,
Just to be talked about at all !
Behold me dwindling in my nook, Edg’d at her left,—and not a look !
A sort of rushlight of a life,
Put out by that great Orb—my Wife!
Scarce is the Morning grey—before Postman and Porter crowd the door ;
332 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
No Premier has so dear a levée—
She finds the Mail-bag half its tra le ; My God—the parcels are so heavy !
And not a parcel carriage-paid !
But then—the truth must be confessed— They’re all so charmingly addressed : Whate’er they cost, they well requite her— “To Madame Blank, The Famous Writer !” Poor thing, she sleeps so soft! and yet
’Twere worth my life to spare her slumber ; “ Madame—from Jena—the Gazette—
The Berlin Journal—the last number !” Sudden she wakes ; those eyes of blue (Sweet eyes !) fall straight—on the Review ! I by her side—all undetected,
While those curs’d columns are inspected ; Loud squall the children overhead,
Still she reads on, till all is read ;
At last she lays that darling by,
And asks—‘ What makes the Baby cry?”
Already now the Toilet’s care
Claims from her couch the restless fair ; The Toilet’s care /—the glass has won Just half a glance, and all is done !
A snappish—pettish word or so
Warns the poor Maid ’tis time to go :— Not at her toilet wait the Graces, Uncombed Erynnys takes their places ; So great a mind expands its scope
Far from the mean details of—soap !
Now roll the coach-wheels to the muster— Now round my Muse her votaries cluster ; Spruce Abbé Millefleurs—Baron Herman— The English Lord, who don’t know German,— But all uncommonly well read
From matchless A to deathless Z!
Sneaks in the corner, shy and small,
A thing which Men the Husband call!
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 333
While every fop with flattery fires her, Swears with what passion he admires her. *¢ Passion !’ ‘admire !’ and still you ’re dumb?” Lord bless your soul, the worst’s to come :— I’m forced to bow, as I’m a sinner, —
And hope—the rogue will stay to dinner ! But, oh, at dinner !—there’s the sting ;
I see my cellar on the wing !
You know if Bureundy is dear ?—
Mine once emerg’d three times a year ;— And now, to wash these learned throttles, In dozens disappear the bottles ;
They well must drink who well do eat,
(Pve sunk a capital on meat).
Her immortality, I fear, a
Death-blow will prove to my Madeira :
*T has given, alas! a mortal shock
To that old friend—my Steinberg Hock ! *
If Faust had really any hand
In printing, I can understand
The fate which legends more than hint ;— The devil take all hands that print !
And what my thanks for all?—a pout— Sour looks—deep sighs ; but what about ? About! O, that I well divine—
That such a pearl should fall to swine— That such a literary ruby
Should grace the finger of a booby !
Spring comes ;—behold, sweet mead and lea Nature’s green splendour tapestries o’er ; Fresh blooms the flower, and buds the tree ; Larks sing—the Woodland wakes once more, The Woodland wakes—but not for her!
* Literally ‘‘ Nierensteiner,’’—a wine not much known in England, and scarcely—according to our experience—worth the regrets of its respectable owner.
334 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
From Nature’s self the charm has flown ; No more the Spring of Earth can stir The fond remembrance of our own ! The sweetest bird upon the bough Tfas not one note of music now ; And, oh ! how dull the Grove’s soft shade, Where once—(as lovers then) —we stray’d ! The Nightingales have got no learning— Dull creatures—how can they inspire her ? The Lilies are so undiscerning, They never say—“ how they admire her !” In all this Jubilee of being, Some subject for a point she’s seemg— Some epigram-—(to be impartial, Well turn’d)—there may be worse in Martial !
But, hark! The Goddess stoops to reason :— “The country now is quite in season, Til go!”—** What! to our Country Seat?” “No !—Travelling will be such a treat ; Pyrmont’s extremely full, I hear ; But Carlsbad’s quite the rage this year!” Oh yes, she loves the rural Graces ; Nature is gay—in Watering-places ! Those pleasant Spas—our reigning passion— Where learned Dons meet folks of fashion ; Where—each with each illustrious soul Familiar as in Charon’s boat, All sorts of Fame sit cheek-by-jowl, Pearls in that string—the Table @ Hite ! Where dames whom Man has injured—tfly, To heal their wounds or to efface them ; While others, with the waters, try A course of flirting,—just to brace them !
Well, there (O Man, how light thy woes Compared with mine—thou need’st must see !) My wife, undaunted, greatly goes— And leaves the orphans (seven! ! !) to me!
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
O, wherefore art thou flown so soon, Thou first fair year—Love’s Honeymoon ! Ah, Dream too exquisite for life ! Home’s Goddess—in the name of Wife ! Reared by each Grace—yet but to be Man’s Household Anyadomené ! With mind from which the sunbeams fall, Rejoicing while pervading all ; Frank in the temper pleased to please— Soft in the feeling waked with ease, So broke, as Native of the skies, The Heart-enthraller on my eyes ; So saw I, like a Morn of May, The Playmate given to glad my way ; With eyes that more than lips bespoke, Eyes whence—sweet words—“ I love thee!” broke! So—Ah, what transports then were mine! I led the Bride before the shrine! And saw the future years reveal’d Glass’d on my Hope—one blooming field ! More wide, and widening more, were given The Angel-gates disclosing Heaven ; Round us the lovely, mirthful troop Of children came—yet still to me The loveliest—merriest of the group The happy Mother seemed to be ! ‘Mine, by the bonds that bind us more Than all the oaths the Priest before ; Mine, by the concord of content, When Heart with Heart is music-blent ; When, as sweet sounds in unison, Two lives harmonious melt in one! When—sudden (0 the villain !)—came Upon the scene a Mind Profound !— A Bel Esprit, who whisper’d ‘‘ Fame,” And shook my card-house to the ground.
What have I-now instead of all
The Eden lost of hearth and hall? What comforts for the Heaven bereft ? What of the younger Angel’s left ?
335
336 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
A sort of intellectual Mule,
Man’s stubborn mind in Woman’s shape, Too hard to love, too frail to rule—
A sage engrafted on an ape! To what she calls the Realm of Mind,
She leaves that throne, her sex, to crawl, The cestus and the charm resign’d—
A public gaping-show to all! She blots from Beauty’s Golden Book *
A Name ’mid Nature’s choicest Few, To gain the glory of a nook
In Doctor Dunderhead’s Review.
* The Golden Book.—So was entitled in some Italian States va especially) the Catalogue in which the Noble Families were enrolled.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 337
TO A FEMALE FRIEND.
-
(WRITTEN IN HER OWN ALBUM.)
[These verses were addressed to Charlotte von Lengefeld, whom Schiller afterwards married, and were intended to dissuade her from a Court life. ]
I.
As some gay child, around whose steps play all The laughing Graces, plays the World round thee ! Yet not as on thy soul’s clear mirror fall The flattered shadows, deem this world to be! The silent homages thy heart compels By its own inborn dignity,—the spells That thou thyself around thyself art weaving, The charms with which thy being is so rife,— Tis these thou countest as the charms of life, In Human Nature, as thine own—-believing ! Alas ! this Beauty but exists, in sooth, In thine own talisman of holy youth, [ Who can resist it?]—mightiest while deceiving ? *
* The sense of the original is very shadowy and impalpable, and the difficulty of embodying it in an intelligible translation is great. It may be rendered thus :—‘‘ The silent homage which thy nobility of heart compels,—the miracles which thou thyself hast wrought,—the charms with which thy existence has invested life,.—these thou lookest on as the substantial attractions of life itself, and as constituting the yery staple of human nature. But in this thou art mistaken. What appears to thee te be the grace and beauty of life, is but the reflection of the witchery of thine own undesecrated youth, and the talisman of thine own innocence and virtue, though these certainly are powers which no man can resist. Enjoy the flowers of life, then; but do not take them for more than they are worth. Their’s is but a surface- beauty; let the glance, therefore, which thou bestowest on them be superficial too. (Gaze on them from a distance, and never expect that the core of life will wear the same attractive hues as those wlica ornament its exterior.’ Schiller has repeated this thought in the Poem of the “ Actual and Ideal.”
338 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
II.
Enjoy the lavish flowers that glad thy way, The happy ones whose happiness thou art ; The souls thou winnest—in these bounds survey Thy world !—to this world why shouldst thou depart ? Nay, let yon flowers admonish thee and save ! Lo, how they bloom while guarded by the fence ! So plant Earth’s pleasures—not too near the sense ! Nature to see, but not to pluck them, gave : Afar they charm thee—leave them on the stem ; Approached by thee, the glory fades from them— And, in thy touch, their sweetness has a grave !
Here conclude the Poems classed under the Second Period of Schiller’s career; we have excepted onlv his translations from Virgil.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 339
FIRST PERIOD; OR, EARLY POEMS.
We now trace back the stream to its source. We commenced with Schiller’s maturest Poems—we close with his earliest. ‘The contrast between the compositions in the first and third period is sufficiently striking. In the former there is more fire and action—more of that lavish and exuberant energy which characterised the earlier tales of Lord Byron, and redeemed, in that wonderful master of animated and neryous style, a certain poverty of conception by a vigour and gusto of . execution, which no English poet, perhaps, has ever surpassed. - In his
poems lies the life, and beats the heart, of Schiller. They conduct us through the various stages of his spiritual education, and indicate each step in the progress. In this division, effor't is no less discernible than power—both in language and thought there is a struggle at something not yet achieyed, and not, perhaps, even yet definite and distinct to the poet himself. Here may be traced, though softened by the charm of genius (which softens all things), the splendid errors that belong to a passionate youth, and that give such distorted grandeur to the giant melodrame of ‘‘The Robbers.” But here are to be traced also, and in far clearer characters, the man’s strong heart, essentially human in its sympathies—the thoughtful and earnest intellect giving ample promise of all it was destined to receive. In these earlier poems, extravagance is sufficiently noticeable—yet never the sickly eccen- tricities of diseased weakness, but the exuberant overflowings of a young Titan’s strength. There is a distinction, which our critics do not always notice, between the extravagance of a great genius, and the affectation of a pretty poct.
HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.
[This and the following poem are, with some alterations, introduced in the Play of ‘The Rebbers.’’]
ANDROMACHE,
Witt Hector leave me for the fatal plain, Where, fierce with vengeance for Patroclus slain, Stalks Peleus’ ruthless son ? Who, when thou glid’st amid the dark abodes, To hurl the spear and to revere the Gods, Shall teach thine Orphan One ? Zz 2
340 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
HECTOR.
Woman and wife beloved—cease thy tears ; My soul is nerved—the war-clang in my ears ! Be mine in life to stand Troy’s bulwark !—fighting for our hearths, to go In death, exulting to the streams below, Slain for my father-land !
ANDROMACHE,
No more I hear thy martial footsteps fall— Thine arms shall hang, dull trophies, on the wall— Fallen the stem of Troy ! Thou go’st where slow Cocytus wanders—where Love sinks in Lethe, and the sunless air Is dark to light and joy !
HECTOR,
Longing and thought—yea, all I feel and think May in the silent sloth of Lethe sink, But my love not ! Hark, the wild swarm is at the walls !—T hear! Gird on my sword—Belov’d one, dry the tear— Lethe for love is not !
AMALIA.
Fair as an angel from his blessed hall *— Of every fairest youth the fairest he! Heayen-mild his look, as maybeams when they fall, Or shine 1eflected from a clear blue sea !
* Literally, Walhalla.
Beaten *
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 341
His kisses—feelings rife with paradise !
Ev’n as two flames, one on the other driven— Ev’n as two harp-tones their melodious sighs
Blend in some music that seems born of heaven So rush’d, mix’d, melted life with life united !
Lips, cheeks burn’d, trembled—soul to soul was won! And earth and heaven seem’d chaos, as, delighted,
Earth—heaven were blent round the belovéd one ! Now, he is gone ! vainly and wearily
Groans the full heart, the yearning sorrow flows— Gone ! and all zest of life, in one long sigh,
Goes with him where he goes.
A FUNERAL PHANTASIE.
IL. PALE, at its ghastly noon, Pauses above the death-still wood—the moon ; The night-sprite, sighing, through the dim air stirs ; The clouds descend in rain ; Mourning, the wan stars wane, Flickering like dying lamps in sepulchres ! Haggard as spectres—vision-like and dumb, Dark with the pomp of Death, and moving slow, Towards that sad lair the pale Procession come Where the Grave closes on the Night below.
II. With dim, deep-sunken eye, Crutch’d on his staff, who trembles tottering by ? As wrung from out the shatter’d heart, one groan Breaks the deep hush alone. Crush’d by the iron Fate, he seems to gather All life’s last strength to stagger to the bier, And hearken Do those cold lips murmur “ Father ?” The sharp rain, drizzling through that place of fear, Pierces the bones gnaw’d fleshless by despair, And the heart’s horror stirs the silver hair.
342. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Ii.
Fresh bleed the fiery wounds Through all that agonizing heart undone— Still on the voiceless lips ‘‘ my Father” sounds, And still the childless Father murmurs “ Son ! ” Ice-cold—ice-cold, in that white shroud he lies— Thy sweet and golden dreams all vanish’d there— The sweet and golden name of “Father” dies Into thy curse,—ice-cold—ice-cold—he lies ! Dead, what thy life’s delight and Eden were !
IV.
Mild, as when, fresh from the arms of Aurora, While the air like Elysium is smiling above, Steep’d in rose-breathing odours, the darling of Flora Wantons over the blooms on his winglets of love.-— So gay, o’er the meads, went his footsteps in bliss, The silver wave mirror’d the smile of his face ; Delight, like a flame, kindled up at his kiss, And the heart of the maid was the prey of his chase.
Vv.
Boldly he sprang to the strife of the world, As a deer to the mountain-top carelessly springs ; As an eagle whose plumes to the sun are unfurl’d, Swept his Hope round the Heaven on its limitless wings, Proud as a war-horse that chafes at the rein, That, kingly, exults in the storm of the brave ; That throws to the wind the wild stream of its mane, Strode he forth by the prince and the slave !
VI.
Life, like a spring-day, serene and divine, In the star of the morning went by as a trance ; His murmurs he drown’d in the gold of the wine, And his sorrows were borne on the wave of the dance.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 343
Worlds lay conceal’d in the hopes of his youth
When once he shall ripen to Manhood and Fame ! Fond Father exult !—In the germs of his youth
What harvests are destined for Manhood and Fame !
vu. - Not to be was that Manhood !--The death-bell is knelling,
The hinge of the death-vault creaks harsh on the ears— How dismal, O Death, is the place of thy dwelling !
Not to be was that Manhood !— Flow on bitter tears ! Go, beloved, thy path to the sun,
Rise world upon world, with the perfect to rest ; Go—quaff the delight which thy spirit has won,
And escape from our grief in the Halls of the Blest.
VIIl.
Again (in that thought what a healing is found !) To meet in the Eden to which thou art fled !— Hark, the coffin sinks dewn with a dull, sullen sound, And the ropes rattle over the sleep of the dead. And we cling to each other !—O Grave, he is thine! The eye tells the woe that is mute to the ears— And we dare to resent what we grudge to resign, Till the heart’s sinful murmur is choked in its tears. Pale at its ghastly noon, Pauses above the death-still wood—the moon! The night-sprite, sighing, through the dim air stirs ; The clouds descend in rain ; Mourning, the wan stars wane, Flickering like dying lamps in sepulchres. The dull clods swell into the sullen mound ; Earth, one look yet upon the prey we gave! The Grave locks up the treasure it has found ; Higher and higher swells the sullen mound— Never gives back the Grave !
344 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
FANTASIE TO LAURA.
Wuat, Laura, say, the vortex that can draw Body to body in its strong control ; Beloved Laura, what the charmed law That to the soul attracting plucks the soul ? It is the charm that rolls the stars on high, For ever round the sun’s majestic blaze— When, gay as children round their parent, fly Their circling dances in delighted maze. Still, every star that glides its gladsome course, Thirstily drinks the luminous golden rain ; Drinks the fresh vigour from the fiery source, As limbs imbibe life’s motion from the brain ; With sunny motes, the sunny motes united Harmonious lustre both receive and give, Love spheres with spheres still interchange delighted, Only through love the starry systems live. Take love from Nature’s universe of wonder, Each jarring each, rushes the mighty All. See, back to Chaos shock’d, Creation thunder ; Weep, starry Newton—weep the giant fall! Take from the spiritual scheme that Power away, And the still’d body shrinks to Death’s abode. Never—love not—would blooms revive for May, And, love extinct, all life were dead to God. And what the charm that at my Laura’s kiss, Pours the diviner brightness to the cheek ; Makes the heart bound more swiftly to its bliss, And bids the rushing blood the magnet seek ?— Out from their bounds swell nerve, and pulse, and sense, The veins in tumult would their shores o’erflow ; Body to body rapt—and, charméd thence, Soul drawn to soul with intermingled glow.
Mighty alike to sway the flow and ebb Of the inanimate Matter, or to move The nerves that weave the Arachnéan web Of Sentient Life-—trules all-pervading Love!
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 345
Ev’n in the Moral World, embrace and meet Emotions-—Gladness clasps the extreme of Care ; And Sorrow, at the worst, upon the sweet Breast of young Hope, is thaw’d from its despair. Of sister-kin to melancholy Woe, Voluptuous Pleasure comes, and happy eyes Delivered of the tears, their children, glow Lustrous as sunbeams——and the Darkness flies ! * The same great Law of Sympathy is given To Evil as io Good, and if we swell The dark account that life incurs with Heaven, *Tis that our Vices are thy Wovers, Hell! In turn those Vices are embraced by Shame And fell Remorse, the twin Eumenides. Danger still clings in fond embrace to Fame, Mounts on her wing, and flies where’er she flees. Destruction marries its dark self to Pride, Envy to Fortune : when Desire most charms, *Tis that her brother Death is by her side, For him she opens those voluptuous arms. The very Future to the Past but flies Upon the wings of Love—as I to thee; O, long swift Saturn, with unceasing sighs, Hath sought his distant bride, Eternity !
* Und entbunden von den gold’nen Kindern Strahlt das Auge sonnenpraeht.
Schiller, in his earlier poems, strives after poetry in expression, as our young imitators of Shelley and Keates do, sanctioned generally by our eritics, who quote such expressions in italics with three notes of admiration! He here, for insteance, calls tears ‘‘ the Golden Children of the Eye.” In his later poems Schiller had a much better notion of true beauty of diction. ‘The general meaning of this poem is very obscure, but it seems to imply that Love rules ell things in the inanimate or animate creation; that, even in the moral world, opposite emotions or principles meet and embrace each other. The idea is pushed into an extravagance natural to the youth, and redeemed by the passion, of the Author. But the connecting links are so slender, nay, so frequently omitted, in the original, that a certain degree of para- phrase in many of the stanzas is absolutely necessary to supply them, and render the general sense and spirit of the poem intelligible to the
English reader.
346 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
When—so T heard the oracle declare— When Saturn once shall clasp that bride sublime, Wide-blazing worlds shall light his nuptials there— *Tis thus Eternity shall wed with Time. In those shall be our nuptials ! ours to share That bridenight, waken’d by no jealous sun ; Since Time, Creation, Nature, but declare Love,—in our love rejoice, Beloved One !
TO LAURA PLAYING.
WHEN o’er the chords thy fingers steal, A soulless statue now I feel, And now a soul set free! Sweet Sovereign ! ruling over death and life— Seizes the heart, in a voluptuous strife As with a thousand strings—the Sorcery ! *
Then the vassal airs that woo thee,
Hush their low breath hearkening to thee. In delight and in devotion,
Pausing from her whizling motion, Nature, in enchanted calm,
Silently drinks the floating balm. Sorceress, her heart with thy tone Chaining—as thine eyes my own!
O’er the transport-tumult driven, Doth the music gliding swim ;
From the strings, as from their heaven, Burst the new-born Seraphim.
As when from Chaos’ giant arms set free, ’Mid the Creation-storm, exultingly
* «The Sorcery.”—In the original, Schiller, with very questionable taste, compares Laura to a conjuror of the name of Philadelphia, who exhibited before Frederick the Great.
LAURA
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 347
Sprang sparkling thro’ the dark the Orbs of Light— So streams the rich tone in melodious might.
Soft-gliding now, as when o’er pebbles glancing, The silver wave goes dancing ; Now with majestic swell, and strong, As thunder peals in organ-tones along ; And now with stormy gush, As down the rock, in foam, the whirling torrents rush ; To a whisper now Melts it amorously, Like the breeze through the bough Of the aspen tree ; Heavily now, and with a mournful breath, Like midnight’s wind along those wastes of death, Where Awe the wail of ghosts lamenting hears, And slow Cocytus trails the stream whose waves are tears.
Speak, maiden, speak !—Oh, art thou one of those
Spirits more lofty than our region knows ?
Should we in thine the mother-language seek Souls in Elysium speak ?
TO LAURA.
(RAPTURE.)
above this world methinks I fly,
And feel the glow of some May-lighted sky,
When thy looks beam on mine !
And my soul drinks a more ethereal air, When mine own shape I see reflected, there,
In those blue eyes of thine !
A lyre-sound from the Paradise afar, A harp-note trembling from some gracious star,
Seems the wild ear to fill ;
348 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
And my muse feels the Golden Shepherd-hours, When from thy lips the silver music pours Slow, as against its will. I see the young Loves flutter on the wing— Move the charm’d trees, as when the Thracian’s string Wild life to forests gave ; Swifter the globe’s swift circle seems to fly, When in the whirling dance thou glidest by, Light as a happy wave. Thy looks, when there Love’s smiles their gladness wreathe, Could life itself to lips of marble breathe, Lend rocks a pulse divine ; Reading thine eyes—my veriest life but seems Made up and fashioned from my wildest dreams,— Laura, sweet Laura, mine !
TO LAURA. (THE MYSTERY OF REMINISCENCE.)*
Wuo, and what gave to me the wish to woo thee—
Still, lip to lip, to cling for aye unto thee ?
Who made thy glances to my soul the link—
Who bade me burn thy very breath to drink— My life in thine to sink?
As from the conqueror’s unresisted glaive,
Flies, without strife subdued, the ready slaye—
So, when to life’s unguarded fort, I see
Thy gaze draw near and near triumphantly — Yields not my soul to thee?
Why from its lord doth thus my soul depart ?—
Is it because its native home thou art ?
* This most exquisite love-poem is founded on the Platonie notion, that souls were united in a pre-existent state, that love is the yearning of the spirit to reunite with the spirit with which it formerly made one —and which it discovers on earth. The idea has often been made raps! to poetry, but never with so earnest and elaborate a
eauty.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 349
Or were they brothers in the days of yore,
Twin-bound, both souls, and in the links they bore Sigh to be bound once more ?
Were once our beings blent and intertwining,
And therefore still my heart for thine is pining?
Knew we the light of some extinguished sun— .
The joys remote of some bright realm undone, Where once our souls were OnE?
Yes, it 2s so!—And thou wert bound to me
In the long-vanish’d Eld eternally !
In the dark troubled tablets which enroll
The Past—my Muse beheld this blessed scroll— ** One with thy love my soul!”
Oh yes, I learn’d in awe, when gazing there,
How once one bright inseparate life we were,
How once, one glorious essence as a God,
Unmeasured space our chainless footsteps trod=— All Nature our abode !
Round us, in waters of delight, for ever
Voluptuous flow’d the heavenly Nectar river ;
We were the master of the seal of things
And where the sunshine bathed Truth’s mountain-springs Quiver’d our glancing wings.
Weep for the godlike life we lost afar—
Weep !—thou and I its scatter’d fragments are ;
And still the unconquer’d yearning we retain——
Sigh to restore the rapture and the reign, And grow divine again,
And therefore came to me the wish to woo thee—
Still, lip to lip, to cling for aye unto thee ;
This made thy glances to my soul the link—
This made me burn thy very breath to drink— My life in thine to sink :
And therefore, as before the conqueror’s glaive,
Flies, without strife subdued, the ready slave,
So, when to life’s unguarded fort, I see
Thy gaze draw near and near triumphantly— Yieldeth my soul to thee !
Therefore my soul doth from its lord depart,
Because, beloved, its native home thou art ;
?
350 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
Because the twins recall the links they bore,
And goul with soul, in the sweet kiss of yore, Meets and unites once more !
Thou too—Ah, there thy gaze upon me dwells,
And thy young blush the tender answer tells ;
Yes! with the dear relation still we thrill,
Both lives—tho’ exiles from the homeward hill— One life—all glowing still!
MELANCHOLY; TO LAURA.
ie
Lavra! a sunrise seems to break
Where’er thy happy looks may glow, . Joy sheds its roses o’er thy cheek, Thy tears themselves do but bespeak
The rapture whence they flow : Blest youth to whom those tears are given— The tears that change his earth to heaven ; His best reward those melting eyes— For him new suns are in the skies!
II.
Thy soul—a crystal river passing, Silver-clear, and sunbeam-glassing, Mays into bloom sad Autumn by thee ; Night and desert, if they spy thee, To gardens laugh—with daylight shine, Lit by those happy smiles of thine! Dark with cloud the Future far Goldens itself beneath thy star. Smil’st thou to see the Harmony
Of charm the laws of Nature keep ? Alas! to me the Harmony
Brings only cause to weep !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 351
iit.
Holds not Hades its domain
Underneath this earth of ours? Under Palace, under Fane,
Underneath the cloud-capt Towers } Stately cities soar and spread O’er your mouldering bones, ye Dead ! From corruption, from decay,
Springs yon clove pink’s fragrant bloom ; Yon gay waters wind their way
From the hollows of a tomb.
Iy.
From the Planets thou may’st know
All the change that shifts below, Fled—beneath that zone of rays,
Filed to Night a thousand Mays ;
Thrones a thousand—rising—sinking, Earth from thousand slaughters drinking Blood profusely pour’d as water ;—
Of the sceptre—of the slaughter— Wouldst thou know what trace remaineth ? Seek them where the dark king reigneth !
Vv.
Scarce thine eye can ope and close
Ere Life’s dying sunset glows ;
Sinking sudden from its pride
Into Death—the Lethe tide.
Ask’st thou whence thy beauties rise ?
Boastest thou those radiant eyes ?—
Or that cheek in roses dy’d ?
All their beauty (thought of sorrow !)
From the brittle mould they borrow.
Heavy interest in the tomb
For the brief loan of the bloom,
For the beauty of the Day,
Death, the Usurer, thou must pay, In the long to-morrow !
352 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER:
VI.
Maiden !—Death’s too strong for scorn ; In the cheek the fairest, He But the fairest throne doth see ; Though the roses of the morn Weave the veil by Beauty worn— Aye, beneath that broidered curtain, Stands the Archer stern and certain ! Maid—thy Visionary hear— Trust the wild one as the seer, When he tells thee that thine eye, While it beckons to the wooer, Only lureth yet more nigh Death, the dark undoer !
VIL.
Every ray shed from thy beauty
Wastes the life-lamp while it beams, And the pulse’s playful duty,
And the blue veins’ merry streams, Sport and run unto the pall— Creatures of the Tyrant, all!
As the wind the rainbow shatters,
Death thy bright smiles rends and scatters, Smile and rainbow leave no traces ;— From the spring-time’s laughing graces, From all life, as from its germ,
Grows the revel of the worm!
VIII.
Woe, I see the wild wind wreak Its wrath upon thy rosy bloom ; Winter plough thy rounded cheek, Cloud and darkness close in gloom ; Blackening over, and for ever, Youth’s serene and silver river ! Love alike and Beauty o’er, Loyely and beloy’d no more !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 353
Ix, Maiden, an oak that soars on high, And scorns the whirlwind’s breath, Behold thy Poet’s youth defy The blunted dart of Death! His gaze as ardent as the light That shoots athwart the Heaven, His soul yet fiercer than the light In the Eternal Heaven Of Him, in whom as in an ocean-surge Creation ebbs and flows—and worlds arise and merge ! Thro’ Nature steers the Poet’s thought to find No fear but this—one barrier to the Mind?
% And dost thou glory so to think? And heaves thy bosom ?— Woe! This Cup, which lures him to the brink, As if Divinity to drink— Has poison in its flow ! Wretched, oh, wretched, they who trust To strike the God-spark from the dust ! The mightiest tone the Music knows, But breaks the harp-string with the sound ; And Genius, still the more it glows, But wastes the lamp whose life bestows The light it sheds around. Soon from existence drage’d away, The watchful gaoler grasps his prey ; Vowed on the altar of the abused fire, The spirits I raised against myself conspire ! Let—yes, I feel it—two short springs away Pass on their rapid flight ; And life’s faint spark shall, fleeting from the clay, Merge in the Fount of Light!
XL And weep’st thou, Laura ?—be thy tears forbid ; Wouldst thou my lot, life’s dreariest. years amid, Protract and doom ?—No; sinner, dry thy tears! AA
354 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Wouldst thou, whose eyes beheld the eagle wing
Of my bold youth through air’s dominion spring.
Mark my sad age (life’s tale of glory done)—
Crawl on the sod and tremble in the sun ?
Hear the dull frozen heart condemn the flame
That as from Heaven to youth’s blithe bosom came ;
And see the blind eyes loathing turn from all
The lovely sins Age curses to recall ? Let me die young !—sweet sinner, dry thy tears!
Yes, Jet the flower be gathered in its bloom !
And thou, young Genius, with the brows of gloom, Quench thou Life’s torch, while yet the flame is strong !
Ey’n as the curtain falls ; while still the scene - :
Most thrills the hearts which have its audience been ;
As fleet the shadows from the stage—and long
When all is o’er, lingers the breathless throng!
THE INFANTICIDE,
16
Hark where the bells toll, chiming, dull and steady, The clock’s slow hand hath reach’ d the appointed time. Well, be it so—prepare, my soul is ready, Companions of the Grave—the rest for crime ! Now take, O world! my last farewell—receiving My parting kisses—in these tears they dwell! Sweet are thy poisons while we taste believing, Now we are quits—heart-poisoner, fare-thee-well !
II.
Farewell, ye suns that once to joy invited,
Changed for the mould beneath the fineral shade ; Farewell, farewell, thou rosy Time delighted,
Luring to soft desite the careless maid.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 355
Pale gossamers of gold, farewell, sweet-dreaming Fancies—the children that an Eden bore!
Blossoms that died while Dawn itself was gleaming, Opening in happy sunlight never more,
Ii.
Swanlike the robe which Innocence bestowing, Deck’d with the virgin favours, rosy fair, In the gay time when many a young rose glowing, Blush’d through the loose train of the amber hair. Woe, woe! as white the robe that decks me now— The shroud-like robe Hell’s destin’d victim wears ; Still shall the fillet bind this burning brow— That sable braid the Doomsman’s hand prepares !
IV.
Weep ye, who never fell—for whom, unerring, The soul’s white lilies keep their virgin hue, Ye who when thoughts so danger-sweet are stirring, Take the stern strength that Nature gives the few! Woe, for too human was this fond heart’s feeling— Feeling !—my sin’s avenger* doom’d to be ; Woe—for the false man’s arm around me stealing, Stole the lull’d Virtue, charm’d to sleep, from me.
Vv. Ah, he perhaps shall, round another sighing, _ (Forgot the serpents stinging at my breast,) Gaily, when I in the dumb grave am lying, Pour the warm wish, or speed the wanton jest, Or play, perchance with his new maiden’s tresses, Answer the kiss her lip enamour’d brings, When the dread block the head he cradled presses, And high the blood his kiss once fever’d springs.
* «Und Empfindung soll mein Richtschwert seyn.”
A line of great vigour in the original, but which, if literally trans- lated, would seem extravagant in English.
AA
356 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
vI. Thee, Francis, Francis,* league on league, shall follow The death-dirge of the Lucy once so dear ; From yonder steeple, dismal, dull, and hollow, Shall knell the warning horror on thy ear. On thy fresh leman’s lips when Love is dawning, And the lisp’d music glides from that sweet well— Lo, in that breast a red wound shall be yawning, And, in the midst of rapture, warn of hell !
VII. Betrayer, what! thy soul relentless closing
To grief—the woman-shame no art can heal— To that small life beneath my heart reposing !
Man, man, the wild beast for its young can feel ! Proud flew the sails—receding from the land,
I watch’d them waning from the wistful eye, Round the gay maids on Seine’s voluptuous strand,
Breathes the false incense of his fatal sigh.
P VIII. And there the Babe ! there, on the mother’s bosom, Lull’d in its sweet and golden rest it lay, Fresh in life’s morning as a rosy blossom, It smiled, poor harmless one, my tears away. Deathlike yet lovely, every feature speaking In such dear calm and beauty to my sadness, And cradled still the mother’s heart, in breaking, The soft’ning love and the despairing madness,
IX. “Woman, where is my father ?”—freezing through me, Lisp’d the mute Innocence with thunder-sound ; “Woman, where is thy husband ?”-—call’d unto me, In every look, word, whisper, busying round ! Alas, for thee, there is no father’s kiss ;— He fondleth other children on his knee. How thou wilt curse our momentary bliss, When Bastard on thy name shall branded be ?
* Joseph, in the original.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 357
x. Thy mother—oh, a hell her heart concealeth, Lone-sitting, lone in social Nature’s All! Thirsting for that glad fount thy love revealeth, While still thy look the glad fount turns to gall. In every infant cry my soul is heark’ning, The haunting happiness for ever o’er, And all the bitterness of death is dark’ning The heavenly looks that smiled mine eyes before.
xt.
Hell, if my sight those looks a moment misses—
Hell, when my sight upon those looks is turn’d— The avenging furies madden in thy kisses,
That slept in his what time my lips they burn’d. Out from their graves his oaths spoke back in thunder!
The perjury stalk’d like murder in the sun— For ever—God !—-sense, reason, soul, sunk under—
The deed was done!
xi. Francis, O Francis ! league on league, shall chase thee The shadows hurrying grimly on thy flight— Still with their icy arms they shall embrace thee, And mutter thunder in thy dream’s delight ! Down from the soft stars, in their tranquil glory, Shall look thy dead child with a ghastly stare ; That shape shall haunt thee in its cerements gory, And scourge thee back from heavyen—its home is there !
XI. oh see, before me It lies cold—stiff !—O God !—and with that blood I feel, as swoops the dizzy darkness o’er me,
Mine own life mingled—ebbing in the flood— Hark, at the door they knock—more loud within me— More awful still—its sound the dread heart gaye ! Gladly I welcome the cold arms that win me— Fire, quench thy tortures in the icy grave !
358 POLMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
XIy.
Franeis—a God that pardons dwells in heaven— Francis, the sinner—yes—she pardons thee— So let my wrongs unto the earth be given : Flame seize the wood !—it burns—it kindles—see ! There—there his letters cast—behold are ashes— His vows—the conquering fire consumes them here : His kisses—see—see—all are only ashes— All, all—the all that once on earth were dear !
XY.
Trust not the roses which your youth enjoyeth, Sisters to man’s faith, changeful as the moon ! Beauty to me brought guilt—its bloom destroyeth : Lo, in the judgment court I curse the boon : ’ Tears in the headsman’s gaze—what tears 1—’tis spoken ! Quick, bind mine eyes—all soon shall be forgot — Doomsman—the lily hast thou never broken ? Pale Doomsman—tremble not !
The poem we have just concluded was greatly admired at the time of its first publication, and it so far excels in art most of the earlier efforts by the author, that it attains one of the highest secrets in true pathos ;—it produces interest for the criminal while creating terror for the crime. ‘This, indeed, is a triumph in art never achieved but by the highest genius. The inferior writer, when venturing upon the grandest stage of passion (which unquestionably exists in the delinea- tion of great guilt as of heroic virtue), falls into the error either of gilding the crime, in order to produce sympathy for the criminal, or, in the spirit of a spurious morality, of involving both crime and criminal in a common odium. It is to discrimination between the doer and the deed, that we owe the sublimest revelations of the human heart: in this discrimination lies the key to the emotions produced by the CGidipus and Macbeth. In the brief poem before us a whole drama is comprehended. Marvellous is the completeness of the pictures it presents—its mastery over emotions the most opposite—its fidelity to nature in its exposition of the disordered and despairing mind in which tenderness becomes cruelty, and remorse for error tortures itself into scarce conscious crime.
But the art employed, though admirable of its kind, still falls short of the perfection which, in his later works, Schiller aspired to achieve, viz., the point at which Pain ceases. The tears which Tragic Pathos, when purest and most elevated, calls forth, ought not to be tears of
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 359
pain. In the ideal world, as Schiller has inculeated, even sorrow should have its charm—all that harrows, all that revolts, belongs but to that inferior school in which Schiller’s fiery youth formed itself for nobler grades—the school of ‘‘Storm and Pressure”’ (‘* Sturm und Drang, as the Germans haye expressively described it). If the reader will compare Schiller’s poem of the ‘‘ Infanticide” with the passages which represent a similar crime in the Medea fand the author of «* Wallenstein ”’ deserves comparison even wtth Euripides), he will see the distinction between the art that seeks an clevated emotion, and the art which is satisfied with creating an intense one. In Euripides, the detail—the reality—all that can degrade terror into pain—are loftily dismissed. The Titan grandeur of the Sorceress removes us froz too close an approach to the crime of the unnatural Mother— the emotion of pity changes into awe—just atthe pitch before the coarse sympathy of actual pain can be effected. And it is the avoid- ance of reality—it is the all-purifying Presence of the Ideal, which makes the vast distinction in our emotions between following, with shocked and displeasing pity, the crushed, broken-hearted, mortal criminal to the scaffold, and gazing with an awe which has pleasure of its own upon the mighty Murderess—soaring out of the reach of humanity, upon her Dragon-Car!
360 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
THE GREATNESS OF CREATION.
Uron the winged winds, among the rolling worlds I flew, Which, by the breathing spirit, erst from ancient Chaos grew ; Seeking to land On the farthest strand, Where life lives no longer to anchor alone, And gaze on Creation’s last boundary-stone.
Star after star around me its shining youth uprears,
To wander through the Firmament its day of thousand years— Sportive they roll Round the charméd goal :
Till, as I look’d on the deeps afar,
The space waned—void of a single star.
On to the Realm of Nothingness—on still in dauntless flight, Along the splendours swiftly steer my sailing wings of light ; Heaven at the rear, Paleth, mist-like and drear ; Yet still as I wander, the worlds in their glee Sparkle up like the bubbles that glance on a Sea!
And towards me now, the self-same path I see a Pilgrim steer ! “Halt, Wanderer, halt—and answer me—What, Pilgrim, seek’st thou here ?” “*To the World’s last shore I am sailing o’er, Where life lives no longer to anchor alone, And gaze on Creation’s last boundary-stone.”
‘ Thou sail’st in vain—Return ! Before thy path, Inrryrry !” “ And thou in yain !—Behind me spreads Inrrniry to thee ! Fold thy wings drooping, O Thought, eagle-swooping !— O Phantasie, anchor !—The Voyage is o’er: Creation, wild sailor, flows on to no shore!”
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 361
ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF A YOUTH.* [Said to be the Poet Rudolf Weckherlin.]}
HEAVY moans, as when Nature the storm is foretelling, From the Dark House of Mourning come sad on the ear ; The Death-note on high from the steeple is knelling, And slowly comes hither a youth on the Bier ;— A youth not yet ripe for that garner—the tomb, A blossom pluck’d off from the sweet stem of May, Each leaf in its verdure, each bud in its bloom; A youth—with the eyes yet enchanted by day : A Son—to the Mother, O word of delight ! A Son—to the Mother, O thought of despair ! My Brother, my friend !—To the grave and the night Follow, ye that are human, the treasure we bear.
Ye Pines, do ye boast that unshattered your boughs
Brave the storm when it rushes, the bolt when it falls? Ye Hills, that the Heavens rest their pomp on your brows?
Ye Heavens, that the Suns have their home in your halls? Does the Aged exult in the works he has done—
The Ladders by which he has climb’d to Renown 3 Or the Hero, in deeds by which valour has won
To the heights where the Temple of Glory looks down? When the canker the bud doth already decay,
Who can deem that his ripeness is free from the worm ; Who can hope to endure, when the young fade away,
Who can count on life’s harvest—the blight at the germ?
How lovely with youth,—and with youth how delighted, His days, in the hues of the Rose glided by!
How sweet was the world and how fondly invited The Future, that Fairy enchanting his eye !
* Of this Poem, as of Gray’s divine and unequalled Elegy, it may be truly said that it abounds in thoughts so natural, that the reader at first believes they have been often expressed before, but his memory will not enable him to trace a previous owner. The whole Poem has the rare beauty of being at once familiar and original.
362 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
All life like a Paradise gmil’d on his way, _And, lo!. see the Mother weep over his bed, See the gulf of the Hades yawn wide for its prey, See the shears of the Parcz gleam over the thread ! Earth and Heaven which such joy to the living one gave, From his gaze darkened dimly !—and sadly and sighing The dying one shrunk from the Thought of the grave,— The World, oh! the World is so sweet to the Dying!
Dumb and deaf is all sense in the Narrow House !—deep Is the slumber the Grave’s heavy curtains enfold ! How silent a Sabbath eternally keep, O Brother—the Hopes ever busy of old !
Oft the Sun shall shine down on thy green native hill, But the glow of his smile thou shalt feel never more ! Oft the west wind shall rock the young blossoms, but still Is the breeze for the heart that can hear never more !
Love gilds not for thee all the world with its glow, Never Bride in the clasp of thine arms shall repose ; Thou canst see not our tears, though in torrents they flow, Those eyes in the calm of eternity close !
Yet happy—oh, happy, at least in thy slumber— Serene is the rest, where all trouble must cease ; For the sorrows must die with the joys they outnumber, And the pains of the flesh with its dust—are at peace ! The tooth of sharp slander thou never canst feel, The poison of Vice cannot pierce to thy cell ; Over thee may the Pharisee thunder his zeal, And the rage of the Bigot devote thee to Hell! Though the mask of the saint may the swindler diseuise ; Though Earth’s Justice, that Bastard of Right, we may sce At play with mankind as the cheat with his dies, As now so for ever—what matters to thee? Over thee too may Fortune (her changes unknown) Blindly give to her minions the goods they desire ; Now raising her darling aloft to the throne, Now hurling the wretch whom she raised—to the mire !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 363
Happy thou, happy thou—in the still narrow cell ! To this strange tragi-comedy acted on earth,
To these waters where Bliss is defil’d at the well, To this lottery of chances in sorrow and mirth,
To this rot and this ferment—this sloth and this strife, To the day and the night of this toilsome repose,
To this Heaven full of Devils—O, Brother !—to Lirr— Thine eyes in the calm of Eternity close !
Fare thee well, fare thee well, O Belov’d of the soul ! Our yearnings shall hallow the losss we deplore ; Slumber soft in the Grave till we win to thy goal— Slumber soft, slumber soft, till we see thee once more! Till the Trumpet that heralds God’s coming in thunder, From the hill-tops of light shail ring over thy bed— Till the portals of Death shall be riven asunder, And the storm-wind of God whirl the dust of the Dead ; Till the breath of Jehovah shall pass o’er the Tombs, ! Till their seeds spring to bloom at the life of the Breath, Till the pomp of the Stars into vapour consumes, And the spoils he hath captured are ravished from Death. If not in the worlds dream’d by sages, nor given In the Eden the Multitude hope to attain, If not where the Poet hath painted his Heaven, Still, Brother, we know we shall meet thee again ! Is there truth in the hopes which the pilgrim beguile? Does the thought still exist when Life’s journey is o’er ? Does Virtue conduct o’er the dreary defile ? Is the faith we have cherish’d a dream and no more ? Already the riddle is bared to thy sight, Already thy soul quaffs the Truth it has won, The Truth that streams forth in its waters of light From the chalice the Father vouchafes to the Son ! Draw near, then, O silent and dark gliding Train, Let the feast for the Mighty Destroyer be spread ; Cease the groans which so loudly, so idly complain, _ Heap the mould o’er the mould—heap the dust o’er the
Dead !
364 POLMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Who can solve the decrees cf God’s Senate ?—the heart Of the groundless abyss, what the eye that explores ? Holy !—holy !—all holy in darkness thou art, O God of the Grave, whoin our shudder adores ! Earth to Earth may return, the material to matter, But high from the cell soars the spirit above ; His ashes the winds of the tempest may scatter— The life of Eternity lives in His love!
THE BATTLE.
Heavy and solemn,
A cloudy column,
Thro’ the green plain they marching came ! Measureless spread, like a table dread, For the wild grim dice of the iron game. The looks are bent on the shaking ground, And the heart beats loud with a knelling sound ; Swift by the breasts that must bear the brunt, Gallops the Major along the front—
‘Halt !”
And fetter’d they stand at the stark command, And the warriors, silent, halt !
Proud in the blush of morning glowing, What on the hill-top shines in flowing? ‘See you the Foeman’s banners waving ?” “We see the Foeman’s banners waving!” “God be with ye—children and wife !” Hark to the music—the trump and the fife, How they ring thro’ the ranks which they rouse to the strife ! Thrilling they sound with their glorious tone, Thrilling they go through the marrow and bone ! Brothers, God grant when this life is oer, In the life to come that we meet once more |
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 365
See the smoke how the lightning is cleaving asunder!
Hark the guns, peal on peal, how they boom in their thunder !
From host to host, with kindling sound, The shouting signal circles round, Ay, shout it forth to life or death— Freer already breathes the breath ! The war is waging, slaughter raging, And heavy through the reeking pall,
The iron Death-dice fall ! Nearer they close—foes upon foes “Ready !”—From square to square it goes,
Down on the knee they sank, And the fire comes sharp from the foremost rank. Many a man to the earth it sent, Many a gap by the balls is rent— O’er the corpse before springs the hinder-man, That the line may not fail to the fearless van. To the right, to the left, and around and around, Death whirls in its dance on the bloody ground. God’s sunlight is quench’d in the fiery fight, Over the host falls a brooding Night ! Brothers, God grant when this life ts o’er, In the life to come that we meet once more !
The dead men Jie bathed in the weltering blood, And the living are blent in the slippery flood, And the feet, as they reeling and sliding go, Stumble still on the corpses that sleep below. “‘ What, Francis!” “ Give Charlotte my last farewell.” As the dying man murmurs, the thunders swell— “PIL give Oh God ! are their guns so near? Ho ! comrades !—yon volley !—look sharp to the rear ! T’ll give thy Charlotte thy last farewell, Sleep soft ! where Death thickest descendeth in rain, The triend thou forsakest thy side shall regain !” Hitherward—thitherward reels the fight, Dark and more darkly Day glooms into night— Brothers, God grant when this life is o’er, In the life to come that we meet once more !
366 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Hark to the hoofs that galloping go ! _ The Adjutants flying,— The horsemen press hard on the panting foe, Their thunder booms in dying— Victory ! The terror has seized on the dastards all, And their colours fall ! Victory ! Closed is the brunt of the glorious fight, And the day, like a conqueror, bursts on the night. Trumpet and fife swelling choral along, The triumph already sweeps marching in song. Farewell, fallen brothers, tho’ this life be oer, There’s another, in which we shall meet you once more !
ROUSSEAU. (FREE TRANSLATION.)
O Monumunt of Shame to this our time! Dishonouring record to thy mother clime ;
Hail Grave of Rousseau !—here thy troubles cease ! Thy life one search for Freedom and for Peace ; Thee, Peace and Freedom life did ne’er allow,
Thy search is ended, and thou find’st them now ! When will the old wounds scar !-~—In the dark age Perish’d the wise ;—Light comes—How fares the sage ? The same in darkness or in light his fate,
Time brings no mercy to the Bigot’s hate!
Socrates charmed Philosophy to dwell
On Earth—by false philosophers he fell ;
In Rousseau, Christians mark’d their victim—when Rousseau enlisted Christians into Men !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 367
FRIENDSHIP. {From “ Letters of Julius to Raphael,’’ an unpublished N. ovel. }
FRIEND !—the Great Ruler, easily content, Needs not the laws it has laborious been The task of small Professors to invent ; A single wheel impels the whole machine Matter and spirit ;—yea that simple law, Pervading Nature, which our Newton saw.
This taught the spheres, slaves to one golden rein, Their radiant labyrinths to weave around
Creation’s mighty heart ; this made the chain, Which into interwoven systems bound
All spirits streaming to the spiritual Sun,
As brooks that ever into ocean run!
Did not the same strong mainspring urge and guide Our Hearts to meet in Love’s eternal bond ?
Link’d to thine arm, O Raphael, by thy side Might I aspire to reach to souls beyond
Our earth, and bid the bright Ambition go
To that Perfection which the Angels know !
Happy, O happy—lI have found thee—I Have out of millions found thee, and paibieeed: Thou, out of millions, mine !—Let earth and sky Return to darkness, and the antique waste— To chaos shock’d, let warring atoms be, . Still shall each heart unto the other flee !
Do I not find within thy radiant eyes
Fairer reflections of all joys most fair ? In thee I marvel at myself—the dyes
Of lovely earth seem lovelier painted there ; And in the bright looks of the Friend is given A heavenlier mirror even of the Heaven !
368. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Sadness casts off its load, and gaily goes From the intolerant storm to rest awhile, In Love’s true heart, sure haven of repose ; Does not Pain’s veriest transport learn to smile From that bright eloquence Affection gave To friendly looks 1—there, finds not Pain a grave?
In all Creation did I stand alone, Still to the rocks my dreams a soul should find, Mine arms should wreathe themselves around the stone, My grief should feel a listener in the wind ; My joy—its echo in the caves should be! Fool, if ye will—Fool, for sweet Sympathy !
We are dead groups of matter when we hate ; But when we love we are as Gods !—Unto The gentle fetters yearning, through each state And shade of being multiform, and thro’ All countless spirits (save of all the sire) — Moves, breathes, and blends the one divine Desire.
Lo! arm in arm, thro’ every upward grade,
From the rude Mongol to the starry Greek, Who the fine link between the Mortal made,
And Heaven’s last Seraph—everywhere we seek Union and bond—till in one sea sublime Of Love be merg’d all measure and all time !
Friendless ruled God His solitary sky ;
He felt the want, and therefore Souls were made, The blessed mirrors of His bliss !—His Eye
No equal in His loftiest works surveyed ; And from the source whence souls are quickened—He Called His Companion forth—Errrnyiry !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCITILLER. 369
A GROUP IN TARTARUS.
Hark, as hoarse murmurs of a gathering sea— As brooks that howling through black gorges go, Groans sullen, hollow, and eternally, One wailing Woe! Sharp Anguish shrinks the shadows there ; And blasphemous Despair Yells its wild curse from jaws that never close ; And ghastly eyes for ever Stare on the bridge of the relentless River, Or watch the mournful wave as year on year it flows, And ask each other, with parch’d lips that. writhe Into a whisper, “ When the end shall be ?” The end ?—Lo, broken in Time’s hand the scythe, And round and round revolves Eternity !
ELYSIUM.
Past the despairing wail—
And the bright banquets of the Elysian Vale Melt every care away !
Delight, that breathes and moves for ever,
Glides through sweet fields like some sweet river ! Elysian life survey !
There, fresh with youth, o’er jocund meads,
His merry west-winds blithely leads The ever-blooming May !
Through gold-voven dreams goes the dance of the Hours, In space without bounds swell the soul and its powers, And Truth, with no veil, gives her face to the day.
And joy to-day and joy to-morrow, But wafts the airy soul aloft ; The very name is lost to Sorrow, And Pain is Rapture tuned more exquisitely soft. BB
$70 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Here the Pilgrim reposes the world-weary limb, And forgets in the shadow, cool-breathing and dim, The load he shall bear never more ; Here the Mower, his sickle at rest, by the streams, Lull’d with harp strings, reviews, in the calm of his dreams The fields, when the harvest is o’er. Here, He, whese ears drank in the battle roar, Whose banners stream’d upon the startled wind A thunder-storm,—before whose thunder tread The mountains trembled,—in soft sleep reclined, By the sweet brook that o’er its pebbly bed In silver plays, and murmurs to the shore, Hears the stern clangour of wild spears no more ! Here the true Spouse the lost-heloved regains, And on the enamell’d couch of swmmer-plains Mingles sweet kisses with the zephyr’s breath. Here, crown’d at last, Love never knows decay, Living through ages its one BripAL Day, Safe from the stroke of Death !
THE REFUGEE.
Fresu breathes the living air of dawning Day, The young Light reddens thro’ the dusky pines, Ogling the tremulous leaves with wanton ray : The cloud-capt hill-tops shine, With golden flame divine ; And all melodious thrills the lusty song Of sky-larks, greeting the delighted Sun ; As to Aurora’s arms he steals along—- And now in bright embrace she clasps the glowing one ! O Light, hail to thee ! How the mead and the lea The warmth and the wave of thy splendour suffuse ! How silver-clear, shimmer The fields, and how glimmer The thousand suns glass’d in the pearl of the dews !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 371
How frolic and gay Is young Nature at play, Where the cool breathing shade with low whispers is sweet ; Sighing soft round the rose, The Zephyr, its lover, caressingly goes, And over the Meadow the light vapours fleet ! Tow, high o’er the city the smoke-cloud is reeking, What snorting, and rattling, and trampling, and creaking ; Neighs the horse—the bull lows, And the heavy wain goes To the valley that groans with the tumult of Day ; The life of the Woodlands leaps up to the eye— The Eagle, the Falcon, the Hawk, wheel on high, On the wings that exult in the ray ! Where shall I roam, O Peace, for thy home ? With the staff of the Pilgrim, where wander to Thee? The face of the Earth With the smile of its mirth Has only a grave for me ! Rise up, O rosy Morn, whose lips of love Kiss into blushing splendour grove and field ; Sink down, O rosy Eve, that float’st above The weary world, in happy slumbers seal’d. Morn, in the joyous world thou reddenest over But one dark Burial-place the Pilgrim knows! O Eve, the sleep thy rosy veil shall cover Is—-but my long repose !
THE FLOWERS.
CHILDREN of Suns restored to youth, In purfled Fields ye dwell,
Reared to delight and joy—in sooth, Kind Nature loves ye well ;
BB2
872 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
Broidered with light the robes ye wear,
And liberal Flora decks ye fair, In gorgeous-coloured pride :
Yet woe—Spring’s harmless Infants-—Woe,
Mourn, for ye wither while ye glow—
Mourn for the soul denied !
The Skylark and the Nightbird sing To you their Hymns of Love,
And Sylphs that wanton on the wing
Embrace your blooms above ; Woven for Love’s soft pillow, were
The Chalice crowns ye blushing bear,
By the Idalian Queen :
Yet weep, soft Children of the Spring,
The feelings Love alone can bring To you denied have been !
But me in vain my Laura’s * eyes, Her Mother hath forbidden ;
For in the buds I gather, lies Love’s symbol-language hidden—
Mute Heralds of voluptuous pain
I touch ye—life, speech, heart, ye gain,
And soul, denied before : And silently your leaves enclose The mightiest God in arch repose,
Soft cradled in the core !
* Nanny, in the Editions of Schiller’s collected Works; but Laura,
when the Poem was first. printed in the Anthology.
In the earlicr
form of the poem, it was not, however, the Poet who sent the flowers
to Laura, but Laura who sent the flowers to him.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER. 373
TO MINNA.
I.
Do I dream? can I trust te my eye? My sight sure some vapour must cover Or, there, did n:y Minna pass by— My Minna—and knew not her lover ? On the arm of the coxcomb she crost, Well the fan might its zephyr bestow Herself in her vanity lost, That wanton my Minna?—Ah, no!
Il.
In the gifts of my love she was drest, My plumes o’er her summer hat quiver ; The ribbons that flaunt in her breast Might bid her—remember the giver ! And still do they bloom on thy bosom, The flowerets I gathered for thee ! Still as fresh is the leaf of each blossom, Tis the Heart that has faded from me!
III,
Go and take, then, the incense they tender ; Go, the one that adored thee forget !
Go, thy charms to the Feigner surrender, In my scorn is my comforter yet!
Go, for thee with what trust and belief There beat not ienobly a heart,
That has strength yet to strive with the grief To have worshipp’d the trifler thou art !
IV.
Thy beauty thy heart hath betray’d— Thy beauty—shame, Minna, to thee!
To-morrow its glory will fade, , And its roses all withered. will be !
374. POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
The swallows that swarm in the sun Will fly when the north winds awaken, The false ones thine Autumn will shun, For whom thou the true hast forsaken !
Vv.
’Mid the wrecks of thy charms in December, I see thee alone in decay,
And each Spring shall but bid thee remember How brief for thyself was the May !
Then they who so wantonly flock To the rapture thy kiss can impart,
Shall scoff at thy winter, and mock Thy beauty as wreck’d as thy heart !
Vi.
Thy beauty thy heart hath betray’d— Thy beauty—shame, Minna, to thee ! To-morrow its glory will fade— And its roses all withered will be! O, what scorn for thy desolate years Shall I feel !—God forbid it in me! How bitter will then be the tears Shed, Minna, O, Minna, for thee ! ,
TO "THE SPRING,
WELcomE, gentle Stripling, Nature’s darling, thou !
With thy basket full of blossoms, A happy welcome now !
Aha !—and thou returnest, Heartily we greet thee—
The loving and the fair one, Merrily we meet thee !
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 375
Think’st thou of my Maiden In thy heart of glee?
I love her yet, the Maiden— And the Maiden yet loves me!
For the Maiden, many a blossom I begg’d—and not in vain !
T came again, a-begging, And thou—thou giv’st again :
Welcome, gentle Stripling, Nature’s darling, thou!
With thy basket full of blossoms, A happy welcome now!
THE TRIUMPH OF LOVE. A Hymn.
BiessEpD through love are the Gods above— Through love like the Gods may man be ; Heavenlier through love is the heaven above, ‘Through love like a heaven earth can be ! Once, as the poet sung, In Pyrrha’s time ’tis known, From rocks Creation sprung, And Men leapt up from stone ; Rock and stone, in night The souls of men were seal’d, Heaven’s diviner. light Not as yet reveal’d ; As yet the Loves around them Had never shone—nor bound them With their rosy rings ; As yet their bosoms knew not Soft song—and music grew not Out of the silver strings :
376 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
No gladsome garlands cheerily
Were love-y-woven then ; And o’er Elysium drearily
The May-time flew for men ; * The morning rose ungreeted
From ocean’s joyless breast ; Unhail’d the evening fleeted
To ocean’s joyless breast— Wild through the tangled shade, By clouded moons they stray’d,
The iron race of Men! Sources of mystic tears, Yearnings for starry spheres,
No God awaken’d then !
*
Lo, mildly from the dark-blue water,
Comes forth the Heaven’s divinest Daughter, Borne by the Nymphs fair-floating o’er To the intoxicated shore !
Like the light-scattering winds cf morning
Soars universal May, adorning
As from the glory of that birth
Air and the ocean, heaven and earth !
Day’s eye looks laughing, where the grim
Midnight lay coil’d in forests dim ;
And gay narcissuses are sweet
Wherever glide those holy feet—
Now, pours the bird that haunts the eve:
The earliest song of love,
Now in the heart—their fountai
The waves that murmur love !
O blest Pygmalion—blest art thou—
It melts, it glows, thy marble now !
O Love, the God, thy world is won!
Embrace thy children, Mighty One.
"3
* “The World was sad, the garden was a wild, And Mon. the Team fie stoh’d—ti] Woman eviileltt °?__CAMPRELY.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Blessed through love are the Gods above— Through love like the Gods may man be ; Heavenlier through love is the heaven abeve, Through love like a heaven earth can be. *
Where the nectar bright-streams,
Like the dawn’s happy dreams,
Eternally one holiday,
The life of the Gods glides away.
Throned on his seat sublime,
Looks He whose years know not time ;
At his nod, if his anger awaken,
At the wave of his hair all Olympus is shaken.
Yet He from the throne of his birth,
Bow’d down to the sons of the earth,
Through dim Areadian glades to wander sighing, Lull'd into dreams of bliss—
Lo, at his feet the harmless thunders lying !
The Sun’s majestic coursers go Along the Light’s transparent plain, Curb’d by the Day-god’s golden rein ; The nations perish at his bended ke c Steeds that majestic go, Shafts from the bended bow, Gladly he leaves above — For Melody and Love ! Low bend the dwellers of the sky, When sweeps the stately Juno by; Proud in her car, the Uncontroll’d Curbs the bright birds that breast the air, As flames the sovereign crown of gold Amidst the ambrosial waves of hair— Ev’n thou, fair Queen of Heaven’s high throne, Hast Love’s subduing sweetness known ; From all her state, the Great One bends To charm the Olympian’s bright embraces, The Heart-Enthraller only lends The rapture-cestus of the Graces !
377
378 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
*
Blessed through love are the Gods above— Through love like a God may man be; Heavenlier through love is the heaven above, Through love like a heaven earth can be !
*
Love can sun the Realms of Night— Orcus owns the magic might— Peaceful where She sits beside,
Smiles the swart King on his Bride ; Hell feels the smile in sudden light— Love can sun the Reals of Night! Heavenly o’er the startled Hell,
Holy, where the Accursed dwell,
O Thracian, went thy silver song ! © Grim Minos, with unconscious tears, Melts into mercy as he hears—
The serpents in Megara’s hair, Kiss, as they wreathe enamour’d there ;
All harmless rests the madding thong ;— From the torn breast the Vulture mute, Flies, seared before the charmed lute— Lull’d into sighing from their roar The dark waves woo the listening shore— Listening the Thracian’s silver song !— Love was the Thracian’s silver song !
*
Blessed through love are the Gods above— Through love like a God may man be ; Heavenlier through love is the heaven above,
Through love like a heaven earth can be !
*
Through Nature, blossom-strewing, One footstep we are viewing,
One flash from golden pionions !— If from Heaven’s starry sea,
If from the moonlit sky ; If from the Sun’s dominions,
Look’d not Love’s laughing eye ;
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 379
Then Sun and Moon and Stars would be Alike, without one smile for me ! But, oh, wherever Nature lives Below, around, above— Her happy eye the mirror gives To thy glad beauty, Love! Love sighs through brooklets silver-clear, Love bids their murmur woo the vale ; Listen, O list ! Love’s soul ye hear In his own earnest nightingale, No sound from Nature ever stirs, But Love’s sweet voice is heard with hers ! Bold Wisdom, with her sunlit eye, Retreats when Love comes whispering by— For Wisdom’s weak to Love! To victor stern or monarch proud, Imperial Wisdom never bow’d The knee she bows to Love ! Who through the steep and starry sky, Goes onward to the Gods on high, Before thee, hero-brave ? Who halves for thee the land of Heaven ; Who shows thy heart, Elysium, given Through the flame-rended Grave ? Below, if we were blind to Love, Say, should we soar o’er Death above ? Would the weak soul, did Love forsake her, E’er gain the wing to seek the Maker ? Love, only Love, can guide the creature Up to the Father-fount of Nature ; What were the soul did Love forsake her ? Love guides the Mortal to the Maker! #
Blessed through love are the Gods above— Through love like a God may man be ; Heavenlier through love is the heaven above,
Through love like a heaven earth can be!
380 POLMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER,
TO A MORALIST.
Ane the sports of our youth so displeasing ? Is love but the folly you say ?
Benumb’d with the Winter, and freezing, You scold at the revels of May.
For you once a nymph had her charms,
And oh! when the waltz you were wreathing, All Olympus embraced in your arms—
All its nectar in Julia’s breathing.
If Jove at that moment had hurl’d
The earth in some other rotation, Along with your Julia whinl’d,
You had felt not the shock of creation.
Learn this—that Philosophy beats Sure time with the pulse,—quick or slow As the blood from the heyday retreats, — But it cannot make gods of us—No !
It is well, icy Reason should thaw In the warm blood of Mirth now and then, The Gods for themselves have a law Which they never intended for men.
The Spirit is bound by the ties
Of its Gaoler the Flesh ;—if I can Not reach as an Angel the skies,
Let me feel on the earth as a Man!
FORTUNE AND WISDOM.
In a quarrel with her lover To Wisdom Fortune flew ; “Pll all my hoards discover— Be but my friend—to you.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 381
Like a mother I presented To one each fairest gift, Who still is discontented, And murmurs at my thrift. Come, let’s be friends. What say you? Give up that weary plough, My treasures shall repay you, For both I have enow !” ‘Nay, see thy Friend betake him. To death from grief for thee— He dies if thou forsake him— Thy gifts are nought to me/”
COUNT EBERHARD, THE QUARRELLER (DER GREINER) OF WURTEMBERG,
Count Eberhard reigned from 1344—92. His son Ulrick was defeated before Reutling i in 1377, and fell the next year in battle, at Doffingen, near Stuttgard, in a battle in which Eberhard was vic- torious. There i is something of national feeling in this fine war-song, composed in honour of the old Suabian hero, by a poet himself « a Suabian. ]
With this ballad conclude all in the First Period, or early Poems, which Schiller himself thought worth preserving, and which are retained in the editions of his “collected works ;—except the sketch of “ Semele,”’ which ought to be classed amongst his dramatic compo- sitions.
Ha, ha !—take heed,—ha, ha! take heed—* Ye knaves both South and North!
For many a man both bold in deed,
And wise in peace the land to lead, Old Suabia has brought forth.
- * 6 Ton’t bear the head too high.” Thr, ihr dort aussen in der Welt, Die Nasen eingespannt ! —
382 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Proud boasts your Edward and your Charles, Your Ludwig, Frederick—are !
Yet Eberhard’s worth, ye bragging carles !
Your Ludwig, Frederick, Edward, Charles— A thunder-storm in war !
And Ulrick, too, his noble son,
Ha, ha! his might ye know ; Old Eberhard’s boast, his noble son, Not he the boy, ye rogues, to run,
How stout soe’er the foe !
The Reutling lads with envy saw Our glories, day by day ; The Reutling lads shall give the law-—. The Reutling lads the sword shall dray— O Lord —how hot were they!
Out Ulrick went, and beat them not— To Eberhard back he came—
A lowering look young Ulrick got— .
Poor lad, his eyes with tears were hot— He hung his head for shame.
“ To—ho”-—thought he—“ ye rogues beware ; Nor you nor I forget—
For by my father’s beard* I swear Your blood shall wash the blot I bear,
And Ulrick pay you yet!”
Soon came the hour! with steeds and men The battlefield was gay ;
Steel closed on stcel at Doffingen—
And joyous was our stripling then, And joyous the hurra !
“The battle lost” our battle-cry ; The foe once more advances ; As some fierce whirlwind cleaves the sky, We skirr, through blood and slaughter, by, Amidst a night of lances !
* Count’ Eberhard had the nickname of Rush-Beard, from the | rustling of that appendage, with which he was favoured to no ordinary extent.
POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER, 383
On, lion-like, grim Ulvick sweeps— Bright shines his hero-glaive-——
Her chase before him Fury keeps,
Far-heard behind him, Anguish weeps, And round him—is the graye !
Woe—woe! it gleams—the sabre-blow--— Swift-shearing down it sped— Around, brave hearts the buckler throw-- Alas! our boast in dust is low! Count Eberhard’s boy is dead !
Grief checks the rushing Victor-van— Fierce eyes strange moisture know—
On rides old Eberhard, stern and wan,
‘My son is like another man— March, children, on the Foe !”
And fiery lances whirr’d around, Revenge, at least, undying—-
Above the blood-red clay we bound—
Hurra! the burghers break their ground, Through vale and woodland flying !
Back to the camp, behold us throng, Flags stream, and bugles play—
Woman and child with choral song,
And men, with dance and wine, prolong The warrior’s holyday.
And our old Count—-and what doth he ? Before him lies his son,
Within his lone tent, lonelily,
The old man sits with eyes that see Through one dim tear-—his son !
So heart and soul, a loyal band,
Count Eberhard’s band, we are! His front the tower that guards the land, A thunderbolt his red right hand—
His eye a gniding star!
384 POEMS AND BALLADS OF SCHILLER.
Then take ye heed—Aha! take heed, Ye knaves both South and North!
For many a man, both bold in deed
And wise in peace, the land to lead, Old Suabia has brought forth !
FAREWELL TO THE READER. ({RANSFERRED FROM THE THIRD PERIOD.)
Tue Muse is silent ; with a virgin cheek, Bow’d with the blush of shame, she ventures near She waits the judgment that thy lips may speak, And feels the deference, but disowns the fear, Such praise as Virtue gives, ’tis hers to seek— Bright Truth, not tinsel Folly to revere ; He only for her wreath the flowers should cull Whose heart, with hers, beats for the Beautiful.
Nor longer yet these lays of mine would live, Than to one genial heart, not idly stealing, There some sweet dreams and fancies fair to give, Some hallowing whispers of a loftier feeling. Not for the far posterity they strive, Doom’d with the time, its impulse but revealing, Born to record the Moment’s smile or sigh, And with the light dance of the Hours to fly.°
Spring wakes—and life, in all its youngest hues, Shoots through the mellowing meads delightedly ; Air the fresh herbage scents with nectar-dews ; Livelier the choral music fills the sky ; Youth grows more young, and age its youth renews, In that field-banquet of the ear and eye ; Spring flies—lo, seeds where once the flowers have blush’d !— And the last bloom is gone, and the last music hush’d.
BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CG., PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS.
Pa as 7. ee os é 7 4 fe at ee as Benen pre ny ; an +) eon why 7
