pikes oi NU
-
io
——— -
Che Canterbury Poets.
EDITED BY WILLIAM SHARP.
POEMS BY DORA GREENWELL.
Weed
i (ort wipe? era ee a ~ ' > aii i
GONZEN TS.
ee PAGE PAGE TSH V Olea: oo 025 sevassaeslass Matan.2,.s-acss-re drones a 60 BROMO tenses ccecuuncdean sscwics BMalentines and Poets . sets tne 1 ones. ‘*God’s Singer” ......... SH ESA ty vevsescescinesstees« 85 When the Night and The Summer Friend 36 Morning meet ...... 12 | Qui sait aimer, sait Haunted Ground ......... 4 |i SMOUMIE A 2. cprecieceeteey. OF A Comparison ............ 18 | The Broken Chain ...... 388 A Vision of GreenLeaves 19 | A Valentine ............... 39 Toa Long-parted Friend 22-| Ibid ..... .....ssecsssesseseaes 40 Toa) Young Girl ......... 23 | The Babes inthe Wood 41 Without and Within ... 24 | Imitated from the Trou- So it Happens ............ 28} badour Sordel ......... 43 The Picture and the olay An Opes dasvswus sce 44 MEL ais ceri ncccsnsoabelle 29 | 'To Maria Ivanovna ...... 45
CONTENTS.
PAGE
“Tf it be pleasant to remember Thee”
I Span beside our Cabin
One Flower A Scherzo Rapture
Srornets,
Ascending
Life Tapestry
To Elizabeth Barrett ’ Browning, 1851
To HElizabeth Barrett Browning, 1861
A Midsummer Night’s
Toa Friend ...,
Silence..
Toa oe ne Friend
Seorsum
To my Friends at —...
The Lesson os
A Farewell to Youth om
The White Crusade ... ..
The Cleft
A Dialogue...
A Song to call to Re- MeEMDFAaNnce..........0000.0
A National Song
The Christmas Carol ... 101
From ‘ Camera
Obscura,’
The Song of Islam The Wren
The Secret
The Homeward Lane
he
CONTENTS.
’ PAGE Bring me word how tall
Basilides
The Battle Flag of Sigurd 125 The Golden Thread ...... 126 A Legend of Toulouse... 180
From  TShe Boul’s Zeaend,’’
The Redbreast
From ‘ Garmiya @riucis,’’
The Garden of Proser- PING sshcueeantze Seerivexiees LOO The Aloe
A Morning in Spring ... 138 The Playfellows
One Friend
A Remembrance
A Life Requiem
Vii
PAGE
A Thought at Midnight 146 November
The Deformed Child..... 170 The Daughter of the
The Lover’s Quarrel The Old Family, Ballad
Seatiered Porews, The Edel Weiss A Parting Song
Good-night, Good-bye 197
viii CONTENTS.
Fidelity Rewarded Lady Alice’s Shrift Grand Coeur Pour Grande Love in Death.
Guessing Going to Bed Noah’s Ark
God’s Garden Child among the Rocks 242 A Story by the Fire
The Flaming Oar Grandmother Nodding 244 The Singer Good-night
The Little Girl’s Lament 213 | The The Railway Station..... 216
The Mourning of the
BIOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION.
——++——.
HE name “ Dora Greenwell” was for many years supposed to be the pseudonym of a writer of rare spiritual insight and fine poetic genius. It was very generally
surmised that she was a member of the Society of Friends; and there was much ground for this supposition. As time wore on, and book followed book, some of the facts of her personal history became known, and were occasionally referred to in the public press, But for a very long period little was really known of her actual life, and many mistakes gained currency. It eventually trans- pired that Dora Greenwell was a native of the ‘County of Durham, the daughter of a highly
x INTRODUCTION.
respected and popular magistrate and Deputy Lieutenant, and that two of her brothers were clergymen of the Church of England, one of them being a Minor Canon of Durham Cathedral. She herself also belonged to the same com- munion.
“Dorothy” was the baptismal name of Miss Greenwell ; but she was always called “ Dora” in her family circle, and by all her friends. Her father, Mr. William Thomas Greenwell, lived upon his estate at Lanchester, nine miles distant from any town, but connected with the cathedral city by many precious and interesting associations. Greenwell Ford, where she was born on Decem- ber 6th, 1821, was a large and handsome house, in a delightfully pleasant and secluded situation on the banks of a picturesque little stream, which the poet has invested with all the charm of her intense love of nature and her rich and pleasant fancy. She revelled in the beautiful grounds and the wonderful old garden, with its old-time shrubs and flowers, which provided her with such a wealth of memory and joy.
She appears to have been a very sweet and gentle child; and as she was the only daughter
INTRODUCTION. xl
of the house, her pure and beautiful nature, com- bined with rare gifts of intellect and imagination, made her a fascinating personality in the home. In very early years there was promise, apparently, of physical health, but much of her life after- wards was more or less marked by feebleness and weakness. She had a brave spirit, and was the owner of irrepressible genius ; yet many earnest enterprises were doomed to disappointment be- cause her strength was unequal to the tasks they imposed.
Sad reverses befell the household of Greenwell Ford in the year 1848, when, owing no doubt to mismanagement, the property had to be sold. A record of the departure from the dear old home, on February 25th of the year, is still preserved in her handwriting. She notes in this record that the Greenwell family had lived at the “Ford” since Henry the Eighth’s time. The “pleasant places” of her life had been spoilt for her ; still there were many compensations in store. She loved human beings more than trees and flowers and streams ; and a wider world opened to her; and much agreeable and stimulating society helped to create new joy in a life which had so
xii INTRODUCTION.
soon felt the bitter winds of adversity. And so it won—
‘¢From shower and shining, from the moulds and suns, Deep colours, odours, richer than of old.”
For a time, Miss Greenwell, with her father and mother, resided at Ovingham Rectory, in Northum- berland, where her eldest brother, William, was holding the living fora friend. Ovingham is on the north bank of the Tyne, close to the river, and was at that time a very picturesque village. There was much in this pleasant spot, and in its singularly interesting surroundings, which gave her great delight. She exerted at this time a great fascina- tion over those who were happy enough to make her acquaintance. She had become deeply religious, and her intellect developed with freedom and elevation ; while a keen sense of humour and light-hearted mirth gave brightness and charm to her society. Stories are told of the good works in which she engaged with passionate enthusiasm on behalf of the poor, the weak, and the afflicted. Young people delighted to yield to the spell of her delicate enchantment, as she kindled into
INTRODUCTION. xiii
glowing fervour their own intellectual and moral life.
It was while she lived in this village that she issued her earliest volume of poems, which was published by Mr. William Pickering, and extended to a little over two hundred pages. Those who had known Miss Greenwell’s delicate apprecia- tion of tastefully-printed works can understand that she would~ derive much satisfaction from seeing her own first book coming from a house which had achieved so unique a fame for their publications. The volume not only contained some fine indications of her poetic genius, but gave promise of still greater successes. The reception which it met with led to the issue of a second volume—in 1850.
After leaving Ovingham, she had no settled home for some time, but lived principally, until 1854, with her brother, the Rev. Alan Greenwell, at Golbourne Rectory, in Lancashire. She entered with much zeal into many interesting forms of parish work, with a view to help and enlighten the people. The sick, the sorrowful, and the young were the objects of her special care. Her health often suffered from the strain to which
xiv INTRODUCTION.
she was subjected by her many and arduous labours for the good of others She maintained at this time an earnest correspondence with her friends, which often verged upon literary subjects.
When Miss Greenwell left the Lancashire Rectory for her native county she was in her thirty- third year. She settled quietly down with her mother in the fine old city of Durham, amongst many friends and relatives—her father having died in 1854. Here she was stimulated and assisted by the pleasant society and interesting neighbourhood By the natural charms of the city, and its historic associations, she was always deeply affected. For eighteen long years she found her home there, and
**¢from the casement, fair, as in a dream,’ She ‘watched, with loving eye, that ancient pile Whereon the sunlight lingeréd awhile, From the red west with rich decaying gleam Of splendour fading in a solemn stream,’ ”
Now began the period of her greatest intellectual efforts. Her correspondence during these years is fraught with so much interest, that one easily
INTRODUCTION. XV
discovers in it the germs of many of her pro- foundest writings. She was destined to become an accomplished essayist, and to produce some prose works which claim a very high place among books of a deeply thoughtful and spiritual kind. Those readers who have made the acquaintance of Two Friends and Colloquia Crucis, will readily endorse this opinion. Some were charmed, and others were somewhat repelled by what may be termed her mysticism. I used to call her “the last of the Mystics.” And, indeed, none can really appreciate much of what is delightful in both her poetry and prose who has not a liking for this quality of her genius. Most of the prose works were connected with the Durham period. Two small volumes were first in order of time—Zhe Patience of Hope and A Present Heaven. The spiritual life is treated of in the former of these in a very delicate and suggestive manner. No Christian person can read it without tender satisfaction. It is interesting to note that in the year 1862, Messrs, Ticknor & Fields, of Boston, U.S., published an edition of this work with an introduction from the pen of Mr. Whittier. The poet remarked, “It is a lofty plea for patience,
ay INTRODUCTION.
trust, hope, and holy confidence, under the shadow, as well as in the light of Christian experience, whether the cloud seems to rest on the tabernacle, or moves guidingly forward.” He praises its “singular beauty of style, and the strong, steady march of its argument.”
Two Friends was published in 1862, and was dedicated to the author’s “attached friend, Mr Thomas Constable, of Edinburgh.” Not a few of those who have the best acquaintance with her writings have ranked this volume higher even than the Cod/oguia. It is rich in studies of the spiritual life blended with poetical sentiment of the highest order.
The character and work of Lacordaire became intensely interesting to Miss Greenwell, as I have found from perusal of a voluminous correspondence which she had with Professor Knight. Lacordaire fascinated her on many sides of his personality : he was intense, spiritual, courageous, and enthu- siastic. She deals very powerfully with the lights and shadows of his commanding character in the volume published by Messrs. Edmonston and Douglas in 1867.
There are many persons who regard her Essays
INTRODUCTION. xvii
(issued in 1862) as-her best prose work. For brilliancy, smartness, and frequent humour this volume certainly takes high rank. We may mention two essays particularly in point— “Our Single Women” and “Popular Religious Literature.”
Colloguia Crucis, a sequel to Two Friends, was published in 1871. This book is a great inspiration, and deals with themes which roused the best powers of the writer, and kindled the purest ardours of her genius. Liber Humanitatis did not appear till 1875; comprising a series of essays on “Various Aspects of Spiritual and Social Life,” and treating them with great ability and far-reaching thoughtfulness. It only remains to mention her brief account of John Woolman, the Quaker; and A Basket of Summer Fruit. :
In 1861, Alexander Strahan & Co., of Edin- burgh, issued a volume of her poetry, which included some of the earlier poems ; and in 1867, the same publishers brought out a new volume with the earlier poems left out, and some later ones taking their place. It bears on its title-page the well-known device which so pen Geant
XViil INTRODUCTION.
symbolises Miss Greenwell’s faith—a hand grasp- _ ing a cross, with the words—Zz Teneo et Teneor. This volume is “Dedicated to the Memory of Elizabeth Barrett Browning ;” with two lines added from Schillers “Don Carlos.” Miss Greenwell’s feeling with regard to Mrs. Browning’s genius and character may be in part learned from two sonnets included in the present volume.
During some seven or eight years Miss Green- well wrote some poems which were finally pub-
lished by Bell & Daldy, with the title, Carmina Crucis. In a letter written from Durham to Miss Christina Rossetti, she referred to them as “of an inwardly historical character, connected, though the thread may not be always apparent.” In this very wonderful little volume, she shows, as it was once said, “how human spirits struggle with the sorrows and doubts incidental to our nature, and find rest in the deeds, the teaching, and the promises of a Redeemer.” The mystical and allegorical nature of these poems, combined with their deeply spiritual character, precludes their appreciation by what is known as the “ general reader ;” but those whose eyes are open to the
INTRODUCTION. xix
secret of their charm, set a higher value upon them, probably, than upon any other portion of her poetical work.
The Soul’s Legend and Camera Obscura, two small volumes, were published respectively in 1873 and 1876. Both of them contain choice examples and illustrations of the mingled sweetness and power of her genius.
Many short poems were inserted in magazines and newspapers, notably in Good Words and in the Sunday Magazine.
Miss Greenwell made her home in Durham for eighteen years. This home was broken up at her mothers death in 1871. Torquay, Clifton, and London became, for briefer or longer periods, the places of her residence. It was a great delight to her to live in London. She saw many of her old friends more frequently and easily there than else- where. While she remained in College Street, Westminster, hardly a day passed without bringing some pleasant caller to the quaint but interesting home which she made for herself beneath the shadow of the Abbey. Her physical powers were often wearied by depression and weakness, but she was the joyous soul of every little gathering
xx INTRODUCTION.
drawn together by her kindly welcome. Some- times she sat up in her easy chair, but more frequently lay upon the sofa covered with wraps ; and nearly always—except in the hottest weather —enjoyed a cheerful fire. No chance visitor— introduced by one of her intimate friends—could
fail to be struck with the frank, unceremonious,
and cordial manner with which she greeted all who came. A social iceberg immediately began ' to thaw in the warmth of her presence. She gave an unusually hearty welcome to anyone who could add to her stock of knowledge. If such persons were present, she plied them with questions, and listened patiently to their answers, never failing to multiply her enquiries if the information failed to satisfy her thirst for knowledge.
She was a somewhat ardent politician, and greatly relished any opportunity for improving her acquaintance with the schemes and movements of political parties, But her greatest zeal was always shown in respect to social and benevolent objects. The poor and suffering—and in a very special sense the whole brute creation—always excited and indeed absorbed her sympathy.
Miss Greenwell was keenly sensitive to delicate
INTRODUCTION. xxi
and kindly attentions ; she spoke of many trifling gifts from her friends—such for instance as flowers, quill pens, good black ink, or even a pretty pincushion—as “testimonials” of their regard. There ran through all her conversation, even when it was concerned with very serious topics, what one of her admiring friends called “a touch of humour like a thread of light.” But perhaps she was at her greatest when moved with indig- nation against some huge moral wrong. She became fiercely eloquent ; her words glowed with the inner fires of life ; sentiments were roused in the breasts of those who were present which were akin to those that would have shown themselves upon the eve of a great moral enterprise. The friend whose words have just been quoted testifies —and the present writer confirms the observation —*TI have heard her speak of moral reform, and armed warfare with evil, as if she wore the Crusader’s Cross; and again, have felt in her presence that one must walk along a lofty narrow path in keen air, and upon snow heights.”
In the autumn of 1881 Miss Greenwell went to her brother at Clifton, much weakened in health, and suffering from the results of an accident. She
xxii INTRODUCTION.
failed rapidly in the following spring, and the shadows fell thickly around. Death released the buoyant spirit from its mortal coil on the evening of Wednesday, March 29, 1882. She was buried in Arno’s Vale Cemetery, Bristol.
And thus, ‘* She vanished to a shore Where none are parted, none are troubled more.”
WILLIAM DORLING, Buckuurst Jiu.
L’ENVOI.
I HOLD within my hand a lute,
A lute that hath not many strings ;
A little bird above it sings,
And singing, soars and claps his wings ; Sing, little bird : when thou art mute, The music dies within my lute.
Sing on, thou little bird, until
I hear a voice expected long,
That bids an after-silence fill
The space that once was filled with song. Then fold thy wings upon my breast, Upon my heart, and give it rest.
(Poems on Legendary Subjects.)
HOME.
’ Two birds within one nest $ Two hearts within one breast ; Two spirits in one fair, Firm league of love and prayer, Together bound for aye, together blest.
An ear that waits to catch
A hand upon the latch ;
A step that hastens its sweet rest to win; A world of care without, A world of strife shut out,
A world of love shut in.
Poems by Dora Greenwell.
POETS.
OnE spake to a poet, *‘ And whence hast thou won The key to the melodies vagrant that run and throb along Nature’s strong pulse, like a strain That haunts us by snatches, yet doth not attain,
Save in thee, to completeness ; The wind-song, the bird-song, the song of the leaves, The heart-song, which breathes through them all, and
recelves H’en in giving them sweetness?”
. Then he answered, *‘ From God, who to each at His will From His fulness gives somewhat the yearning to still Of the soul, that as yet He designed not to fill ; For He would not that any should tax Him and say, * Thou gavest me nought as I went by the way To joy in and bless Thee.’ ”
And His gifts are a// blessed ; He giveth to some Rich boons; they are happy, and so they are dumb— There was silence in Heaven; 542
2 POETS.
And the strength and the loving, to gaze on each thing That they have not, with joy in its beauty, and sing, To some He hath given.
These sit in their gladness, all robed and all crowned,
As guests at Life’s banquet, while swift circles around Ke Life’s rosy joy-bringer ;
But a banquet needs music, so ¢hese in the cold
Stand singing without ; though his harp be of gold, Wilt thou envy the singer ?
4 io
For one (was it oe, then?) went forth from the crowd, A warrior, chosen, and faithful, and vowed 3 Sore-wounded they found him With a bright-blazoned banner wrapt round him, and prest To his bosom, to stanch its deep death-hurt; none guessed That his life-blood welled over it darkly, so proud Was the purple that bound him.
Ye sit by the hearth in the cold, bright spring weather, At evening, and hear the birds chiming together ; And ye say, ‘‘ Happy singers !” forgetting the trees Are leafless, and keen winds hold back beyond the seas The swallow, blithe comer ; Yet Summer is coming for us as for these, A long Summer,
GOD’S SINGER.
GOD’S SINGER.
HE bore a harp within his hand, And on his breast outspread
The flower, that from the dawn to dusk, For love of one o’erhead,
Still follows on a look, till all Its golden leaves are shed ;
Ye had not called him grave or gay, For old nor yet for young
Ye had not known him ; so he seemed To be them all in one;
And only in his smile ye knew The singer ere he sung.
*« A name, a name is in my heart, It bideth, hidden long,
Because my hand hath not a chord That would not do it wrong ;
So pure is it, so sweet, unmeet For rounding of a song,
Yet in the cleft, its honey left Hath made my spirit strong.
‘¢ A thought, a thought is in my heart Though seldom on the string ;
I keep it, round all other thoughts Its sweetnesses to fling ;
GOD'S SINGER.
Yea! were it not within my soul, Methinks I could not sing,
Nor ever raise my voice in praise Of any other thing.”
So sang he sweet, so sang he clear, and lift his look above,
They said that listened, ‘‘ Now he thinks of her, his ladye love ;”
But through the wood, where in the calm of summer’s noon hung still
And motionless each little leaf, there ran a sudden thrill.
He stood within a castle’s keep, A castle that could wear,
Stern looming o’er its rocky steep, As dark a frown as Care.
Yet now it smiled, as one beguiled Of ruggedness through sleep,
So sweet a sunshine on from tower To tower did flash and leap,
And all the summer’s noon did swoon About it, breathing deep.
On coigne and gurgoyle little heads In carven stone did seem To wink and peep, as they did creep From out some evil dream ; And over each, on leaf and scroll, Strange words were writ, that seemed to flit
GOD'S SINGER.
Within each mask, and be to it Interpreter of soul :
** Sans Roi, sans Lot, sans Foi: and there, Above the gate a time-gnawed wreath
And legend mouldered half away, -Spoke fair to passer underneath :
“© Entres dans le chateau des delices, et fais ce
que voudray,”
,
A fountain warbled, more it seemed In weariness than play ;
The birds sang loud, but not as in The forest depths sing they ;
Yet ringing clear above them all, Up rose the minstrel’s lay,
As freshly shook as when the brook
Sang with him on his way.
The soft air lifted it on high, Through pleasant bower and hall,
And ladies o’er the balcony Leant, holden in its thrall ;
Tt floated in above the din That rose within the court,
The grey-beards paused above the cup, The gallants ’mid their sport ;
** Ha!” spake the Baron, ‘‘ bring him in, The merry Jongleur ! to the strings
The wine will move, and dance within
Our beakers while he sings.”
GOD’S SINGER.
As came the minstrel in the hall, He bore him high and free, Yet lowly bowed, as one long vowed To gentle courtesy. Then o’er his harp, with thought to claim A silence ere he sung, He passed his hand, as if to tame Each bounding chord that sprung Beneath it ; as a loving heart, Now fretted, and now wrung, Must rise and fall unto the thrall That over it is flung ; Then soft and low, as is the flow Of waters, to whose drip A child hath danced, his finger fine From string to string did slip, Till, gathered in a sudden shower, The spray-drops glanced and flew As light as when, ’mid thick-wove boughs, The sunbeams trickle through.
And then, with firmer, bolder touch, he struck a deeper strain,
And high amid the cloven hills, by thunder rift in twain,
The swollen torrents leapt and sprang, and down the flashing rain :
Poured in through ghastly rents, while swift, from giant hand to hand,
GOD'S SINGER. 7
Like arrows torn from fiery sheaf, the lightning’s jagged brand, [land ; Flung careless on from peak to peak, lit up the startled
And then a swell, a rush as of broad rivers in their flow,
Ran through it, and the forest shook with rustlings light, and low
Smooth-sweeping winds, till underneath, you heard the grasses grow,
And as the stormy waves withdrew, Disparting here and there,
The flood rolled backward, and to view The mountain summits bare
Pierced upwards, till a world swept out Green, jubilant, and fair ;
Then clear the singer’s voice arose Upon the freshened air.
Ife sang an old and simple tale, A sad and earnest song,
Of things most frail that did prevail, Of weakest things made strong ;
Of tender Truth, that did not fail For time or change, and long,
Long suffered, rather than to give, Content to suffer wrong ;
A song that hath been ofttimes sung, A tale that hath been told
Since first this world of ours was young, Nor with it groweth old ;
GOD'S SINGER.
While human eyes keep tears to weep, And hearts have love to hold
For friend or lover under sun, Or underneath the mould.
The matron on her Dais high, That held her place of pride, Turned, with a trouble in her eye, Her stately head aside ; For through the music little feet Went moving, and the child That One who loveth souls took back, Unaltered, unbeguiled, With sweet voice small did seem to call Upon her name, and smiled. The Gallant drew his pluméd cap Across his brow, and sighed ; A hand was clasped within his own, A step was by his side ; A soft low voice he seemed to meet, Each whispered tone he knew 3 None since had ever been so sweet, Nor any since so true, For like a child, unto the hill Whence springs the rainbow, driven, His mind on many a glittering quest Since then had toiled and striven, Yet never had he touched again The point where Earth meets Heaven.
GOD’S SINGER.
The grey-haired Seneschal, that leant Upon his staff apart,
Felt somewhat trembling on his lip, And tightening round his heart,
A ruined shrine, that had not seen Its angels a// depart ;
For now he felt his mother’s kiss Upon his cheek, and heard,
Oh ! sound approved from lips beloved, Her fond and praiseful word.
And as each aged fibre shook, And trembled to the strain,
He heard the cawing of the rook, He was a boy again !
With glad feet plashing in the brook That wimpled onwards, fain
Its shining boundary to trace, And clip his little world within
Too small a space to leave a place For sorrow and for sin.
And through each heart a pang shot strong, And on it darkly bore A sense of something that had long Been lost, unmissed before ; But now, to reach a guiding Hand, The Spirit groped and felt Across the void, and for the land It yearned where once it dwelt ;
GOD’S SINGER.
It longed to knit some broken troth, And then, as if it knew
All good below is but the show And shadow of the true,
Each thirsted sore to claim once more His birthright, and renew
A higher ’legiance, whence the soul Had lapsed and fallen through.
And there was Silence, such as falls On one that, musing lone,
At midnight on a city’s walls, Sees moonlight round him thrown,
So heavenly fair, ere he is ’ware Ilis inner sense hath grown
More pure, and may not well endure To think on Pain and Sin,
On all that shines so fair without That lurks so foul within
Our mortal state, and ill can wait Those clearer heights to win,
Where never goodly thing goes out, Nor evil cometh in !
At length the Baron broke the spell : ‘¢ Sir Minstrel? sorry cheer,
For all thou playest deft and well, Methinks thou bringest here :
So now that ye have made us grave, Your penance I will choose,
GOD'S SINGER.
To troll us out a joyous stave, As merry Trouveurs use,
A song of jest and gaillardise To wreathe about the cup,
That, while we drain it, ladies’ eyes May glisten from it up.”
** Fain is my harp,” the minstrel spake, ** To bring you joy and ease,
Yet would it break if I should take A strain on it like these:
Its only skill is such to wake As may my Master please.”
“* Thy Master!” then the Baron smiled A scornful smile and proud,
‘**T did not deem ye brethren free To other service vowed
Than flowing of the Malvoisie And largesse clinking loud.”
** Yea,” said the Minstrel, ‘*I am free, And yet a Lord is mine,
A service that is liberty, A Master who is thine !”
Then sprang the Baron from his seat ; * A priest without the frock !
Now bind him, varlets, hands and fect, And fling him down the rock ;
12 NIGHT AND MORNING MEET.
For I have sworn, no hireling shorn Among their tribe should cross
My threshold, but have cause to mourn His boldness to his loss.”
“ They bar against Thy priest the gate, Thy Singer passeth free ; ~
So hold me ever consecrate Thy Witness still to be.”
Thus, looking up, the minstrel spake, And, turning, went his way
From out them all, and none did seek To hinder him or stay ;
And as he passed beneath the gate, A bird was singing free,
And from the chapel in the wood Rose vespers solemnly ;
And as upon the air serene His song ascended calm,
Methought it filled the space between The Carol and the Psalm!
WHEN THE NIGHT AND MORNING MEET.
In the dark and narrow street, Into a world of woe,
Where the tread of many feet Went trampling to and fro,
_
NIGHT AND MORNING MEET. — 13
A child was born—speak low ! When the night and morning meet.
Full seventy summers back Was this, so long ago.
The feet that wore the track Are lying straight and low,—
Yet hath there been no lack Of passers to and fro.
Within the narrow street
This childhood ever played ; Beyond the narrow street
This manhood never strayed ;
This age sat still and prayed Anear the trampling feet.
The tread of ceaseless feet Flowed through his life, unstirred By waters’ fall, or fleet Wind music, or the bird Of morn ; these sounds are sweet, But they were still unheard.
Within the narrow street I stood beside a bed,— I held a dying head When the night and morning meet ; And every word was sweet, Though few the words we said.
HAUNTED GROUND. |
And as we talked, dawn drew To-day,—the world was fair
In fields afar, I knew; : Yet spoke not to him there
Of how the grasses grew, Besprent with dewdrops rare.
We spoke not of the sun, Nor of this green earth fair ; This soul, whose day was done Had never claimed its share In these, and yet its rare Rich heritage had won.
From the dark and narrow street, Into a world of love A child was born,—speak low, Speak reverent, for we know ~ Not how they speak above When the night and morning meet.
HAUNTED GROUND. ‘Tt is the soul that sees.”
THE rest have wandered on—
Stay thou with me, dear friend, awhile, awhile ; The air is full of voices leading on, : As o’er enchanted isle.
HAUNTED GROUND.
This ground is writ all o’er With the soul’s history ; I may not choose,— Spell-bound—but pause above this living lore To linger and to muse.
We give of what we take From life of outward things ; our spirits leave, Where they have heen, a glory in their wake More bright than they receive.
And this was once my Home: ' The leaves, light rustling o’er me, whisper clear— ** The sun but shines on thee where thou dost roam, It smiled upon thee here.” *
And these are of the-things That God hath taken from me, safe to keep: Sometimes, to let me look on them, He brings Them to me in my sleep ;
And I have been in sleep
So oft among them, ow their aspect seems The vague soft glow evanishing, to keep,
Of half-remembered dreams.
Thou shouldst have been with me Of old, dear friend, as now! and borne a part In all that was—then Life were filled with thee
As wholly as the Heart !
* The idea that the sun shines on us in absence, but smiles on us at home, is borrowed from a German song.
HAUNTED GROUND.
Then hadst thou won mine eyes My soul to look through ; half it angers me To think a sweetness on the years can rise That is not mixed with thee !
Yet stoop with me to trace These olden records, overrun with bloom ; The Dead are underneath, and yet the place Looks hardly like a tomb
This is the wood-walk ; oft I feel a clasp detaining, —not the fold
Of clinging bindweed,—far more close and soft ; For here in days of old,
My earliest friend with me
Walked hand in hand ; we sat long hours upon This bank ; and I am on the earth, but she
Had wings, and she is gone,
See! see ! the ancient hall With sunset on it ! how the windows flame In evening light—they flash and glitter all— And one looks still the same.
As when my mother kept
Upon me, while I played, an eye of love ; Since then, it oft has watched me while I wept, Still watching, from above!
a
Siete fe ith kbc Gane + Aled he bee! een
HAUNTED GROUND, 17
As then she used to smile, And softly stroke my head ; so now my heart These gentle memories stroke and soothe—awhile, Awhile we will not-part.
Kind shadows ! from the door,
At noon-day with a joyous shout flung wide, I see the merry children rush, before ” Its welcome stroke had died.
The old domestic, grey And bowed with weight of many years, whose look And grave, kind smile still followed on the way Our flying footsteps took ;
Such wealth was his in store Of loving words, when fain he would be stern, And chide our rovings, all his speech the more To tenderness would turn!
As twilight brings a face
Drawn faint, yet perfect, on the darkening wall ; So on me rise the spirits of each place,
Yet bring not gloom withal.
Heaven’s wasted wealth, the gold It gave for treasure slighted and ungraced ; Earth’s kindly seeds of love on soil too cold, Let darkly run to waste, 943
18
A COMPARISON.
That needed but our care To bloom for ever round the heart serene 3 These, these the forms of evil things that were, Of good that might have been.
_ Time gathers silently,
Yet from their ashes-troubling phantoms sends More stern than these of happy hours gone by, Than these of buried friends ;
More sad than these that smile And whisper, ‘‘ Now thou comest as a guest Where once thou dwelt, yet mourn not thou the while, Because thou hast been blest |”
A COMPARISON,
THERE is no Winter in the soul of man;
Its clime is Tropical, a giant tree
In stately Southern forests blowing free
And broad, it stands where equal Summer sways All seasons, and as one swift joy decays,
Another pushes forth a fan-like frond
Or succulent leaf dark-shining far beyond
Before it falls; and wing-like thoughts have sown Their seeds all round about its roots, and thrown
A VISION OF GREEN LEAVES. 19
A veil of living blooms from bough to bough,
Leaf, flower, and tendril twining, so that now
Most vain it were to track each home, or guess Whence springs this weight and wealth of loveliness ; While e’en its cloven bark, a sheath and shroud
Of splendour, blossoms o’er—so fancies crowd Within the soul, so mounting swift and high
Up to that tree’s tall summit, suddenly
Spring in one night efflorescent, bright hopes,
That drop again to earth like flowery ropes
Let down from Heaven by angels’ hands ; yet there Stand forth, ’mid all that fulness, gaunt and bare, Like matted cordage, withered coils that fruit,
Or flower, or leaf, bear never, for the root
From whence they drew earth’s kindly juice is gone ; And these are hopes that die, yet still cling on !
A VISION OF GREEN LEAVES.
THE time was Winter, Winter or the Spring That comes with tardy footstep, lingering
Like some reluctant Giver, yielding cold
The boons that it no longer may withhold ; And ere I slept, I listened to the rain
Dashed by the fitful wind against the pane, The wind, that even through my sleep did seem To break upon the music of my dream,
20
A VISION OF GREEN LEAVES,
With pause of change and dreariness, and still
Swelled, sighed, and moaned each varying scene to fill
With trouble and unrest; at length outworn
I slept within my sleep, and to the morn
(Still in my dream) awoke, with vacant eye
Forth from the casement gazing listlessly,
When sudden I exclaimed, ‘* A miracle !
A Summer come at once without a Spring
To herald it! a bright awakening
To life and loveliness ;” for all around
Were leaves, green bursting leaves, and on the ground
Was short grass springing thick, and through the wave
The dark flag cut its swift way like a glaive;
And broad as Orient growths, upon the pool,
Large, juicy leaves lay mantling, smooth and cool : _
I saw no flowers, no fruit, but everywhere
Leaves, only leaves, that filled the Summer air
With murmurs, soft as whispers that the heart
Hath longed and listened for: while light and low,
As chidings fall from lips that turn their flow
To gentleness, quick rustlings waved apart
The boughs, and fragrance soothed the sense like thought :
Too sweet for utterance ; e’en then I caught
The Dream’s full import: ‘‘’Tis the Spring’s warm sigh,”
Methought, ‘* that calls forth all this luxury
Of leaf and greenness ; thus, upon the heart
—_ 7 =
A VISION OF GREEN LEAVES.
A word, a look will bid a Summer start,
A Summer come at once, without a Spring
To herald it, a sudden wakening ;”
Then from the bands of sleep my spirit broke, And with the sweetness on my soul I woke, And it was Winter still! but in my heart
Was Summer !—Summer that would not depart, But breathed across its silence, low and light, Like those sweet forest-rustlings of the night ;
It was a dream of Hope! and sent by her,
My Lady bright, because I minister
Unto her honour, while I strive to sing
And praise her with my Lyre’s most silver string ; It was a dream of Hope; I know the hue
Of her fresh mantle, and her symbol true,
The leaf! she cannot give the flower or fruit, But sends their promise by a herald mute ;
The leaf, that comes like one in haste to bring The first of all some gladsome welcoming,
And cannot speak for joy, but with the hand Still points and beckons to the coming band ;
I know the symbol, and I bind the sign
Upon my heart to make it doubly thine,
Thou Bringer of sweet dreams by day and night, Still will I sing and praise thee, Lady bright ! And I will gather of these leaves, to twine
A chaplet for those sunny brows of thine ;
And by thy smiling thou wilt keep its sheen,
In Winter as in Summer, fresh and green
22 TO A LONG-PARTED FRIEND.
TO A LONG-PARTED FRIEND.
THou comest back unto me like a ghost ;
And all the years that have been buried long
In silence, at thy aspect, crowd and throng
Each portal of my mind—a Phantom host.
Now will we commune with that cloud-like train Awhile, then send them to their rest again ;
For all their forms are pale and colourless ;
Not from their full joy-vintage could we press
The wealth of this day’s gleanings! nay, the woes That we have known since then have nobler shows, And all their more ” sounds feebler than our “‘ less.”
We parted in the blossom and the bud,
Now in the bloom-time of Life’s perfect Rose
We meet ; and though it may not yet unclose
Each petal, for that earth lies ever cold
About its roots, and in their conflict rude,
Rough, biting winds have bowed its head, and strewed Some leaves upon the ground ; yet hath it won
From shower and shining, from the moulds and sun, Deep colours, odours richer than of old !
The rocks that lock the Vale’s monotony
In quiet, once our mutual vision spanned ; Since then by distant pathways, painfully
We have been climbing both, now hand-in-hand And see the spot where then we parted lie Beneath us like a speck ; now through the haze
TO A YOUNG GIRL.
Together on the steep ascent we stand, Disparting for a moment, we will gaze
Down on the Alpine hamlet, till we hear
Jts songs and sheepfold tinklings rising clear, Then lift an upward heaven-aspiring eye Together, ere our tracks break suddenly,
And we go onwards through the cloud and mist Alone, yet cheerful ! on the Hill, dear Friend, Ere evening-light its cold white brow hath kissed, Tinging its snows with rose and amethyst, Once more those far-diverging lines may blend !
TO A YOUNG GIRL.
!
} | TWELVE years before thee through life I must run, Dearest ! oh, would I might counsel the hours, Saying, ‘‘ Keep back your ‘best sunshine for one That is coming behind me, and spare her the showers ! ”
Fain would I stop to remove from thy way Stones that have bruised me, and thorns that have grieved ; Set up my errors for waymarks, to say, Here I was wounded, ensnared, or deceived !
Vain is my wishing ! in lines of our own We must traverse the pathway marked out from above ;
24 WITHOUT AND WITHIN.
Life is a sorrowful teacher, alone We must learn its deep lessons, unaided by love.
Yet where I journey waste places among,
I will scatter a seed by the wayside, and say, Soft to myself as I hasten along, _
«Tt may be a flower when se cometh this way.”
Yet will I leave thee some token, that there, Just where the path looks most rugged and dim, It haply may cheer thee, in meeting with Care, To know that thy friend walked before thee with him !
So for thy loving and trusting and truth, Gentle acquittance in part it may be;
Thou who hast shrined me an image of Youth, Brighter than ever my youth was to me!
february 13th.
WITHOUT AND WITHIN.
ONCE spake a grey-haired poet : A noble thing and good,
To strike a heat adown the chain of our great brother- hood ;
To send the blazing torch of truth from eager hand to hand,
To bid thought’s swift electric wire vibrate from land to land.
~~
WITHOUT AND WITHIN. 25
To nurse a generous seed that in the mind hath taken root,
Then waft it forth on kindlier soil to come to nobler fruit,
By fire-lit hearth, in love-lit heart, a heritage to claim ;
This have men called an idle breath, the vanity of Fame !
But as to champing steed the noise of battle from afar,
That bids him paw the ground, and neigh to trumpet- sound, Ha, ha!
Is Fame to poet-soul, and mine hath shared among the
rest Yet was the praise of earliest days the sweetest and the
best !
And it is with me now as when with keen, ambitious
breast, At school I struggled with my mates, and ever foremost
pressed ; Yet knew not what I won—the worth or sweetness of my
prize— Till I took it home, and read them both within my
mother’s eyes !
My mother ! she to whom I read my earliest rude essays,
Who pinned my verses in her gown, and on her house- hold ways,
As she kept moving, to herself she said them over soft ;
I had a True-love afterwards that read them not so oft !
26 WITHOUT AND WITHIN.
And he, the kind old bachelor, whose heart had been for one
Too much, and so he shared it out with all beneath the sun 3
I see his broad and honest brow, the sparkle in his eye
(A steadfast fire undimmed by age), I hear his slow reply.
The patientest of anglers he, and I the quietest
Of dreamy boys, true comrades we—he chose me from the rest ; 7
Content to saunter by his side in silence through the day,
Through coppice and by stream, the while my thoughts were far away,
Perhaps with Crusoe in his isle; our noonday meal we took
Beneath an old grey lichened rock that beetled o’er the brook ;
Then with our tongues set free at last! not learning much nor wit
Went with our simple fare, but talk as well that seasoned it.
I never hear a chafing brook, nor see the smooth stones lie
Beneath it golden-brown, or mark the mailéd dragon-fly
Shoot past, but something o’er my soul a summer feeling sends,
That brings my good old kinsman back, and all my boyhood’s friends,
WITHOUT AND WITHIN. 27
One still is left, the friend that fought my battles out at school ;
Now would he fight them with the world; if ever it should cool
To verse of mine—yes, inch by inch contending : not a line
He reads, but takes them all on trust, content that they are mine.
Now have I made me store of mes the kindred of my mind ;
They give unto me of their wealth, I pay them back in kind :
The world needs music at its feasts, it bids me welcome free ;
It loves me for the songs I sing, but ##ese loved my songs for me!
And so to such as these my heart flies back, a thing set free ;
It craveth more than doth the mind, less cold equality ;
Love is the one true leveller below, he bringeth down,
He raiseth up, he sets on all his chosen brows a crown :
For he hath gold enough, enough of sweetness in his tone
To lend an echo unto Fame far deeper than its own ;
Its hollow cymbal-sound is gone, and hushed its selfish din
When praising from Without is met by loving from Within.
“SO iT HAPPENS?
“SOelT HAPPENS.” (From the German of Emanuel Geibel.)
' © Fig loves thee not,” so spake they to her cold ; *© He trifles with thee;” then she bowed her heac, And down her cheeks, like dew from roses, ro!led The tears fast welling at each word they said ; Oh ! why did she believe? for when he came Her doubtings angered him ; a semblance light He held through all, he spoke and smiled the same, And waited—waited to weep through the night !
Still knocked a better angel at her heart, ‘Yet is he true, give, give thy hand again; ” Still felt he, through that bitterness and smart, ** She loves thee yet, she loves thee now as then; Speak but one word, hear but one greeting kind, So is the spell that lies betwixt you broken.” Once more they met ; oh! Pride is harsh and blind. That word, that only word remainel unspoken.
So parted they, and as within the choir Of some great minster, wanes the altar-light To duller red, then flashes fitful fire All quivering restless, then sinks down in night ; So love died in them, long and sore bewept, Called back again with yearning vain at last Forgotten, till within each heart it slept, With old illusions faded and o’erpast.
THE PICTURE AND THE SCROLL. 29
Yet otf-times started they, when moonlight streamed, Up from their pillows that were wet with tears, And wet with tears each face, for they had dreamed I know not what ; then thought they of the years,
The old, the lovely time that once had been, And of their idle doubts, their broken troth, And all that now was set their souls between, So wide, so wide—O God, forgive them both !
THE PICTURE AND THE. SCROLL.
‘*Oh, mes amis! lisez-vous quelquefois mes vers; mon 4me y est empreinte.”
A Bribe looked long upon her picture: ‘‘ Thou Art left among the things I held most dear, A dearer love is calling me; yet now These to my heart have never been so near ; And I shall not be by when they are gay ; They will be sad, and I shall be away ; Yet thou wilt look upon them night and day, As once I looked, so now I leave upon Thy silent lips a kiss to bide alway ; Smile on them, smile on them when I am gone
1”
A Singer looked in silence on a scroll, Her eyes were dark with eloquent fire, her soul
MADANA.
Smiled through them bride-like, yet the hand was | cold That locked her slender palm within its hold, And set the spousal wreath upon her brow ; She said, ‘‘ I go from all that has been dear, For dearer love is calling me; yet now These to my heart have never been so near, So will I leave my kiss this scroll upon, That they may find it, while I whisper clear,
Smile on them, smile on them when I am gone !*”
MADANA.
[The invisible Madana (or Kama), the Hindu Cupid, is armed with a bow of sugar-cane, strung with bees, and five arrows, each tipped with a flower exercising a peculiar and distinct influence on the heart ; among these, one alone of fatal and unetring flight is headed, and the head covered with honeycomb, ]
SUMMER ! Summer! soft around, With a hushed and dream-like sound, From a beating heart that knows
Too much rapture for repose, Breathless, tremulous, arise
Murmurs ; thick mysterious sighs ; Whispers, faintly wandering by, Breathe a warning out and die ; Lightly o’er the bending grass, Changeful gleams and shadows pass ;
MADANA.
Through the leaves a conscious thrill Lightly runs, and all is still ;
Like the tree* whose branch and stem Flame with many a sudden gem, Blushing in its haste to greet
Touch of Beauty’s slender feet ; Earth with inner joy opprest, Shaken from her central rest, Through her bursting bloom reveals Hidden ecstasy she feels:
Now the rich, unfolding Rose Through its crimson splendour glows ; Jasmine blossoms manifold
Shed their stars of paly gold ;
On the lake’s broad bosom borne, Reddening to the reddening dawn, Flashes many a floating cup
Raised to drink the sunbeams up 3 Drooping on the heavy air
Faint with sweetness that they bear, Now the Mango buds grow pale O’er their passion-breathing tale ; And the Champak’s leaves disclose Where, amid their vestal snows, Kindling at deep gleaming eyes Fiery-hearted fragrance lies ; Summer! Summer ! now the air
* The red Asoka, supposed to blossom when its stem comes in contact with the foot of a beautiful woman,
MADANA.
Trembles—Madana is there ! Watch not for his flitting wing,
List not for the bounding string, Floating ’mid the groves to choose Gorgeous blossoms, mingled hues, Viewless as the viewless wind, Weaving spells for heart and mind, Flower-armed, flower-crowned Deity, Light his unseen arrows fly ! Tremble not! the archer’s smile Plays but carelessly the while Summer lightning o’er the sky Flashing, flickering restlessly ; Sporting with the passing hours, He hath winged their flight with flowers ; Gentle witchery and brief,
He hath breathed o’er bud and leaf, That hath lent to glance and tone Light and sweetness not their own 3 And as these shall fade away,
Will the pleasant charm decay, Droop, and leave no trace behind Where its clasping tendrils twined, Fading, fleeting, like the sigh
Of some wandering melody ;
Like a blissful dream that flings Light upon the coming day,
Like a bird whose gorgeous wings Glitter as it flits away ;
So they vanish ! yet the heart,
MADANA.
Ere its gentle guests depart, Links a thought for after hours, Summer ! to thy songs and flowers !
Yet beware the hidden power Madana hath yet his hour :
These were but the chords that thrill Lightly to a master’s will,
Tones, his wandering fingers fling
Breeze-like from the trembling string.
Ere he call forth all the fire,
All the passion of the Lyre,
Ere he stir through one deep strain All the founts of joy and pain,
One full chord is yet unshaken, One wild note hath yet to waken, One keen arrow yet to fly, Tremble ! Madana is nigh !
O’er the fatal shaft is thrown Sweetness all the archer’s own 3 For his strength in sweetness lies— Sweetness, that through gentle eyes (E’en in gazing half withdrawn) Sheds upon the soul a dawn ; Sweetness lingering in a word, Softly uttered, faintly heard,
Yet within the heart to dwell, Treasured deep in many a cell, Long with haunting echoes rife, When the sounds have died to life ;
344
MADANA.
From that subtle arrow’s might, Vain is wisdom, vain is flight !
Vain the charmer’s boasted spell Mightier charms than his to quell 5 Groves of sandal and of balm
Yield no soothing, yield no calm, Though their odorous branches shed Fragrant tears upon thy head, Vainly o’er thine aching brow Droops the incense-breathing bough, Not the cooling * Lotus leaf
Gives to hurt like thine relief;
To thy throbbing temples prest, Bound upon thy burning breast ; Vainly ! still through pulse and vein Glows the dull unceasing pain ; Vainly, vainly ! still the smart Rankles in thy stricken heart. Therefore from the earth a sound, Hushed, and dreamlike, and profound, Gathers—warning whispers rise, Murmurs thick, mysterious sighs ! Therefore all the haunted air Trembles—Madana is there !
* The flower and leaf of the lotus are used by Hindu writers as the type of all grace and beauty, and they suppose the latter to possess a peculiar efficacy in allaying mental disquietude.
Valentines and Songs.
— ——~$>—__—_
LUISA.
© Just like Love is yonder Rose, Heavenly sweetness round it throws, And in the midst of briars it blows,
Just like Love!” —CAMOENS,
I sTOOD at eve upon the turrowed shore
With one, that as the tide its legions filed Unto our feet, stooped down, and o’er and o’er
Wrote on the sand that only name, and smiled. The stern, self-mocking smile joy owns no more To see the waves efface it. ‘‘ Far more slow,” IIe said, ‘‘ are Time’s dull waters in their flow To wear away that name where it is writ
And graven deep, as with a pointed gem Upon the rock; yet vain to cancel it
All else, so must I leave it unto them ! This name, that I in weakness of self-scorn, With idle finger have dishonoured thus, Fair-written once in letters luminous,
36 THE SUMMER FRIEND.
Was shut and clasped within my heart’s great Book For ever, as I deemed! rude hands have torn Those pages from my life, but memory Hath kept them, yet for sadness scarce can brook Within that rifled volume now to look, Or shut its golden clasps without a sigh !
THE SUMMER FRIEND.
TO CG M.
“Tt was not in the winter Our loving lot was cast ; It was the time of roses,— We plucked them as we passed.” —Hcop.
Yrs! ever with the Summer, As flies across the sea
The Spring’s first blithesome comer, My thoughts fly swilt to thee !
For they were wove of sunbeams, The ties that hold us fast ;
It was Summer when I saw thee first, And when I saw thee last !
And short and bright as Summer Our meetings still have been,
(Enough, enough of Winter Hath ever come between !)
id cat ell
a
|
“QUI SAIT AIMER, SAIT MOURIR.” 37
Till with a doubling sweetness Thy smile is now a part
O: Summer, Summer on the earth, And Summer in the heart !
Still come, dear friend, in Summer, That I may keep thee twined
With all its warm and golden gifts, For ever to my mind !
Yet come, dear friend, in Winter, To prove what half my heart
Hath guessed, that it is Summer still, My Summer, where THOU art!
February 13, 1851.
QUI SAIT AIMER, SAIT MOURIR.”
**T BURN my soul away !” So spake the Rose, and smiled; ‘‘ within my cup All day the sunbeams fall in flame, all day They drink my sweetness up!” ‘*T sigh my soul away !” The Lily said; ‘‘all night the moonbeams pale Steal round and round me, whispering in their play An all too tender tale !”
38 THE BROKEN CHAIN.
‘*T give my soul away!” The Violet said; ‘‘ the West wind wanders on, The North wind comes; I know not what they say, And yet my soul is gone!”
~ Oh, Poet, burn away
Thy. fervent soul! fond Lover at the feet Of her thou lovest, sigh ! dear Christian, pray, And let the world be sweet !
THE BROKEN CHAIN.
CAPTIVES, bound in iron bands, Half have learned to love their chain, Slaves have held up ransomed hands, Praying to be slaves again: So doth custom reconcile, Soothing even pain to smile ; So a sadness will remain In the breaking of the chain,
But if chain were wove of flower, Linked and looped to sister free, With a Name and with an Hour, Running down its Rosary, Light as gossamers on green, By their shining only seen 3 Would not something sad remain In the breaking of the chain?
Luan i ie
A VALENTINE.
But if chain were woven shining, Firm as gold and fine as hair, Twisting round the heart and twining, Binding all that centres there In a knot, that like the olden May be cut, yet ne’er unfolden, Would not something sharp remain In the breaking of the chain?
A VALENTINE.
T sap to one I loved, ‘* Why art thou sad?” And he made answer, ‘‘ There hath been a tune Long floating round my brain; morn, night, and noon, With inarticulate cadence making glad, Yet vexing me, because I could not find Words sweet enough to set to it, and bind Its music round about my heart for aye. Till, musing late above an ancient book, The window being open, breezes fleet Lifted the rare old page, and sudden shook A loose leaf, writ with song, unto my feet : In these quaint words methought lies hid the key To all those cadences faint struggling round, Now will I wed them to that melody, And set my life to music by their sound ;
A VALENTINE.
E’en so I practised them upon my lute’ Early and late, yet found they would not suit Together, though so sweet ! and all the strain Broke into discords ! still the strain goes on, But only angers me, its meaning gone ; Nor will I seek to find it words again !
February 13th,
A VALENTINE,
TO Cc. M.
ONE said to me, ‘‘ To-day I go where I perchance may meet thy Friend, What shall I take from thee?” TI answered, ‘* Nay, Nought have I left to send,
‘« For she hath all of mine Already ! only giving of her store, A little miser! through her usury fine To draw on mine the more !
“‘ More fit that she send back What she hath won of me ; but it were vain What once hath been with Her will seek the track, The wonted track, again !”
February 13th.
THE BABES IN THE WOOD. 41
THE BABES IN THE WOOD. A LOVER’S DREAM.
So dreaming sad and true, He deemed he saw two outcast children rove ; Oft had he nursed them fondly, so he knew Their faces—Hope and Love !
And ever farther north, Such heavy doom lay on them through some sin And sorrow not their own, they wandered forth, And none didtake themin. |
* The wild wind round them strewed
Brown whirling leaves, and sighed amid its play, While ever deeper in the wintry wood
Their small feet went astray.
Yet smiling as they sung Their little songs, they held each other’s hand,
And cheered each other onwards in a tongue None else might understand.
They fed each other kind,
For slender food these gentle babes require, With here and there a berry, left behind
On rugged thorn or brier.
THE BABES IN THE WOOD.
. And closer, as the dew Fell dank, unto each other’s side they crept ; And closer, closer to each other drew For warmth, before they slept ;
For by some law, these two Together born, together linked for age, Could only die together ! so they knew What time their hour drew nigh.
And oft amid the chill
They woke, and listened for each other’s breath, And felt a pulse beat feebly ; all was still,
And yet it was not Death !
*€ Still, brother, thou art warm,”
They whispered to each other ; till its fold Relaxing languidly, each little arm
Grew stiff, and both were cold.
No pious Robins there
Brought leaves, but smitten with a late remorse A pitying Spirit of the upper air
Wept kind above each corse ;
And from undying bowers Shook on those Children, buried in the snow, Sweet buds and blossoms of the very flowers They played with long ago!
THE TROUBADOUR SORDEL. 43
IMITATED FROM THE TROUBADOUR SORDEL.
Her words, methinks, were cold and few ; We parted coldly ; yet
Quick-turning after that adieu, Flow kind a glance I met !
A look that was not meant for me, Yet sweeter for surprise,
As if her soul took leave to be One moment in her eyes :
Now tell me, tell me, gentle friends, Oh, which shall I believe,
Her eyes, her eyes that bid me hope, Her words that bid me grieve ?
Her words, methinks, were few and cold ; What matter! Now I trust, Kind eyes, unto your tale half-told, Ye speak because ye must ! Too oft will heavy laws constrain The lips, compelled to bear A message false; too often fain To speak but what they dare ;
Full oft will words, will smiles betray. But tears are always true ; r Looks ever mean the thing they say :
Kind eyes I trust to you !
TO LAG
Her looks were kind—oh, gentle eyes Love trusts you! Still he sends By you bis questions, his replies, He knows yoa for his friends. Oh, gentle, gentle eyes, by Love Se trusted, and su true To Love, ye could not if ye would Deceive, I trust to you!
FOUR SONGS. Set to Music by the Author. 70 7 4, &
Ox, hast thou won my heart, my love ! What gain to thee? what gain ? It plights thee with no golden ring, It decks thee with no chain ; A simple thing, yet it will bring To thee, my love, no pain ; To give thee rest, to make thee blest It hath been ever fain, my love, Tt hath been ever fain !
Qh, have I won thy heart, my love? What gain to me ! what gain !
What brooding calm, what soothing balm, What sweet release from pain !
TO MARIA IVANOVNA. 45
Through sudden rest my spirit guessed What hour to me it came,
And day by day I mark its stay
Through comfort of the same, my love, Through comfort of the same !
TO MARIA IVANOVNA,
Ir dark be she I love, or fair,
I ask not now; I do not seek With her the lily to compare,
To find the rose upon her cheek, Such flowers as these grow everywhere ; With all things soft, and dusk, and rare
I liken her ; the woodbine feels And finds her way with touches light ; She keeps her hold with tendrils slight.
How close, how kind the woodbine steals ! The summer air is warm with bliss All stolen from the woodbine’s kiss,
Sit thou by me when eve has stilled And soothed the day’s quick pulse to rest ; Let none be near us while we build Within each other’s hearts a nest, Of joys that fade, of youth that flies, Of love that stays, of memories
IF IT BE PLEASANT.
That pass not with the passing day : Sit thou by me; be sad, be gay,
So sweet thy smiles, so sweet thy sighs, So soft thy clasp, so kind thine eyes. Be what thou wilt, ’tis ever best ;
Be what thou art, and I am blest !
IF IT BE PLEASANT TO REMEMBER THEE.
IF it be pleasant to remember thee,
What is it, then, what is it to forget thee? But for a space, one moment's space to be
As though I ne’er had loved, or known, or met thee, My soaring soul on some high quest to send,
On some stern task to bind my strength’s endeavour, Then, like the bird, with rapid wing descend
Upon the nest that is my own for ever.
By some sweet song, by some dear dream to be
Upon my lonely way entranced, o’ertaken ; Awhile, awhile to cease to think of thee,
Then in the sweetness of thy soul to waken ! Sweet dream, with day pass not away,
As once in hours when all my joys were fleeter ; Dear haunting lay, I bid thee stay,
And in my heart for evermore grow sweeter.
I SPAN BESIDE OUR CABIN DOOR. 47
If still to bear thee in my mind be sweet, What is it then, what is it then to lose thee ? In play with life to let the moments cheat My steadfast heart that flies again to choose thec? Afar, I see thee lift thy soul in prayer, I see thee in thy quiet ways abiding ; Oh, sweet to me hath grown the common air, To me, for whom the Rose of life is hiding !
I SPAN BESIDE OUR CABIN DOOR. (Adapted from an ancient Irish Song.)
I spAN beside our cabin door, I watched him slowly cross the moor,
I smiled as I will smile no more, Eskadil, mavourneen slawn !
How many an evening as I sat,
With father he would come to chat,
He came for this, he came for that Eskadil, mavourneen slawn !
I watched him o’er the moor so wide, He took the path that turned aside ;
I went within the house and cried, Eskadil, mavourneen slawn }
A SONG.
T saw him pass our cabin door ;
The world is wide, he came no more ;
I wept as I will weep no more, Eskadil, mavourneen slawn!
I drew my wheel beside the fire,
I span as if I span for hire ;
My father talked, and did not tire, Eskadil, mavourneen slawn !
My heart is weary and my head,
And all is done, and all is said,
And yet it is not time for bed, Eskadil, mavourneen slawn !
A SONG.
(Set to Music by Mrs. Tom Taylor.)
Kiss me before I sleep, Oh gentle child, oh loving child ! that so My spirit, ere it sinks within the wide Dim world of shrouded dreams, unsatisfied, And seeking ever, unto Thine may grow, Nor stir, nor move, nor wander to and fro ; Kiss me before I sleep !
AMID CHANGE, UNCHANGING. 49
Kiss me before I wake, Oh loving child, oh child beloved, that so The sweetness of thy soul, thy smile, thine eyes, May meet my spirit on its way to take The chill from off this life of ours, and make A world more kind and warm wherein to rise ; Kiss me before I wake !
AMID CHANGE, UNCHANGING.
THE Poet singeth like the bird that sitteth by the rose, While dews are chill, and on the hill the first faiut sunbeam glows ; While through the buds’ thick-folded green the first red- rose streak shows, Sing Poet, sing of Hope and Spring, Still sing beside thy rose !
The Poet singeth like the bird that sitteth by the rose, While on the golden summer noon her golden heart o’erflows ; And now she waxeth red, now pale, yet ever is the rose, Sing, Poet, sooth of love and youth, Still sing beside thy rose ! 545
ONE FLOWER.
The Poet singeth like the bird that sttteth by the rom, Whea from the drooping Stalk her brief sweet glory:
earthward goes, ; a fedeth from the
8 Soak, Sinn meen Stil sing beside thy rose!
ONE FLOWER.
* FAREWELL, my flowers,” Isa, The sweet Rose as I passed . Blushed to its core, ts st Warm tear the Lily shed, The Violet hid its head Among its leaves, and sighed, “*Qh thou, my flower, my pride, Sweet Summer's sweetest bride, The rest are fair, but dear Art thou, hast thou ne tear? What givest thon?” “ The whale,” The glowing Pink replied, ** Blush, tear, and smile, and sigh one Tn giving thee my soal,” “The summer, wanderiag by, Hath breathed in thee her sigh,
A SCHERZO.
Hath wooed thee from the South, With kisses of her mouth; Hath wooed thee from the West, Hath blest thee with the best Warm blessings of the sun ; And yet a heavy dower Is thine, my joy, my flower, Thy soul hath burst its sheath, Oh, is it love or death, Sweet flower, that thou hast won? Oh, is it love or death That breathes from this thy breath, That kindles in thine eye?” Then won I for reply,  T have made sweet mine hour ; As dies the flower, I die, I lived as lives the flower.”
A SCHERZO. (A Shy Person’s Wishes.)
WirH the wasp at the innermost heart of a peach, On a sunny wall out of tip-toe reach,
With the trout in the darkest summer pool,
With the fern-seed clinging behind its cool Smooth frond, in the chink of an aged tree,
RAPTURE.
In the woodbine’s horn with the drunken bee,
With the mouse in its nest in a furrow old,
With the chrysalis wrapt in its gauzy fold ;
With things that are hidden, and safe, and bold,
With things that are timid, and shy, and free,
Wishing to be ;
With the nut in its shell, with the seed in its pod, ~
With the corn as it sprouts in the kindly clod,
Far down where the secret of beauty shows ,
In the bulb of the tulip, before it blows ;
With things that are rooted, and firm, and deep,
Quiet to lie, and dreamless to sleep ;
With things that are chainless, and tameless, and proud,
With the fire in the jagged thunder-cloud,
With the wind in its sleep, with the wind in its waking,
With the drops that go to the rainbow’s making,
Wishing to be with the light leaves shaking,
Or stones on some desolate highway breaking ;
Far up on the hills, where no foot surprises
The dew as it falls, or the dust as it rises ;
To be couched with the beast in its torrid lair,
Or drifting on ice with the polar bear,
With the weaver at work at his quiet loom ;
Anywhere, anywhere, out of this room }
RAPTURE.
RAPTURE.
LicHurT at its full of the harvest moon,
Heart of the rose in the heart of June,
Song of the bird when its song takes wing,
Breath of the blossomed furze in spring,
Kiss of the angel that comes when dreams
Are more sweet than all sweetness that is or seems,
Fire in the cloud of the opal burning,
Fall of a footstep at eve returning,
Clasp of a hand that thrills to the soul,
Bliss of a spirit that wins its goal }
ASCENDING.
Sonnets,
ASCENDING.
THEY who from mountain peaks have gazed upon The wide illimitable heavens, have said, That still receding as they climbed, outspread, The blue vault deepens over them, and one By one drawn farther back, each starry sun Shoots down a feebler splendour overhead. So, Saviour ! as our mounting spirits, led Along faith’s living way to Thee, have won A nearer access, up the difficult track Still pressing, on that rarer atmosphere, When low beneath us flits the cloudy rack, We see Thee drawn within a widening sphere Of glory, from us farther, farther back,— Yet is it then because we are more ear.
LIFE TAPESTRY.
LIFE TAPESTRY,
Too long have I, methought, with tearful eye, Pored o’er this tangled work of mine, and mused Above each stitch awry, and thread confused ;
Now will I think on what in years gone by
I heard of them that weave rare tapestry
At Royal looms, and how they constant use
To work on the rough side, and still peruse
The pictured pattern set above them high :
So will I set My Cory high above,
And gaze, and gaze till on my spirit grows
Its gracious impress ; till some line of love
Transferred upon my canvas, faintly glows ;
Nor look too much on warp or woof, provide
He whom I work for sees their fairer side !
56 ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.
TO ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING. IN 1851.
I LosE myself within thy mind—from room To goodly room thou leadest me, and still Dost show me of thy glory more, until
My soul, like Sheba’s Queen, faints, overcome,
And all my spirit dies within me, numb, Sucked in by thine, a larger star, at will ; And hasting like thy bee, my hive to fill,
I ‘‘swoon for very joy” amid thy bloom ;
Till—not like that poor bird (as poets feign) That tried against the Lutanist’s her skill, Crowding her thick precipitate notes, until
Her weak heart break above the contest vain— Did not thy strength a nobler thought instil,
I feel as if I ne’er could sing again |
ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING. 57
TO ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING, IN 1861.
I PRAISED thee not while living ; what to thee Was praise of mine? I mourned thee not when dead ; TI only loved thee,—love thee ! oh thou fled Fair spirit, free at last where all are free, I only love thee, bless thee, that to me For ever thou hast made the rose more red, More sweet each word by olden singers said In sadness, or by children in their glee ; Once, only once in life I heard thee speak, Once, only once I kissed thee on the cheek, And met thy kiss and blessing ; scarce I knew Thy smile, I only loved thee, only grew, Through wealth, through strength of thine, less poor, less weak ; Oh, what hath death with souls like thine to do?
58 A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM. TO D. E. lL.
Too full our hearts of sorrowful delight, Of parting converse, that one night, I ween, For dream of Midsummer or Fairies’ Queen; As thou sat’st near me, half in shade, half light, The moonbeams touched thy forehead cold and white, And Thou didst speak in moonlight ! so serene And soothing were thy words, and all thy mien, Transparent as thy soul ! when swift and bright (So did our talk the short-lived night beguile) The sun broke in to bid us make an end With his beginning ! Since that hour, dear friend, I never think on Thee, so calm the while Yet cheerful, but the sweetness seems to blend Of moonlight and of sunlight in thy smile!
RESERVE.
Now would I learn thee like some noble task That payeth well for labour ; I would find Thy soul’s true Dominant, and thus unwind
Its deeper, rarer harmonies, that ask
Interpreting ; for like a gracious mask Is thy calm, quiet bearing ; far behind Thy spirit sits and smiles in sunshine kind,
And fain within that fulness mine would bask. Set if thou wilt this bar betwixt thy tide Of feeling and the world that might misknow Its strength ; use ever with the crowd this pride, *¢ Thus far, and yet no farther shall ye go;” But not w7th me, dear friend, whose heart stands wide To drink in all thy Being’s overflow.
HOPE.
WHEN I do think on thee, sweet Hope, and how Thou followest on our steps, a coaxing child, Oft chidden hence, yet quickly reconciled,
Still turning on us a glad, beaming brow,
And red, ripe lips for kisses: even now Thou mindest me of Him, the Ruler mild, Who led God’s chosen people through the wild,
And bore with wayward murmurers, meek as thou
That bringest waters from the Rock, with bread Of angels strewing Earth for us! like Him Thy force abates not, nor thine eye grows dim ;
But still with milk and honey-droppings fed,
Thou leadest to the Promised Country fair, Though thou, like Moses, mayst not enter ¢here !
TO A FRIEND.
TO A FRIEND.
OH, call me but thy Friend !
Seek thou no other word when thou wouldst pour Thy soul in mine ; for this unto the core
Of Love doth pierce, and in it ey ened All secrets of its lore !
Yet thou dost move within A Tropic sphere of soul, and all too weak For thy full-hearted utterance ; worn too thin By daily usage seem the words we speak, Too oft misprizing them ; so thou dost hold This current coin of ours for base, and choose From thine own wealth new moulds, wherein to fuse Thy virgin, unsunned gold ! So let thy choice be free ! Our spirits thus by divers laws are bound, One may not judge the other ; but from me Seek thou no other token ! for its sound Hath been to me for music ; bringing round Kind eyes that looked on me, kind hands I found, Outstretched to help me over pathways drear ; And some of these are far, and some are near, And some are in the Heavens, but all are dear In God, who gave them to me; so this ‘‘ Friend”
REST.
Is like a full-stringed chord, that still doth seem Within its sound to gather up and blend
All, all that life in other lives that takes
Away Life’s curse of barrenness, and makes
Our Being’s sweet and often-troubled dream !
I never used it lightly ; unto me A sacredness hung round it; for a sign T held it of our common words that be Initial letters of a speech divine : Oh, take this coin, too oft to worthless ends Profaned, and see upon its circlet shine One Image fair, one Legend never dim ; And whose but Czesar’s? for this word by Him Was used at parting, ‘I have called you Arends.”
REST.
Tuis life hath hours that hold
The soul above itself, as at a show A child, upon a loving arm and bold
Uplifted safe, upon the crowd below
Smiles down serene,—I speak to them that know This thing whereof I speak, that none can guess And none can paint, —what marks hath Blessedness ? What characters whereby it may be told? Such hours with things that never can grow old
OLD LETIERS. 63
Are shrined. - One eve, ’mid autumns far away, I walked alone beside a river; grey And pale was earth, the heavens were grey and pale, As if the dying year and dying day Sobbed out their lives together, wreaths of mist Stole down the hills to shroud them while they kissed Each other sadly ; yet behind this veil Of drearness and decay my soul did build, To music of its own, a temple filled With worshippers beloved that hither drew In silence; then I thirsted not to hear The voice of any friend, nor wished for dear Companion’s hand firm clasped in mine; I knew, Had such been with me, they had been less near.
OLD LETTERS.
WITHIN an ancient hall,
Where oft I love to wander, once I found
An antique casket, that without a sound Flew open quick, and as a Rose will fall To pieces at a touch when overblown, So was the floor around me thickly strown
With yellow leaves, the letters of the Dead: Oh, hands that wrote these words! oh, loving eyes That brightened over them ! oh, hearts whose prize And treasure once were these, by Time made Heir To this your sometime wealth, with pious care
OLD LETTERS.
I gather in my hoards ; for this is dust
Of human hearts that now I hold in trust,
And while I muse above it, spirits flown
Come back and commune with me, till the fled
Pale ink reveals two names that now have grown
Familiar to my soul, as I had known
And pitied them in youth; in parley soft
I win their secrets forth from them, and oft
Make question of their Past! Did Love find rest
And fold its wing where it had made its nest
So warm and deep, or were these of the strong
And patient souls, condemned, though wedded long,
To serve for the other duteously, and wait
Upon a harsher Laban,—Life, that proves
With grievous, stern delays each heart that loves?
O gentle spirits, all your lives on high
Are written fair, but mortal history
Is traced upon the sand that may not keep
The dint of wave, so quick the dash and leap That follows on—a picture on the wall—
A name upon the stone—a leaf whose green
Less quickly fades, because it once hath been Within the Dove’s soft beak, and this is all.
lL (Written in Cypher.)
I write to thee in cypher, even so Doth not the heart write ever? being proud,
OLD LETTERS. 65
Tt careth not to boast its wealth, nor show Where lie its precious things by speaking loud. And here, upon my page an uncouth sign Would say, “I love thee;” farther down this mark Shows plain, ‘‘ for ever,” yet the sense is dark To every eye that looks on it but thine. So is it ever with my heart, thine ear Can catch each broken whisper it hath used ; So even with my life, thou makest clear Its meaning, ofttimes to myself confused ; _ The souls that use one mother-tongue are free To mould their rapid speech, but when from thee I turn to others, straight I have to choose My words, as one who in a foreign dress Must clothe his thought, speak slow in fear to etr, Interpreting himself ;
We do but guess At one another darkly, ’mid the stir That thickens round us ; in this life of ours We are like players, knowing not the powers Nor compass of the instruments we vex, And by our rash, unskilful touch perplex To straining discord, needing still the key To seek, and all our being heedfully To tune to one another’s :
Ours were set Together at the first ; each hand could move ~ 546
66 OLD LETTERS.
Like a skilled master’s, knowing well each fret And chord of the sweet viol he doth love, All up and down each other’s soul, and yet Call forth. new concords,—now with softer kiss I move o’er other souls in fear to miss Their latent charm ; these too, if better known Were worthier prizing ; Love’s great charity Hath taught this lesson, as beside her knee I stand, and child-like con it o’er and o’er, ‘* Through loving one so much love all the more.”
Il.
How much, dear friend, how much Wouldst thou from me? Oh, nothing but the whole I give or take: what good is in the touch Of hands that for awhile the other fold, Of eyes that read in each Life’s unexpressed Deep hint of ecstasy to each confessed, Of hearts that for awhile are warm and blest Within the other, yet into the cold Must pass again, while fading from the West. Pale gleams withdraw, and grieving winds molest ? Content, content ! within a quiet room All warm and lit we meet, the outward gloom Is like a folding arm about us pressed ; A space to love in, and a space to pray We find ; content, content ! until the Day Go down we quit not our beloved rest.
—
OLD LETTERS. Il.
Oft have I bent my gaze Adown our Life’s steep edge with eyeballs dim And thirsting soul, aweary of the day’s Hot parching dust and glare ; this well is deep, Too seldom rise the waters to its brim, And I had nought to draw with ! oft in sleep I felt them touch my very lips, and flow All o’er my forehead and my hands, but, lo I waked and thirsted ; looking down, I knew Each pebble lying at the base, that drew A glimmer from the sunbeam ; round the rim I knew each flower, each forkéd fern that through The stone did thrust its tongue, each moss that grew Far down its cool and slippery sides—I knew All but the water’s freshness.
Now I yearn No more in ee no longer need I stoop So wistful o’er the well, for like an urn Is thy pure soul to me, wherein I scoop The waters as I list, and still return.
Iv.
We broke no piece of gold, We took no pledge of lock nor picture slid Within the breast; our faith was not so cold That it should ask for any sign! We date
OLD LETTERS.
Our marriage from our meeting day, and hold These spousals of the soul inviolate As they are secret ; for no friends were bid
To grace our banquet, yet a guest Divine Was there, who from that hour did consecrate Life’s water, turning it for us to wine.
Vv.
Stern voices say, ‘* Too much Thou givest unto one thy soul in trust ; To frame such covenants with things of dust Is but idolatry, that to decay Doth quickly tend.” I answer not to such, But turning from them proudly, I appeal Unto my equals, none but those that feel Shall be my judges in this question; nay ! 1 will not unto these my cause unseal, But bear it to a Court where I shall find A yet more patient hearing ; far more kind The Father than the Brethren! He who made - The heart doth know its need, but what are we, And whence have we our wisdom, unafraid With hands unskilled to vex a che We cannot disentangle?
Yet I speak Too harshly in this matter, silence best Becometh happy spirits ; hearts at rest s— O Love, thy gentleness hath made me meek !
OLD LETTERS.
vi.
Upon thy lips this name
Of mine so softly taken, first became That which it is in very deed, the name Most Christian and most kind, by which I claim A wide inheritance ;—and I have borne This name so long, and only yester morn Have learned its sweetness ! so doth life, our field Redeemed for us, but slowly, slowly yield The treasure hid within it ! all our less
Would grow to more, and this our Earth to Heaven, Might we but pierce unto the blessedness That lies so near us, might we but possess
The things that are our own, as they were given !
VII.
I turn from things behind ;
They lose their savour ! now that on the core
Of Life content I feed, I fling the rind, That once locked fair, aside for evermore, For I have pierced beneath it. Since my eyes Have looked upon thy face, to all things wise,
And pure, and noble they have clearer grown ; But careless are they to the vanities
That once could hold them chained. I stood alone To watch the long procession that yestreen
Moved through our city stately to the flow Of martial music ; then I saw thee lean
From out a balcony, and all the show
OLD LETTERS.
Went by unmarked of me, as we had been Alone beside the river winding slow ;— So doth this world’s fair Pageant pass me by, I see but thee ! yet do not therefore grow Unmindful of its goodly company : I tracked those glittering ranks until they stayed Within the square, and passing through the door Of the great Minster, took within its shade The sunshine after them ; like One that prayed In silence, seemed that multitude, before So bright and jubilant, now only made The stiller for its vastness, as the sea Doth soothe the sense with wide monotony Of quiet waves unstirred. I saw thee kneel Afar ; the organ, as it were the Soul Of many human souls, that did reveal Their secrets, sighed, as on its stormy roll It gathered them; my silent spirit drew More close to those who prayed with me; I knew That each of these still faces, where I see No charm to bid me look again, doth make The sunshine of some eye, and for its.sake The heavens and earth look fairer: each that here Doth kneel, is loved of some, or hath been dear, The treasure of some heart beneath the sod. Oh, we are held unto the other near When each is dear to one—and all to God}
=
SILENCE.
SILENCE.
I TURN unto the Past _ When I have need of comfort ; I am vowed To dear remembrances : most like some proud, Poor noble, who, on evil fortunes cast, Has saved his pictures from the wreck, I muse Mid these that I have gathered, till I lose The drearness of the Present !
On the hill That noon in summer found us ; far below
We heard the river in a slumbrous flow
Chide o’er its pebbles, slow and yet more slow ;
Beneath our feet the very grasses slept
Signed by the sliding sunbeam as it crept
From blade to blade, slow stealing with a still
Admonitory gesture ; now a thrill
Ran lightly through the wood, but ere to sound
The shiver grew upon the hush profound,
It died encalmed ; methought a Spirit’s sigh
Had then been audible, but none came by
-To trouble us, and we were silent, fed
With golden musings by our friend that read
From out thy chosen Poet ; in a hall
Of mute expectancy we stood, where all
That listened with us held their breath unstirred ; When suddenly the reader’s voice let fall
72 TO A LONG-PARTED FRIEND,
Its flow of music ; sweet as was the song
He paused in, conquered by a spell more strong We asked him not its cadence to recall.
It seemed as if a Thought of God did fill
. His World, that drawn unto the Father's breast, ‘ Lay hushed with all its children. This was Rest,
And this the soul’s-true Sabbath, deep and still. —~ Then marvelled I no longer that a space
Is found in Heaven for Silence; so to me
That hour made known its true sufficiency Revealed not oft below, because its place
Is with the Blessed! Speech is but a part
Of Life’s deep poverty, whereof the heart
Is conscious, striving in its vague unrest
To fill its void ; but when the measure pressed And running over, to its clasp is given,
It seeketh nothing more, and Earth is blest With Silence—even such as in Heaven !
TO A LONG-PARTED FRIEND.
“Tat I never made use of your stay here to unite the present with departed days is one of the things—there are not a few of them—for which I can never be consoled; it was as though a spell lay upon me; I felt it would be enough to speak one word, but that word I could not unclose my lips to speak. The Past could not rise again from its grave, and I felt as though it would have shaken the foundations of that Present,
ZO A LONG-PARTED FRIEND. 73
which it is now my duty to preserve and develop. My mind is like a nation that has passed through a revolution, and must proceed in a new order, the old order being irrevocably destroyed. . . . Yet how was it with me after you had gone?” —Niebuhr to Count Adam Moltke.
I,
As by a camp-fire in the wilderness Two hunters meet, that o’er the Prairie long Have roamed on distant tracts companionless ; So to this city, drifted by the stress That draws the nations hither—in the throng We stood together in this mortal press A moment face to face ; thou didst not guess At mine, and I—forgive me then this wrong — By favour of the light that fitful fell Did let thee pass unchallenged; so that look Thine olden look, so long unseen, so well Remembered, troubled me; thine aspect shook The strong foundations of my soul, I knew It was the Past within its grave that drew A long, deep, sighing breath, and like a pent Voleanic force, this smouldering element Would kindle at thy glance ; I felt a stir Among the ashes of a sepulchre Long sealed, long smooth with grass, with flower o’ergrown, A word from thee, and bursting through the stone The Dead had risen up! before one shrine We knelt together ; though the fires are cold We lighted there, I deem that still we hold
74
TO A LONG-PARTED FRIEND.
A mournful faith unto this worship old
And lovely, counting it for half Divine.
Now is that altar broken, and a sign
From Heaven hath warned us hence—we may not
bring
The living Past again, we can but wring
Its secrets from its grasp, disquieting,
Like one of old, with awful charm its sleep ;
Oh, leave its rest unbroken, I assign
A day far hence to meet thee—now thine eye
Would vex me with its kindness, silently
Would turn where mine is turning; even yet, I am as one that wistful o’er a wave
Stoops down, intent, and sees beneath it lie
The fragments of a wreck, that glistering wet Tempt down the eager outstretched hand; I crave
A little longer pause, for soon or late
Come all things to a calm ;—I do but wait.
I turned, and thou wert gone ; O then my heart rose sudden up and passed A hasty judgment ; saying, I had cast A Life within that moment from me, more Than life would give again, and chiding sore Like one defrauded of its right, it took Its arrows tipped with olden love, a look,
A word remembered barbs them—oh, my friend, I turn to thee for solace ;—draw this glaive Deep plunged unto the hilt from out my breast !
Thy hand it was unwittingly that drave
4
oe ee
TO A LONG-PARTED FRIEND.
It home, and none beside can give it rest ; Speak comfort to my soul, oh reconcile My spirit with itself! upon thy track My heart runs after thee; yes, mile by mile, It follows thee, it does not call thee back !
Il.
I said, I do assign A day far hence to speak with thee ; if late Or soon it fall, I know not, for its date Rests not with me, but One above, who draws Our ruins to an order through the fine And ceaseless working of His kindly laws ; For we are hasty builders incomplete ; Our Master follows after, far more slow And far more sure than we, for frost and heat, And winds that breathe, and waters in their flow Work with Him silently ; we stand too near The part as yet to look upon the whole ; That thing which shall be doth not yet appear ; It is not with the eye but with the soul _ That we must view God’s work ;
Of when and where We ask not wisely ; if our meeting were Delayed indeed, until no more to part We meet at last within a Mansion fair, Where there are many such, would this impart A sadness to thy spirit ? heart with heart
SEORSUM. May commune safely when the Master’s art Hath tuned His perfect instrument ! below We learn not half its sweetness ; not for men Its broken strings are joined ; it keeps its flow Of music for the Land where none again May wring its chords ; ,
Yet even here, I know,
Are seasons calm and glad that antedate The coming in of happier cycles, where
The human soul, too long left desolate, Shall reckon up its Sabbaths, and repair
Its pleasant things laid waste ; upon that Rest Together we shall enter ! we shall share
Its joy above, below,—as God deems bes! +
SEORSUM.
¥ “The Heartis a Clock that gives warning before its Hour strikes.”
BeForE they met they loved ; Their souls fore-felt each other: passing through This life’s dim treasure-caverns, on them grew A whisper, clearer as they onwards moved ; «There is a Sesame that opens to
SEORSUM.
Yet richer chambers,” so like Him who drew
The perfect circle of our globe, and proved, That waiting for him on its margin (where He knew not yet), a World in summer air
And muffling leaves and greenest quiet slept Until he came to wake it, they were ’ware Of this bright realm, this Virgin of the Sun, This bride unsought, unwooed, that should be won, But of the luxury, the wealth it kept In store, its gorgeous wilds, its solitude Instinct with life, its tropic shade and glow Alternating, they knew not, nor could know. Yet, as they neared that shore, the deep was strown With drifts of fragrant things, and seawards blown,
Strange birds with sunshine warm upon them clung About their masts, while evermore, like tales So vague and sweet that spoken language fails To catch their music meaning, gentlest gales
Curled up the waves before their prow, and sung And whistled clear within their fluttering sails
To lure them to the country whence they sprung.
So when they met they loved ; They took not counsel of the Eye or Ear ; These are but erring vassals, and the clear
_Soul-region in its rarer atmosphere
Needs not their failing witness. This was June, The noon of Life, the heart was at its noon ; A noon by Summer lulled to sleep, and hid
SEORSUM.
Beneath its leaves, half stirring to a tune Self-sung in happy dreams; while sunshine slid Adown the hill’s steep side, and overtook And meshed within its golden net, each nook ; O’ershadowed with dark growths, and filled each cleft _ And thunder-splintered chasm storms had left ; ' When these two mounted on a blissful tide, Sailed each-within the other’s soul—no oar Flashed light along their way, no canvas wide’ Impelled them ; but a steadfast current bore Them o’er the level champaign, till they neared A Palace, where, through open gate and door, They gazed together on the land that lay Before them, glittering peak and gleaming bay, As on a country known to them before, Though unbeheld: and even as a King Upon his crowning day new robes will fling On all around him, so each common thing Stood forth in light apparelléd, and took Its hue and semblance even from the look They cast upon it; yet, thus venturing, I speak not wisely,—nay, ¢hese only took Their pristine hues—their colour that forsook And fled, when Man with Death upon his track Went woeful forth from Eden’s gate, came back When Eden’s tongue was spoken ! and the smile That Nature ’neath her Mother’s brow of care Hides in her loving eyes, dawned bland and fair To see her children’s gladness! So the while They sat beneath one crown, upon one throne,
SEORSUM.
And wrapped within the purple, o’er their own Stretched forth the sceptre ; never dial flung
Its warning shadow, never iron tongue
Knelled forth the busy hours; they took no heed Of Time or of his flight, nor had they need :
For they together with the world were young, And ever would be! Life in very deed
Held back for them no Future, and the Past Lay calm before them in a mirror glassed
To feed sweet fancies, showing how it led
To this bright zow; so all things ministered And wrought their bidding ; here they deemed it well Like her who said, ‘* I sit a Queen,” to dwell
In joy for evermore ; but change befell.
They parted but they loved ;
How could ¢hese part ? what sword could be in life To sever hearts like these? Methinks its strife Should but have proved the furnace in whose glow The fiery bars of metal fuse, and grow More close together welded; even so, But in this world of ours the heart, though strong And armed and watchful, never holdeth long
Its own in peace; for sure as to the moon The ocean rises, here a steadfast law Doth hold or rend asunder hearts that draw
Together, restless till they meet, then soon Divided, and for ever; it would seem That God hath made these loving hearts and bold, For Him and for His world that lies a-cold
SEORSUM.
For lack of generous fuel, not to fold
Their warmth within each other, but to stream Afar and wide, with broader, purer gleam,
How this may be I know not, but I know
That never more within one hearth-light’s glow These sat together ; never gazing through
One lattice, watched the sky ; but when they knew Their paths were severed, rising, on their way Went forth before the breaking of the day,
And parted on Life’s cross-road,—not before
Each lifted up a voice of weeping sore,
And blessed the other’s journey !_ So they moved (In tents abiding) through new lands that bore
No likeness to the country where of yore
They dwelt together: other scenes and looks Grew round them ; other hearts became the books They read and mused in ; other trials proved, And other blessings gladdened, yet they loved.
They parted, yet they love ; And shall these spirits in an air serene, Where nought can shadow, nought can come between Meet once again, and to the other grow More close and sure than could have been below ? Or will that State, that blissful Commonweal, Leave, each of all possessing, room to feel
For other bliss than merges in the flow
Of Love’s great ocean, whence these drops did steal To Earth of old, and wandered to and fro? —I know not of this now, but I shall know.
THE LESSON.
TO MY FRIENDS AT ——. A
Tus love of ours hath been Awhile mislaid, it never could be lost ; I did not fear for it, yet somewhat crossed My spirit mournfully, as o’er the grass The little cloudlets darken as they pass. It was a shadow from without that swept The sunshine off our spirits, yet I wept, So much I missed that sunshine! Sad and strange It seemed to me that any chill should creep Across our Love ; yet patient o’er its sleep I watched and warmed it safe through every change, Until it wakened smiling! All things came As they had been of old, yet not the same, For nought returns again ! but far more sure, More deep our trust, more fitted to endure Life’s changeful skies ; we mourn not for that fled First April bloom ; we count not up the cost Of that sweet blossom on the breezes sped,— The ripened fruit need fear no after-frost !
THE LESSON.
I sarp, This task is keen—
But even while I spake, Thou, Love Divine, Didst stand behind, and gently over-lean My drooping form, and, oh! what task had been
A FAREWELL TO YOUTH.
Too stern for feebleness with help of Thine? Spell Thou this lesson with me line by line, The sense is rigid, but the voice is dear ; Guide Thou my hand within that hand of Thine— Thy wounded hand ! until its tremblings take Strength from Thy touch, and even for Thy sake Trace out each character in outline clear.
A FAREWELL TO YOUTH. A Midsummer Day’s Dream.
Tuou fair and hurrying guest ! O Youth, in tears half-drowned, And half with roses crowned ! Thou sweetness unpossessed ! I pine not for the sound Of thy swift wings, thy sighs, Thy whispers, nor thine eyes Soft, silent language seek, that sent around So many a glance, caressing and caressed ; Nor grieve I for thy song, Glad, sad, and sweet, so long Remembered, though its cadence broke so soon : A fond farewell, O Youth, I take of thee! thy truth Was sweet, and e’en thy falsehood scarce beguiled; For thou, thyself a child,
A FAREWELL TO YOUTH. 83
Believing, hoping, loving, didst receive And give with equal hand, and sweetly keep And sweetly break thy troth, and wake and sleep In peace through every change, unchilled, ungrieved. Thy Waking and thy Dream So sweet, so close did seem, That thou wert blest, deceiving or deceived.
And thou wouldst not remain To hear reproachings vain ; A print upon the grass, a line between The rustling boughs of sudden-parted green, And thou wert gone for ever! Truly fled? I know not yet ! methinks within my heart Thou hidest still thy bright unsheltered head, And dost remain, for evermore a part Of all things fair, and from the violet’s eye Thy smile looks up, thy breath goes wandering by In many a wild, warm, briery-scented sigh, Linked with all lovely things that change and cannot die !
So come and go, dear youth, I will not chide with thee ! for now the mist Hath rolled all up the glittering hills sun-kissed, And broad around me stretch the woods, the plains ; And still the landscape widens, still the sky Bends over all with broad, unwinking eye,
84 A FAREWELL TO YOUTH.
Above an equal blue, an equal green
Below, and nought is hidden ! all is seen And all is known! But now methinks the lanes Grow white and dusty, and no flower remains
With brimming cup, no descant wild and shrill
Of all that morn and eve were wont to thrill
My listening ear ; the reapers work in bands,
But all is silent : where are now the hands
That sought for mine, the dances light and free?
The tales that seemed beginning still to be,
And pausing woke again, and still were sweet to me?
But now upon the clear Calm summer air, I hear, Far on the silence borne, a distant strain ; A tune that gives and takes, That hushes while it wakes, That loosens while it binds a gentle chain; So sweetly on the sense It falls, I ask not whence It comes, nor know I whither goes that tune More soft than summer dews— Most like a hand that wooes An arrow forth—and while I listen, seems Far off and faint, like music heard in dreams, To change and fade each dim, half-shrouded pain ; Each fond regret, each care Ts fled ;—oh, tell me where, ; Dear Shepherd, Thou dost feed Thy flocks at noon ?
THE WHITE CRUSADE.
Oh, tell me in what still Fair meadows at Thy will Thou leadest them? by what glad streamlet’s flow? Perchance upon the rocks Thou sittest now, Thy flocks With reedy murmurs soothing, while the low Soft summer winds reply ; or by the well Thou sittest now, perchance, as once befell When Thou wert wearied with the noontide glare Oh, long-belovéd, let me’ find Thee ¢here, And there with Thee abide; the shadows soon Will fall and darken o’er these pathways wide ; Oh, let me be no more as one aside That turns unwilling ! by Thy tents I dwell, Thy dear companions know me! Shepherd, tell Where dost Thou make Thy flocks to rest at noon? :
THE WHITE CRUSADE—ITALY 1860,
Long, long the foot of pride
Trode down the human heart from hour to hour With iron heel, and ever on the side
Of tyrants there was power ;
Till, seventy summers back,
A cry went up by night to God for food ; A raven’s cry, a lion’s, on the track
Of rapine and of blood ;
86 THE WHITE CRUSADE,
And Freedom at the sound Stirred where she lay within her grave for dead, And rose up from the earth, and gazed around Like one disquieted.
As one that hath been dead Four days, she rose up from her grave ; she woke Fast bound with grave-clothes, hands, and feet, and head ; Yet when she rose she spoke :
Like Lazarus from the tomb She rose, and stood upright ; like him a while She walked with men, —yet on her cheek no bloom And on her lip no smile.
As one that sleeping shakes Beneath a ghastly slumber-coil, will seem To wake at dead of night, yet only wakes Into a fearful dream ;
She woke into a world Of wreck and ruin; winds and waves that roared, Men’s hearts that failed, and goodliest treasures hurled To monsters overboard,
They called her, but she shrank ; She stretched her hands to bless, and lo! a stain Of blood upon each palm! She groaned, and sank Into her grave again.
THE WHITE CRUSADE.
Yet ’mid the tumult fierce That gathered as she fell, was faintly heard From fainting lips—a blessing or a curse— And yet a treasured word ;—
And still from land to land
The whisper grew, and still the murmur sped By look, by sign, by pressure of the hand,
** The maiden is not dead.”
Till every heart that knew A stronger beat, that shook a looser chain, Caught up the word, until its meaning grew From hour to hour more plain.
And some would watch for hours Beside her tomb, until they seemed to hear, Beneath the winter’s ice, the summer’s flowers, A breathing low and clear.
The nations spake: ‘* But who Shall roll away this heavy stone, by day And night close sealed and watched?” They came, and lo! The stone was rolled away !
And clothed in raiment white From head to feet, was seated on the stone A Shining Form, that earth had given to light Without a travail-groan.
THE CLEFT.
No blood on brow or palm, Or on her robe, but in her steadfast eye, And on her lips, a summons clear and cain: : “* Who loves, knows how to die.”
The swords of friends and foes
Are crossed before her breast ; her breast is bare, And bare her feet; and on the way she goes
Lies the red burning share.
She wakes, perchance to show Of wounds received in houses of her friends,—to weep, Like Rachel, o’er her sons brought forth in woe, Yet never more to sleep !
THE CLEFT. 1861.
“ Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.”
** Oh, throw away the worser part of it, And live the purer with the other half.”
THE skies have voices soft And loud, they mutter oft, Dissolve and break in tears of joy and wonder ;
GUE CLEP f, 89
More fierce the shock, the din More harsh, when from within Earth shakes, self torn, and riven with secret thunder ;
And now a ghastly cleft Yawns wide from right to left, And sucks and draws the Western World within it ; What voice, what arm uplift This dire encroaching rift May close with sovereign spell? and how begin it ?
In such a gulf of old The Roman flung, not gold, But Youth’s heroic hope and Strength’s endeavour ; Yet this one of the best Hath ta’en, and for the rest Still craves, unclosed, insatiate, widening ever.
Say, will ye smoothe it over, And bid the maid and lover Dance here away their light-linked hours of leisure. Yea, smoothe it over, sow it With grass and flowers; below it Are sounds that mingle strangely with the measure.
Or leaning o’er its edges, Now will ye barter pledges With clasping hands, and talk of hearts combining, Or plant the rootless tree Within it—Liserry, Hung round with garlands and with ribbons shining?
THE CLEFT.
The jagged cleft from side To side yawns yet more wide ; And Echo from within, your words recalling, Hath sent from out the ground The yet more hollow sound Of loosened earth upon a coffin falling.
Then let-it yawn to sever The Bond and Free for ever : Then Falsehood’s hectic flush of vain relying, On Freedom's cheek more fair The glow of health, though there Across it broad and deep a scar be lying !
Yea, let the sword pierce through This tangle and undo The knot that doth but harder twist for friction : Oh, seek not now to bind What God hath loosed ! no kind Espousals these, but fettered, galled constriction.
When life meets life with kiss Of rapture strong, oh! zhzs Is union, this is strength ; then leave the dying With Death their troth to plight, In charnel vaults by night, *Mid dead men’s bones and all uncleanness lying.
There leave them ! let the wide, Deep chasm still divide
A DIALOGUE. 91
*Twixt Night and Day, ’twixt Light and Darkness,— : know That greater than the whole
Is now the part ; the soul Is nobler than the body,—let them go !
A DIALOGUE. IN 1863.
‘* WELL, what news have you got to-day, neighbour?” ** Why, the Prince is going to be wed
To the Princess Royal of Denmark.” ‘Ay, so I hear it is said,
And she'll be a grand young lady, there’s no doubt at all; but you see
I never set eyes on the Prince in my life, and he knows nought about me.”
** And what other news have you got, neighbour?” *¢ Oh terrible news : abroad
The great Garibaldi’s taken and wounded.” ‘‘ Was he some Lord
Or King? But I know so little of these people beyond the sea, :
They seem to be always fighting, it’s a pity they cannot agree,”
92 A DIALOGUE.
‘Why then, if you come to fighting, the Yankees are at . }
it still, As hard as ever they were at the first.” ‘‘ Well, they must then, if they will. I suppose they’re a sort of cousins of ours; but then ° they’re so very far Removed, that it doesn’t — matter to us how long they go on with the war.’
‘* Now there you are out for once, neighbour, for it’s neither more nor less
Than their keeping up of this war so long that’s causing our great distress.
They’ve given up growing their cotton, and sending us any to spin,
And that’s the way things keep going wrong, you see, when once they begin.
** You're not a reader like me, neighbour, or you wouldn’t soon forget
The things that they tell in the papers; my word, but they’re sharply set
In Lancashire now; and it’s my belief, that if things don’t soon work through
They’ll be taking to dying off pretty fast, if they’ve nothing else left them to do.
~~
A DIALOGUE. 93
‘Why now, how would yoz like it, neighbour? I think
you would look rather blank
If you hadn’t a shilling left in the house, nor a guinea left in the bank,
If first you’d to part with your silver watch, and then with your handsome clock,
And then with your quilt, and blankets, and bed, till at last you came to the stock !
€*Until when you looked about your room there was nothing to see at all,
But just a table, perhaps, and a chair, and the roof, and the floor, and the wall.
And how would you like to sell your best black coat that you've worn so long?
Or your wife to have to go out and pawn her good Sunday cloak for a song?”
‘*T shouldn’t like it at all, neighbour ; and as to my wife, why she
Would take on, perhaps, if all were known, a great deal worse than me.”
‘* And then when there’s nothing to do, you see, there’s always so little to eat ;
And only think of the children, neighbour, how they must be missing their meat !
904 A DIALOGUE.
“‘ Now there’s that curly Jem of yours, that likes nothing he gets so well
As what he gets with his granny and you, as I’ve heard you so often tell,
That just when you're sitting down to your meat, he’s sure to come peeping in,
~ You wouldn’t like it so well, neighbour, to see him
growing thin.”
*€T shouldn’t like it at all, neighbour, I tell you, but where’s the good
Of talking when folks are starving? sure I’d help them if I could.”
** Well, there’s nothing so easy as that, neighbour, you haven’t got far to send—
It’s only like taking a bit of your dinner across to an ailing friend,”
‘Why, not quite so easy as that, neighbour, for if things are as bad as you say,
It’s little to better them that we can do by giving them once in a way.”
‘* Well, giving them once in a way perhaps would come rather short ; but then
There is nothing to stop us, that I can see, from giving them once and again.”
A SONG. 95
‘* Why that’s very pretty talk, neighbour, but then to be always giving
Doesn’t come quite so easy to folks like us that have to work hard for our living.”
‘* Well, as to the matter of that, neighbour, if we haven’t got much to spare
There'll just be the less to send, but still we may always have something to share.
_ ** We might all of us give far more than we do, without being a bit the worse ; It was never yet loving that emptied the heart, or giving that emptied the purse. We must be like the woman our Saviour praised, and do but the best we can.” *¢ Ay, that'll be just the plan, neighbour, that'll be just the plan.”
A SONG TO CALL TO REMEMBRANCE. A Plea for the Coventry Ribbon- Weavers.
I HEARD a little maiden sing, ‘‘ What can the matter be?” A simple song, a merry song, yet sad it seemed to me,
A SONG.
“Qh, my love is coming from the town, he is coming ~ from the fair, And he will bring me ribbons blue to tie my bonny hair !”
O lasses fair, that love to wear—O lads that love to see
The ribbons bright, the ribbons rare—what can the © matter be ?
~ At Christmas-tide, when all beside are merry and are glad,
How many English hearts are sore, how many homes are sad !
The looms are stopped, the hands are still that wrouzht the ribbons gay ;
When anxious fathers have no work, the children dare not play ;
No cheerful noise around the board; oh! little to- prepare ! ’
The mother’s work is quickly o’er, but not the mother’s care !
And all is dull and all is chill within the humble room ;
Beside his black and fireless hearth, beside his idle loom,
The poor man sits from day to day in garments worn and thin,
And sees the homely comforts go he toiled so hard to win.
The icicle hangs on the eaves, and silent as a stone All Nature lies in sleep or death, chilled through unto the bone ;
A SONG. 97
The earth below is white and cold. the skies are cold and
grey, The grave seems very near, and- Heaven seems very far away.
Oh sad and short the wintry day. oh sad and long the
night,
When in the heart there is no hope, and in the house no light,
No fire, no food! yet goodly gifts, yet words of Christian cheer,
Can make the grave seem farther off, can make the heavens more near.
Ye merry hearts, that meet to laugh and dance the hours away,
Ye gentle hearts, that better love in sheltered homes to prays
Think on the homes whose Christmas guests are only Want and Care,
Think on the hearts too sad for mirth, too sad perchance for prayer ;
For Want and Care are dreary mates, and where they enter in _ There Love should follow after quick, for Discontent and Sin
548 Neen nnn nn TEENIE NEESER
98 A NATIONAL SONG.
Without the door are knocking loud—oh! keep them - waiting there,
And hold at bay the prowling wolf of savage, gaunt despair !
A little while and skies will clear that now are overcast ; Our ship that rides ’mid heavy seas will right itself at last ; he Come, loving hearts, come, open hands, with bounty
warm and wide,
Come, lend our struggling friends a lift, till the turning of the tide.
A NATIONAL SONG,
OF flowers that bloom in gardens fair, that bloom in meadows free,
I had my choice of all that blow, and I chose me only three ;
But I must have them all or none! the first one that T chose
Was Queen of all the flowers that be, the red, the royal Rose ! y
The Rose that blooms upon the rock, and lets the salt sea-spray Drift over her, nor asks if this be anger or be play ;
A NATIONAL SONG. 99
She bows not down her stately head for any breeze that blows,
She smiles in kindness on her friends, in pride upon her
foes.
A lion watches by her root, and all her gallant stem
Is set with thorns—ah, woe betide the hand that touches them !
But deep within the rose’s heart, in many a silken fold
Wrapt round, a costly treasure lies of fragrance and of gold.
Then lone and free, on hill and lea, unguarded, yet
unharmed, All green I saw the Thistle grow that groweth ready armed, ; She flings her arrowy seeds afar to thrive where’er they fall, 7
Oh, grasp the hardy thistle close, or grasp her not at all!
Oh love the thistle well, for she will love thee to the end,
For scorching sun she will not droop, for storm she will not bend ;
How fair upon the thistle’s head her purple-tasselled crown,
And oh! within the thistle’s heart, how soft and warm
the down!
100 A NATIONAL SONG.
Vet must I farther on to seek a flower that loves the ._ West ;
I only found a little leaf, with mystic signs imprest ;
‘* Hast thou no flower?’ I sadly said, ‘‘and hast thou nought to show
But this thy high and heavenward hope, but this thy patient woe?
** Yet saints have loved thee, fairies danced across thee at thy birth,
And thine are gifts that suit with joy, and gifts that suit with mirth ;
Shine on, green leaf, to kindly Trust, to Wit, to Valour dear,
And still let Erin’s smile be ours, though smiling through a tear.”
Of flowers that bloom in gardens fair, that blow in meadows free,
Now have I had my choice of all, and I have chosen three ;
I would not live, I would not die, I would not sing for one,
I love them all so well that I must have them all or none !
A CHRISTMAS CAROL.
A CHRISTMAS CAROL. 1863.
Ir ye would hear the Angels sing ** Peace on earth and mercy mild,” Think of Him who was once a child, On Christmas Day in the morning.
If ye would hear the Angels sing, Christians ! see ye let each door Stand wider than ever it stood before,
On Christmas Day in the morning.
Rise, and open wide the door ; Christians, rise | the world is wide, And many there be that stand outside,
Yet Christmas comes in the morning.
If ye would hear the Angels sing, Rise and spread your Christmas fare ; ’Tis merrier still the more that share, On Christmas Day in the morning.
Rise, and bake your Christmas bread ; Christians, rise! the world ts bare, And bleak, and dark with want and care, Vet Christmas comes in the morning.
A CHRISTMAS CAROL, ©
If ye would hear the Angels sing, Rise and light your Christmas fire ; And see that ye pile the logs still higher,
On Christmas Day in the morning.
Rise, and light your Christmas fire ; Christians, rise ! the world zs old, And Time ts weary, and worn, and cold, Yet Christmas comes in the morning.
If ye would hear the Angels sing,
Rise and spice your wassail bowl
With warmth for body, and heart, and soul, On Christmas Day in the morning.
Spice tt warm, and spice it strong,
Christians, rise! the world ts grey,
And rough is the road, and short ts the day, Yet Christmas comes in the morning.
If ye would hear the Angels sing, Christians ! think on Him who died ; Think of your Lord, the Crucified,
On Christmas Day in the morning.
From “Camera Obscura,”
THE SONG OF ISLAM.*
The Poet Ferdusi had this name given him by his countrymen on account of the sweetness of his verses. The meaning of Ferdusi is “‘the Poet who came from Paradise.” When but a poor boy he sat down at the foot of the mountain Elbarg, and begun to write. ‘‘ Boy,” said one who passed, ‘‘ what are you writing?” He replied, ‘I am writing Shah Nameh,”—the story of a King. This was his answer to all comers.
He sang not of love’s delight
Of the day and the night and the world, On the passing exquisite
Of a moment heaped and hurled, Of the mingling of soul and breath,
Of the soft detaining kiss,
Of the step that hastens to bliss,
* The word Islim (salvation) is founded upon the verb salm salama, which signifies to be tranquil, at rest, to be paid up, to be at perfect peace, and finally to hand over one’s self to him, with whom peace is made. The nounso derived means ‘‘ peace greeting, safety, salvation.”—SYED AMEER ALI MOULVI.
THE SONG OF ISLAM.
Of the clasp that lingereth ; He sang not the moment brief That crowneth the cup of life With flower and.with fruit and with leaf. He sang not the song of grief With Antar, for Abla white Of mourners and singers chief. He sang not the song of strife With Amr El Kais vowed To the cymbal clash, and the loud Fierce clangour of battle proud ; Of the javelin’s steely flight, Of the flashing of spear and sword, Of the wine that moveth aright In the wine-cup freely poured. He sang not of what men praise, Of how men suffer, or grieve, OF the little dust that we raise, Of the little dust we leave ; Of the moving caravan, Or the camel’s patient march, Or the skies’ unmoving arch— He sang not the song of man !
He sang of the light that breaks
When the thunder-cloud is riven, He sang of the life that wakes
To a call that cometh from Heaven; Of a voice in the desert heard,
Of a cry at the midnight hour,
THE SONG OF ISLAM.
Of a strength that waiteth a word Of the hiding* of ancient power. He sang of the life that takes Its sleep in the arms of death, Of the dawn through the dusk that breaks That the darkness conquereth. He sang of the light that sleeps And burns in the hidden gem, He sang of the light that leaps And flames in the diadem. He sang of the flowering rod, Of the almonds blossoming, He sang of the seed in the clod, A dark unlovely + thing. He sang of the blade through the sod That cleaves at the breath of spring, He sang to the ear of God, He sang the song of a King.
* “ His brightness was as the light, and there was the hiding
of His power.”—Habakkuk iii., 4. + “Thou darksome, undelighting thing.”—Mrs. TIGHE, On the
Root of the Lily.
THE WREN.
THE WREN. ‘The wren, the wren, is king of the birds.”
T AM small among birds, yet am King
Of the birds, that with flame and with gold Have lit up my tiny crest ;
I mount-on the eagle’s wing,
On the tallest trees * I am bold
To build up my little nest.
I am drunken, but not with wine;
T have lit up my flaming crest
In the sea incarnadine,
With the summer’s sunken suns,
When the light from the East to the West Moves swiftly as strength that runs,
Or love that would seek its rest.
When the fires of your earth burnt low
I mounted, at your behest,
To the hearth of Heaven aglow !
* “This most pleasing fairy bird delights in the largest trees, such as oaks, elms, tall pines, and firs, particularly the first, in which it finds both food and shelter; in these it builds its nest. It stays with us the whole year, and braves our severest winters, which it helps to enliven by its sprightly note. During that season it approaches near the dwellings of man, and takes shelter in the roofs of houses, barns, and in haystacks ; it sings till late in the evening, and not unfrequently during a fall of snow. In the spring it betakes itself to the woods, where it builds in a low bush, or sometimes on the turf itself, near a tree’s bole.”—-BEWICKE’s British Birds.
THE WREN.
Since then on my tiny crest, Since then on my little breast, Is the touch of fire imprest.
I sing when the leaf from the oak
Hath dropt, when the light from the rose With the scent that her heart o’erflows Hath fled ! when the songs spring woke Are hushed ! at the evening’s close
You may hear me sing through the snows. When the hedge is still, and the brook By leaf or by song unshook,
My song ye may ofttimes hear ;
It is bold, it is loud, it is clear,
Though but slender change it knows.
I sing when the thrush is mute, When the swallows fly I stay;
I flit o’er the hidden root,
I flit neath the blacken’d spray. When the year is dead, and the day Is dying fast, I sit
On your roofs awhile, then I flit Like a shade among shadows grey From a cloud none seeth pass, Though it darkens the sunny grass Ere yet it hath moved away. Thou little lark on thy breast That bearest the scent of the sod
108
_DEMETER AND CORA.
Unto heaven and the morning’s dew ; To thyself thou art true, and to God. With God I am bold ; I am true Unto man ! at his desire
I mounted, I brought down fire 5
Yet my breast is scorched, and behold My breast is bare ! -I am cold,
I shiver,yet I bring fire !
DEMETER AND CORA,
‘SPEAK, daughter, speak ; art speaking now?” Seek, mother, seek ; art seeking thou
Thy dear-loved Cora?” ‘‘ Daughter sweet,
I bend unto the earth my ear
To catch the sound of coming feet ;
I listen long, but only hear
The deep, dark waters running clear.”
“Oh! my great mother, now the heat
Of thy strong heart in thickened beat
Hath reached thy Cora in her gloom,
Is’t well with thee, my mother—tell? ”
‘*Ts’t well with thee, my daughter?” * Well Or ill I know not; I through fate
Queen of a wide unmeasured tomb
DEMETER AND CORA.
Know not if it be love or hate
That holds me fast, but I am bound
For ever! What if I am found
Of thee, my mother, still the bars
Are round me, and the girdling night Hath passed within my soul ! the stars Have risen* on me, but the light
Hath gone for ever.” ‘‘ Daughter, tell, Doth thy dark lord, the King of Hell, Still love thee?” ‘‘ Oh, too well, too well He loves ! he binds with unwrought chain. I was not born to be thy mate,
Aides ! nor the Queen of pain :
I was thy daughter Cora, vowed
To gladness in thy world above,
T loved the daffodil, I love
All lovely, free, and gentle things
Beloved of thee ! a sound of wings
Is with me in captivity
Of birds, and bees, with her that sings The shrill Cicula, ever gay
In noon’s white heat.” ‘‘ But, daughter, say, Dost love Aides?”’ ‘* Now, too bold
Thy question, mother; this be told,
I leave him not for love, for gold,
One lot we share, one life we know.
The Lord is he of wealth and rest,
* ¢ When night has once passed into a human soul it never leaves it, though the stars may rise.”—VICTOR Hugo.
DEMETER AND CORA.
As well as king of death and pain ;
He folds me to a kingly breast,
He yields to me a rich domain.
I leave him not for aught above,
For any god’s unsteadfast love
Or fairest mortal-form below 3
Thou hast left heaven for earth ; and thou For thy poor Cora’s sake, self-driven, Hast fled its sunny heights in scorn
And hate, of Zeus unforgiven |
Do mortals love thee?” ‘‘ Daughter, yea. They call me their great mother. Corn And wine I give them when they pray ; Their love for me their little day
Of life lasts out ; perchance they knew
It was not love for them that drew
Me down to wander where the wine Is-sweet to me, and breath of kine.
Art listening now, my Cora dear ?
Art listening now, my child,—art near? Oh, that thy kiss upon my cheek
Were warm ! thy little hand in mine
Once more! Yet, let me hear thee speak, And tell me of that garden rare,
And of thy flowers, dark, fiery, sweet, That never breathe the upper air.”
*‘Oh, mother, they are fair, are fair ; Large-leaved are they, large-blossomed, frail, And beautiful. No vexing gale
Comes ever nigh them; fed with fire
vp)
THE SECRET.
They kindle in a torch-light flame Half ecstasy, half tender shame
Of bloom that must so soon expire. But, mother, tell me of the wet,
Cool primrose ! of the lilac-bough And its warm gust of rapture, met
In summer days !—art listening yet?” “© Art near me, O my Cora, now?”
THE SECRET.
“Tl faut qu’ étant auprés de vous, je suis un secret entre yous et moi, ef un énigme pour tous les autres.”—BALZAC (Seventeenth Century).
‘*Brrp,” I said, ‘‘ that in Autumn grey Singest so sweet when the sunlight sped
Lies low on the hill, and the darkening way Is drifted o’er with the light leaves shed, Wert thou wounded, for now I see
That little breast of thine is red?
Hath any loved thee? and wert thou fed
On the wine of the berry wild and free !
Hast thou been mated, and wooed, and wed ?” Then sang the bird: ‘‘I sing to thee;
I sing when the Spring’s light leaves are shed, I sing when the Summer day for dead
THE SECRET,
Lies lapped ! of its passing sweet and brief I sing to thee! of the flower and the leaf
I sing,” sang the Bird. “I sing to thee, But I tell to none my historie.”
‘¢ Flower or herb, that with eager quest
For thy perfume rare of leaf and stem
I have sought for east, I have sought for west ;
Now that I find thee among the rest,
With flowers that grow near the beaten way,
Thou bloomest, and even, like one of them,
Thou art not sweet, methinks, nor gay.”
Then the Flower said: ‘* Other-where
Seek thou for flowers that are sweet and fair,
I lived through the bitter frost that slew
The sheltered bloom of the orchard’s pride 3
I lived on the burning wind, I grew
Through the summer drought when the roses died ;
I lived,” said the Flower. ‘‘ I was sweet not gay,
And my life in its giving passed away ;
Dost thou find me shrunken, and sere, and dry ?
If I please thee not, thou canst pass me by.
But as thou wert mounting the hill-side steep,
And as thou wert climbing the rock-hewn stair,
Didst thou meet with an odour strange and deep?
I have lived,” said the Flower, ‘‘and my soul was there,
It is not mine both to give and keep.”
THE HOMEWARD LANE. 113,
*€ Voice,” I said, ‘‘ that upon my way,
At the close of the twilight dank and chill,
Dost meet me, and then flit away ;
Art thou a shade among shadows grey,
Or the voice of one who is living still?
Doth power go with thee, and strength, and will; What art thou?” Then the Voice said, ‘‘ A voice That crieth of things that are yet to be.
If thou hearest me, then abide ; for thee
I have a message from God: Rejoice,
T say, or else lament with me :
If thou hearest not, pass on, forbear,
And leave me, as I leave thee, free.
To meet thy question is not my care ;
I have an errand, but not with thee. ”
THE HOMEWARD LANE.
“ Sehst du sehr gebliasslich aus? Seyst getrost ! du bist zu Haus.”—HEINE,
My soul within me yearned For home ; not yet appeared The father’s house in sight : I saw no kindled light
In gleaming window-pane, No forms arrayed in white
549
THE HOMEWARD LANE.
Came forth, yet was I cheered At heart: I knew I neared My home, and kept aright The way.
My footsteps turned Adown.a well-known lane, Lone, quiet ; on each side A grassy margin wide, And hedgerows freshened to the deepened stain Left by warm summer rain, O’er all a sparkle wet ; = And odour dark and cool From Balsam poplars set Within the hedge, and yet A sunset flash from many a tiny pool.
Then saw I on a gate
Two men in garments plain
That leant, as in the summer evenings late
Men lean ; of common things
And themes, to dwellers in the country dear,
If husbandmen or kings,
They spake, nor ceased their talk as I drew Near ;
But with a quiet smile
One open held the gate ;
The other spake, ‘‘ For thee, I said, long while
Here would I stand and wait.”
THE HOMEWARD LANE. 115
But when I would have turned within, I saw
A sandy heath forlorn
That stretched, whereon an aged woman, bent
With care and toil outworn,
Stooped down to pluck a small white rose,* that grew
As if it lived but with its leaves to strew
The thin light soil, nor seemed, sun-fed, the dew
To need, beset with many a grieving thorn ;
But when she, turning, lifted up her head
I looked upon the face
Of one long loved by me and with the dead
Long numbered, there no trace
Of age or pain I read,
But in her deep-set eye
Dwelt untold ecstacy,
And in her smile was bliss,
And rapture in her kiss,
And heaven in her embrace.
* Rosa spinossima, the small white Burnet rose.
“BRING ME WORD?
‘BRING ME WORD HOW TALL SHE Is.”
Woman in 1872.
« How tallis your Rosalind ?” “ Just as high as my heart.”
—As You Like Tt.
WITHIN a garden shade,
A garden sweet and dim, Two happy children played Together ; he was made For God, and she for him.
Beyond the garden’s shade, In deserts drear and dim Two outcast children strayed Together, he betrayed
By her, and she by him.
Together, girl and boy, They wandered, ne’er apart ; Each wrought to each annoy, Yet each knew never joy Save in the other’s heart.
By her so oft deceived ; By him so sore opprest 5
“BRING ME WORD?
They each the other grieved, Yet each of each was best Beloved, and still caressed,
And she was in his sight Found fairest, still his prize, His constant chief delight ; She raised to him her eyes That led her not aright.
And ever by his side
A patient huntress ran Through forests dark and wide, And still the woman’s pride And glory was the Man,
When her he would despise, She kept him captive bound ; Forbidding her to rise,
By many cords and ties
She held him to the ground.
At length, in stature grown,
He stands erect and free ;
Yet stands he not alone,
For his beloved would be
Like him she loveth wise, like es she ' loveth free:
. E - ~~ - eS as a ee eet Bios - = 4
LILIES. “ f
So wins she her desire,
Yet stand they not apart ;
For as she doth aspire
He grows, nor stands she higher Than her Beloved’s heart.
LILIES.
“The evening and the morning make our day.”—E, B. BROWNING.
By woody walks, near pathways dank With the drip of the thick-wove boughs they grew, By the side of the garlic, wild and rank,
The Valley-lilies, pure as dew. Shrouded and swathed in a tender gleam,
Gold in the sun, and dim in the shade,
Lilies globe-like, and orbed, and rayed, Flashed, afloat on the glittering stream ;
Each on its cool, thick leaf apart,
Flung eager-wide to day’s golden dart, As a door will ope with a secret thrill, .
To a touch beloved, each warm, trembling heart For the light of the morning to flood and fill.
At mid-day the lilies stood up tall,
Stood up straight, ‘neath the garden wall, White and regal like queens that bear
Beneath their crowns disconsolate A weight of woe and a world of care,
a ae
LILIES. 119
Who are glad when the night * bears all away Yet are ever queens through their long white day, Robed and fair and desolate. Golden were some, and some had curled Their leaves back in pride, or in scorn of the world, And some were tawny, and streaked, and pied, And freck’d, as if in them something ill Had passed, but had left them lilies still. And after them came a sworded strife Of lilies that warred with death or with life, Flushed or pallid with love or hate I know not which, for to living flame They changed from their rose-bloom delicate, And strove, so that neither overcame ; For as I marvelled thereat, day grew More dim, and the flowers t sweet miracle Went by, and a sudden twilight fell, And with it brought to my soul the scent Of mossy wood-walks drenched in dew, And of Valley-lilies crushed and bent.
* The lines— **Be the day never so long It ringeth at last unto even-song,” are written in Queen Elizabeth’s ‘ Book of Houres.” + ‘I die,” said a Dutch botanist who had encountered some deadly exhalations in a Javanese forest, ‘‘but I have seen the miracle of flowers.”
DARIA,
DARIA,
In Calderon’s drama, Los Dos Amantes del Cielo, Daria, 4 beautiful Roman girl, eventually a Christian convert and inartyr, declares, while yet Pagan, that she will never love until she finds someone who has died to prove his love for her.
Ou, proud and fair was she ! Yet only proud perchance in being fair, And in her speech, and in her smiling free, As Rose to summer air;
And near her in the dell Another damsel sat who sweetly sung ; And one who* Love's fond ancient chronicle Read ; and these three were young,
And fair, and richly dight, But she I speak of, read not, neither sung, But deemed she ministered enough delight In being fair and young.
** Love !” said she in disdain,
** Now am I weary of the vows and sighs Of lovers that to die for me are fain,
Yet find I none who dies.”
* “Ovid.”
DARIA. 121
She spoke again in jest Or sadness—which, I knew not then, nor she: Deep words are spoken, deepest thoughts confessed, By hearts in careless glee.
“* Vet might I in that train
Find one who for my love indeed had died, . Then let him come to ask for love again, And I will be his bride !”
Oh, meek was she and fair,
But then most fair, methought, in being meek ; And yet the same was she whom otherwhere
I heard so proudly speak.
Her voice rose clear and soft
As is the dove’s, and dove-like still caressed One tender note, as if returning oft
To what it loveth best.
She sang, ‘* My soul is bound
By that sweet olden promise, One who died For me and for my love now have I found,
I quit no more His side.”
BASILIDES.
BASILIDES.
“Many things are related of this virgin (Potaminca) in suffering for faith in Christ.... She was at last, with her mother Marcella, committed to the flames. Immediately thereupon receiving the sentence of condemnation, she was __led away to die by Basilides, one of the officers in the army.
But when the multitude attempted to assault and insult her with abusive language, he by keeping off restrained their insolence, exhibiting the greatest compassion and kindness to her. Perceiving the man’s sympathy, she exhorts him to be of good cheer, for after she was gone she would intercede for him with her Lord.... Not long after Basilides plainly professed himself to be a Christian.”—Eusebius.
‘© In vain unto this oath
Ye urge me, O my fellow-soldiers ; lo!
I swear not by the gods nor Cesar! So
These lips of mine are sealed unto a troth
More firm and sure, they may not now unsay Their steadfast pledge, ‘Thou art a Christian?’ Yea. A Christian, yea! and evermore, Amen !
No more Basilides ! Such name I bore
But yesterday—a man with other men
Who bowed the knee to all that men adore ;
Who lied, who sued, sung, flattered, jested, swore By Ceesar and the Gods ; a soldier proud
To track the crimson tunic through the fray,
And raise the loud a-la-la ! in the crowd
Of slaves the foremost slave! These things away Are past for ever. Yea! aChristian? Yea!
BASILIDES.
*¢ Three times to me at dead
Of night she came, with solemn stillness round. White robed I saw her stand, with roses crowned, And in her hand were roses white and red.
*€ She called me by my name— :
* Look up, Basilides! Dost mind thee now
Of her, by thee and by thy soldiers led
From prison unto death? Dost mind thee how Thou spakest to her then? Of words she said Dost mind thee? I am come to quit that vow. For what did then await me, were it sword
Or shame, I knew not. If the burning mesh, Death by the lion’s hated paw, abhorred Embrace—then shrank my spirit, shrank my flesh ; I heard of many wheels the grind and roll,
Of many beasts I felt the sudden spring,
From countless eyes athirst to drink my soul
I, turning, met the unrelenting glare
Of the blue sword-gleam round me, met the stare Of the blue distant heaven unpitying ;
Then in thine eye one moment seeking mine
I pity read, and gentlest tenderness ;
What words thou spakest then in my distress
I heard not, but my hands I felt in thine
One moment caught and held amid the press— “Look up,” she said, ‘‘ Basilides, behold These hands of mine! their grasp is laid on thee For evermore! I quit thee not, be bold,”
She spake again, ‘‘ for soon shalt thou be free,
BASILIDES.
‘¢ ¢ A Pagan art thou, drunk
With many spells? a slave art thou within The dark Ergastulum each night shut in ?
By day the thrall of legion-masters, sunk
In sense, fast bound unto the earth by sin? Care not for these thy fetters, nor thy stains Regard 3 a Mighty One for thee hath striven : Strong is He, pitiful, to Him thy chains
Are reeds ; the past is past, effaced, forgiven. Thine is the God by fire that answereth.
His feet within the furnace glow and-move, His eyes are flame that kindle flame, his breath Lights up the stream of fire unquenchable That unconsumed, consumeth, who can dwell
With everlasting burnings? TZhey who /eve.’
** Her words like seeds of flame
Lie in my heart. Basilides no more
Am I, and yet Basilides the same
But yesterday who flattered, jested, swore
By Cesar and the’Gods. Gods! now I name One God whom I adore, and Him obey,
One God in Heaven who lives, on earth who died, And lo! He liveth ! Him the crucified
Who lives for evermore! A Christian, yea!”
THE BATTLE-FLAG OF SIGURD.
The flag of Sigurd, the northern warrior, carried victory with it, but brought death to its bearer.
T HAVE no folded flock to show,
Though from my youth I have loved the sheep,
And the lambs, as they strayed in the valleys low, Or clomb the upland pastures steep, But none were given to me to keep !
T stood on the hill when the dawn brake red, Through the darkling glen the foe drew nigh,
They came on swift, with a stealthy tread ; I gave the earliest warning cry !
Then flashed the falchion, the arrow flew ; I did not fight, nor yield, nor fly,
I held up the flag the whole day through— Wrap it round me when I die!
I have no garnered sheaf to show, Though oft with my shining sickle bared I have wrought with the reapers, row by row, And joined the shout as they homeward fared : I was not by when the land was shared ! T stood at noon when the maidens dread Came forth ere the battle, to choose the slain, And at nightfall the raven’s foot was red, And the wolves were met on the darkening plain.
THE GOLDEN THREAD.
Then hewed the hanger, the sword smote sore, I held up the flag till the day went by ;
It was glued to my straining clasp with gore— Wrap tt round me when I die!
I have no silken spoil to show No torque of the beaten gold, no red Rich broidered mantle, wrung from the foe, Or flung down by chief as the banquet sped ; I have only watched, and toiled, and bled ! I stand at eve on the vessel’s prow, My heart is wounded, and I have striven So long that my arm is weary now, And the flag I bear is stained and riven ; The dark waves mutter, the night dews fall; *Twixt a sullen sea and a stormy sky I hold up the flag in the sight of all— Wrap it round me when I die!
THE GOLDEN THREAD,
incident so narrated in a very early French Fabliau.—(See Sir Walter Scoti’'s ‘* Essay on Romantic Literature.’’)
“Sans espoir, sans peur.”—Ancient Motto of the House of Burgundy.
IN pleasant lands far away (Listen, gentles, for delight)
1
THE GOLDEN THREAD. 127
Dwelt a fair lady bright,
That unto knight, page, and thrall, Aged nurse and seneschal,
Gave upon a certain day
Gifts kind, and unto each
Somewhat spake of gentle speech That suiteth gift kind and free.
But when she came to one who long As page, upon his bended knee
Had served her well, and now as squire Served her both with sword and song, And as knight did yet aspire
To serve and guard her, not for hire, But all for love and loyalty ;
Were it all her gifts were spent,
Or were it but in merry sport,
Or love, that love to hide thought,
I know not, guess not what she meant, That do but tell the tale I heard ; She paused, and spake never word Nor gave Jook, but slowly drew From out her scarf a golden thread, And lightly to the squire threw,
And he for answer quickly took
His dagger forth, and lightly strook Across his breast a wound red,
And in it laid the golden thread,
Nor spake word nor gave look,
But in the days when the green leaf Springeth, and singeth, each that can
THE GOLDEN THREAD.
Sing, be it bird or man,
For gladness either, or for grief ; Full softly for his heart’s relief,
He sang, between the sun and shade, A little song that he had made.
THE SQUIRE’S SONG.
** Store hath she of gifts meet
That gave to me the golden thread ; Store hath she of wordes sweet
That with it nevér word said.
How may be, then, this riddle read ? She did not speak her meaning plain, But if she meant her gift for pain
It suiteth well,” he said, ‘‘ with me. What man that liveth but pain knoweth ? And if for love, I ween it groweth
In gentle hearts full speedily. *
‘*T would that she had spoken soft,
I would that she had smiled,” he said, ** As oft she speaketh, smileth oft, That gave to me the golden thread. And yet her gift with my degree
Suits, that am a lowly squire ;
The cloth of gold it may-not be,
The cloth of frieze is not for me.
* “Amor, che in cor gentil ratto s’ apprende.”—DANTE,
THE GOLDEN THREAD, . 129
In that so highly I aspire.
I prize the gift I did not choose ! Contented well with my estate
I stand, I serve, I run, I wait.
Content am I to win, to lose,
To bear through all a heart elate,
To bear through all a wounded breast ; And foeman’s hand that seeks,” he said, “« My heart to strike or sweet friend’s head That fain thereon would lean to rest, Must strike it through the golden thread, Must lean upon a wound red !
** Dayes of peace and dayes of strife
Pass,” he said, ‘‘and heat and cold, And ever with my hearte’s life
Is wrought the little thread of gold. It is not with me as of old;
My careless dayes of youth and glee Are gone for ever, such a bold Sweet surmise to felicitie
Hath neighboured me, and unto pain Knit up my life with longing vain, And neared it to a purpose high ; And still runneth, till life flit by, Through all my dayes a wound red, Runneth still a golden thread !”
A LEGEND OF TOULOUSE.
A LEGEND OF TOULOUSE.
A LEGEND that in earliest youth I read, remembered well—
A legend that in deepest ruth
And awe I read, and held for truth, Is this that now I tell;
A legend was it of a youth, Who, as it then befell,
From out his evil soul the trace
Had blotted out of guiding grace, Abjured both heaven and hell ;
That once unto a meadow fair, (Heaven shield the desperate !)
Impelled by some dark secret snare, Repaired, and to the burning sky Of summer noon flung up on high,
A dagger meant for God’s own heart,
And spake unto himself apart Words that make desolate.
There came from out the cloudless sky A hand, the dagger’s hilt That caught, and then fell presently Five drops, for mortal guilt From Christ’s dear wounds once freely spilt ; And then a little leaf there fell To that youth’s foot through miracle—
A LEGEND OF TOULOUSE.
A leaf whereon was plain These words, these only words enwrit, Enwritten not in vain, Oh! miserere mei; then A mourner, among mourning men, A sinner, sinner slain Through love and grace abounding, he Sank down on lowly bended knee, Locked up to heaven and cried, ‘¢ Have mercy, mercy, Lord, on me For His dear sake, who on the tree Shed forth those drops and died!”
131
THE REDBREAST.
“Far; far away, is a land of woe and darkness, spirits of evil and fire. Day after day a little bird flies there, bearing in his bill a drop of water to quench the flame. So near to the burn- ing stream does he fly that his feathers are scorched by it, and hence he is named ‘ Bron-rhuddyn’ (breast burned).”—A Carmarthenshire Legend of the Robin.
THE souls in bliss to souls in woe Would fain a message send :
It is not love, above, below, That loves not to the end ;
This know I, though I little yet Love’s secret apprehend,
But how shall love with love prevail Its message sweet to take,
What wing that will not droop and fail, What spirit but will quake,
To bear it through the gloomy vale,
Across the fiery lake?
THE REDBREAST.
In heaven was silence ! sweet to hear The songs that angels sing,
Yet sweeter then had been the clear Quick rustle of a wing.
On earth was silence! to the sun The eagle soared ; apart
The dove, in grief or love for one Sate, brooding o’er her heart ;
Wings, wings! a heaven and earth of wings, Outspread, unstirred, and free ;
I only heard one little bird Make answer then, ‘‘ Send me.”
A little bird,* unseen, unheard, When summer woods are gay,
That flits across a darkening path And haunts a leafless spray ;
Its song is broken, sweet, and wild, Its eye is bright and clear ;
It singeth best when to the west The sinking sun draws near:
A bird beloved by man and child, And to its Maker dear.
It trills not with the nightingale, It moans not with the dove,
* In spring the redbreast retires to woods and thickets. During summer it is rarely to be seen.—BEWICK’s British Birds. 3 ;
THE REDBREAST.
It hath no fond heart-piercing wail Of passion nor of love ;
It mounts not with the lark on wings Of rapture and desire,
It hath a heart that does not quail, A wing that does not tire.
“7 do not fear the valley drear, Nor yet beyond the gate
What lies, though tt indeed be vast, And dim, and desolate.
My breast ts scorched with fire, so near
The burning wind I fly; to fear Would now for me be late.
‘* For me the little children spread Their crumbs upon the snow, I stay with them and I am fed When the swallows flit and go. t have eaten of man’s daily bread Too long to shun his woe ; L have met earth’s sleety blast, I have felt its driving rain: The time of fear ts overpast For one, the mate of pain ;
Yea, more! upon the bitter cross L saw One hang, who bore
Of all Creation’s wrong and loss, The weight and burden sore ;
THE REDBREAST.
And then from out a brow divine, With anguish pierced and torn,
TL strove, with this small beak of mine To wrest a single thorn,
“ Too slender was my little bill ; L strove and strove in vain ;
But then, in guerdon of my will, My bosom met a stain,
Broad, ruddy, deep, that shields from ill And marks it unto pain.”
Oh, little bird! these words of thine Methinks are true and wise !
For he who looks on man who lives, Who looks on God that dies,
Baptised within the cloud, the sea,
Baptised within the fire, like thee,
May pass along the valley drear,
And through the gateway dim, nor fear For aught beyond that lies,
November 15th, 1870.
From “Carmina Crucis.”
THE GARDEN OF PROSERPINE.
AMARANTH and asphodel, Methinks I know ye well,
And thou, frail wind-swept flower that in the dim Green woods, unseen by him
Thou lovest best, must pass, beloved in vain ! Here blooms each flower whose leaf Or petal hints at grief
And bears a mystic sign, a crimson stain ; The golden rod with fire Stands tipp’d, the tuberose, In its swift fading glows
And lights within its heart a funeral pyre. No roses, white nor red, Glow here, the poppy’s head Droops drown’d in spells that keep The keys of death and sleep, ; Of anguish, ecstasy, and wild desire ;
THE ALOE.
Here ever on the turf green twilight lies ; Here ever warm and fragrant is the air, And all this place is desolate and fair, Made by a King, and meet for Love’s delight ; Yet here joy comes not, but the exquisite Brief thrill of rapture in a pang that dies. Here walks a Queen with steadfast eyes unwet, With white narcissus garlanded, that still Dreams of fair Enna’s sunlit mead, and yet Mourns for the fresh, ungather’d daffodil.
THE ALOE.
“The aloe, after a long life of rest, sends up a large flower- spike, which shoots up in a few weeks on a stem from twenty to thirty feet high, utterly destroying the parent plant by its rapid, exhausting growth.”
Love’s daily, fond, continual miracle I cannot work for thee, nor crown thy day Each passing hour with bloom of bud and bell ; Not mine with subtle fancies light and gay To clasp thy soul about with delicate rings Like hers, the summer’s wooer, born with wings, Sweet flower that fain: would climb, yet only clings! Let flowers like hers be fair, For they were born to bless
A MORNING IN SPRING.
The warm, still brooding air, And win the wind’s caress ; Such flowers were born to woo, To flatter, yet be true, And spend their souls away in fond excess ; So let the cystus’ snows Fall light upon the sunny grass at noon 5 So let the gorgeous rose Fold to her proud warm heart the heart of June, And let each pass in passing of the leaf, In passing of the flower, when earthward goes All that earth knows of glory, sweet and brief; A flower that is not fair, But wondrous, blooms my secret soul within ; Sudden the life it springs to! strange and rare The aspect that it weareth, long shut in From sunshine and sweet air as in a tomb ; It cleaves the heart that beareth it to win A moment’s triumph ending in swift doom ; —Then marvel not that it was slow to bloom.
A MORNING IN SPRING.
How sweetly, sweetly spoke ~ Flowers, fields, and sunny skies that morn in May ! As if the earth awoke
Some plain, old, long-accustomed word to say,
A MORNING IN SPRING.
But seeing Heaven come forth upon the way
To meet her, in an unsought poem broke ! Methought her very breast, As with a sigh repress’d,
A long, deep sigh of bliss, did swell and heave; The skies above were clear, The kiss without the tear
They gave that morn ; they loved and did not grieve.
Each tender presage curl’d Within the bud unfurl’d: All plumed and wing’d each leaf while light and shade Did mix, and chase, and lovingly invade The others’ realm; each cottage seem’d a nest Among its trees; the meads were golden fair, Odour, and light, and bloom upon the air Strove which might tell its happy story best. Oh, earth, I feel thee press My soul in thy caress ; What would’st thou speak to me, thou sayest, © Guess !”
Is now some ancient bond
Of discord harsh repeal’d? Is now some world beyond
To sight and sense reveal’d ?
140 THE PLAYFELLOWS.
Or is this but a veil Thou drawest o’er thy pale Worn face? is this thy pride Of spirit that would hide Thy wound beneath thy vesture’s broider’d fold ? Enough ! thou wilt not tell Thy secret till a spell More strong shall wrest and wring it from thy hold. Smile on, o’er good and ill Brooding unconscious still, Sphynx-like, impassive, terrible and cold!
THE PLAYFELLOWS.
FAR away and long ago,
Long ago and far away,
Seems it now since in the low
Deep valley, shut from rougher weather, Love, Hope, Joy, and I together Play’d, ah ! many and many a day ; Hid beneath the branching fern,
Hid beneath the blooming heather, Hiding, seeking, each in turn.
Oh! what games we play’d together ! Till one day, within the dell,
Hope and Joy, together hiding,
Hid so long and hid so well,
—
ONE FRIEND. 141
We found them not, though keenly chiding, When we call’d came no replying, Came a sound of hidden laughter From the wood’s deep heart, and after Came a sound of secret sighing ;
Then a shadow from the hill
Crept, and all grew sudden still ;
Gay and green and golden there Daffodils ’twixt light and shade Laugh’d, blue periwinkles made
Nets our childish feet to snare ;
On us lightly from the bough
Cherry blossoms dropp’d ; but now Through the glen we slowly pass’d, We knew that we had seen the last
Of Hope and Joy, no more together Play we there in summer weather.
ONE FRIEND.
SaID a sick and lonely child,
** Often have I tired of thee, Tired of all thy answers mild, Heard so oft, so wearily ;
Wilt thou never tire of me,
Gentle Patience? now look forth From our window looking north, -
A REMEMERANCE.,
And tell us where the others play, All this long, warm summer day,”
“ Love is standing in the sun,
Joy and beauty at his side,
Now in one their shadows run, Hope has sent an arrow wide ; Shading from his brow the light, Now I see him watch its flight.” ‘Oh! that they would look this way, Oh ! that to this quiet room
They would come awhile to play ! See my rose-tree all in bloom,
See the flowers I dried last Spring ; Hear my little linnet sing
In his cage ! they need not stay Longer than they please !” the child Patience soothed with answer mild.
A REMEMBRANCE.
“ Herb ist des Lebens Innerster Kern,”
SHE sang at evening in an ancient room, In the Spring twilight ; soft the sunset gloom, And at the casement soft the pear-tree’s bloom
A LIFE-REQUIEM. 143
Look’d in, and from the coppice warblings soft
And slender, met low bleatings from the croft,
Peace was on all within, without; yet pain
Made sweet the singer's voice, made sweet the strain
She sang, and in the listener’s heart was pain ;
What art thou, Life? methinks thou leavest room
For the sweet bird to sing, the flower to bloom,
And canst not give the heart its little hour ;
To spread in sweeter song, in fairer flower ;
Oh ! thou art bitter, Life! within thy strong
Rude grasp the birthright crushing, let this wrong
Suffice thee ! now relenting, let thy cold
Reluctant hand one little boon unfold ;
Take not the blessing also; give the breast
One little sunset hour of peace and rest ;
Canst thou not give one hour? ‘The day is past,
The summer’s golden noon was overcast ;
The day is past, the night draws on: oh! night!
Be thou more warm, more kind, than was the light.
A LIFE-REQUIEM.
‘¢ A life that had no friends but God and death.”
None knoweth of thy grave ; What wert thou? kind and young,
A LIFE-REQUIEM.
Tender, and true, and brave ; Yea, all that hath been sung In poet’s song, or told
In story, sweet and old,
Was thine ; an aspect fair,
A heart to love and dare,
An arm to guard and save,
A soul for high emprise ;
And still thine ardent eyes Woo’d life unto thy breast, And found it fair, caress’d
For all it promised, blest
By thee for all it gave.
Yet on thy life, from day
To day, as on the child Outstretch’d the Prophet lay ; Pain lay outstretch’d, and prest Upon thy brain, heart, breast, Until thine anguish wild
And weary, changed and sank To silent spaces blank ;
And love, hope, joy, repress’d, Seem’d as by harsh decree The aspect weird to take
Of flowers their thirst that slake At desert springs, and break In hues of mockery,
Life was to thee a shroud ; Each day that o’er thee sped
A LIFE-REQUIEM.
Heap’d ashes on thy head,
And through the tumult loud, *Twixt sense and spirit, Pain Wove its thick spells, and round Thy silent life-springs bound And wrapt its fine-wrought chain ; So did’st thou sit and hear
Afar, the bird sing clear,
And see the flower unfold
In the warm noon-tide gold ; Love sued and pleasure sang, And like a clarion, pride,
With full, clear summons rang Upon the air—all died.
None knoweth of thy grave; Thy life and heart in twain Were broken ; even so, How should the passer know Their record sad and vain? Fling in the dust, and there Let fall with it Life’s fair, Fond presage unfulfill’d ; Fling eager hope unstill’d And love, that burning low, Burn’d unconsuming here ; What need of flower or tear To mark this heaving sod ? The spot is mark’d by God !
NOVEMBER.
A THOUGHT AT MIDNIGHT.
Ou ! that some soul o’er-weigh’d With love and pity, as a flower with dew, For me at this still moment wept and pray’d, And pray’d for me alone! that leaning through My casement, now tc mine a spirit drew
So close it scarce could hear
My secret, nor my tear
Could feel, nor mark my breast
That flutter’d in unrest, Till, like two drops that roll Within each other on the shaken leaf, Absorbed and sunk within the tender soul Of pity, pass’d the shrinking soul of grief!
NOVEMBER.
* Poor heart of mine, dost mourn To see the rose-leaves shed Fall on their earthy bed? To see the day outworn Fade out into the dead Chill eve so soon? dost mourn Above the wither’d leaf, the blighted corn?”
NOVEMBER.
**T mourn not for the sped Swift daylight in its close, I mourn not for the fled Fair spirit of the rose, That pass’d not till it fed With fragrance all the air Of June ; a sweeter care Was mine than buds in thickest green enclose, _ A dearer hope than lives in aught that dies and blows.”
**T mourn not for a trust
Misplaced, a broken troth ;
Life healeth life that even from the dust Will stir and bloom ; I mourn
A sweeter hope withdrawn,
I miss the sealing of a firmer oath.”
** Who can endure this frost ? Who can endure this cold? The harvest’s blighted gold ? The buried seed-corn lost ? A time of sweeping rains, of bitter grief, The dews are thick on earth and light the fallen leaf.”
** And didst thou think through prayer To pierce this heavy air ?
Through patience to unwind
The cere-cloths of the mind?
NOVEMBER.
‘Through love to breathe away
The grave-damps of decay,
Through love, through faith, through prayer,
Didst hope upon some fair,
Fond, future day to find
Earth purer, Heaven more kind? Behold ! the heavens are strong, the earth is old, _ And all that comes between is dim and cold.
*¢ A fall of wither’d leaves,
The voice of one that grieves, That grieves nor yet prevails— For prayer that makes with Hope
A covenant, yet fails For ever of its scope ; For Faith’s lone lamp that pales, Still raised above the dark Lone wat’ry waste ; for Love that finds no ark, But still with patient breast Broods on until its nest Is filled with wint’ry flakes of cold despair ; For Christ that still delayeth ; For Life that still gainsayeth The spirit’s trust ; for dark despair that sayeth, ‘ Where is the promise of His coming ? where The answer to thy prayer ?’
Behold the heavens are strong, all things remain
As they have been at first, and hope is vain.”
‘* A time of sweeping rains, of bitter grief,
The devs lie thick on earth, and red the biighted leaf.”
DESDICHADO.
DESDICHADO.
WEEP not for them who weep For friend or lover taken hence, for child That falls ’mid early flowers and grass asleep, Untempted, undefiled.
Mourn not for them that mourn For sin’s keen arrow with its rankling smart, God’s hand will bind again what He hath torn, He heals the broken heart.
But weep for him whose eye
Sees in the midnight skies a starry dome
Thick sown with worlds that whirl and hurry by, And give the heart no home;
Who hears amid the dense Loud trampling crash and outcry of this wild Thick jungle world of drear magnificence, No voice which says, my chdid ;
Who marks through earth and space A strange dumb pageant pass before a vacant shrine, s And feels within his inmost soul a place Unfill’d by the Divine ;
A PASTORAL.
Weep, weep, for him, above That looks for God, and sees unpitying Fate, That finds within his heart, in place of love, A dull, unsleeping hate.
A PASTORAL.
A SIMPLE shepherd I, Unskill’d to guard or tend My flocks that wander slow, But little prized by friend, But little feared by foe ; Yet sweet and many are the songs I know.
In youth no gentle art Was mine to learn or teach; As shepherds wont, my speech Was rude, unapt to reach The ear, or win the heart, Till, where moist willows grew, a slender reed I found, and fashion’d fitly to my need.
Then from the sedgy brook, Where yet its kindred shook, A sigh so deep, so sweet, so piercing broke,
A PASTORAL.
That ere I knew, a sigh Went back in fond reply, And on my lips a sudden song awoke.
With each warm tender thing That thrust its head in spring, From earth’s dark breast, my spirit communed free ; A soul that loves and grieves Would speak from out the leaves, The clouds stole down the hills to talk with me.
And oft with unconfess’d Fond instinct, only guess’d, Through some quick pressure, all the silent air, The while I sing, would fill With light, would throb and thrill As if a mighty heart were beating there.
And while I sang, the swains That listen’d, straight forgot How fierce upon the plains The sun, the shepherd’s lot How hard—their slender gains, Their ceaseless, thankless toils, remembering not.
And while I sang, the maid On tiptoe unafraid Would steal at shut of eve, and linger long,
A PASTORAL.
With parted lips, and shy Sweet, unaverted eye, Forgetting still the singer in the song.
I sang of war, of love, Of gods that reign above =
In bliss, of men that suffer—still I sung Of deeper pangs, of tears More sweet, that fell in years
Of broader flight, while yet our earth was ycung.
So sang I until song Forsook me; I would tell How this my strain so well Beloved, beloved so long, Fell from my lips, as falls the star, As falls the leaf, to dwell (If-yet it lives) apart, afar, Like echo shut within a secret dell.
It was the summer prime Of noon, the sleeping time
Of Pan, no leaflet stirr’d, yet from the ground Whereon I lay, the clear Low breathing met mine ear
Of woods, rocks, vales, and hills in slumber
bound.
And on the air a slow Sweet shining now would grow, And o’er the sunny spaces flit and fail,
A PASTORAL.
As if beloved and fair, Earth softly, unaware, Smiled ’neath the secret of her folded veil
Beneath the beechen shade The golden sunbeams stray’d In sleep, my flock slept round me, all was still ; When from afar I caught A flute’s clear note, methought Some shepherd bids me to a contest of sweet skill.
It ceased, and at its close A voice in song arose, So sword-like sweet, it seem’d to cleave the thin Warm air, and still, with soft Delay, to question oft, And still to woo, and evermore to wia.
This was no ancient tale Of flying nymph, or bold Free hunter, this no old Fond funereal wail For youth slow fading by a fountain’s side ; And yet a high lament Through all its changes went, It told of One that loved, it told of One that died.
It told of rude disgrace, And of an anguish’d face, It told, methought ; and of a wounded Friend.
A PASTORAL.
Of pain it told, and shame; Of love that overcame Through simple skill of loving to the end.
A silence on the plain, A silence on the hill,
To hear that song again, I listen, listen still.
Oh, sweet to me my vain Old songs and stories free,
Thy story sad and plain
Is now more sweet to me.
Take, Shepherd, take thy prize, For who like thee can sing ? No fleece of mingled dyes, No apples fair I bring ; No smooth two-handled bowl, Wrought with the clasping vine— Take, take my heart and soul, My songs, for they are thine !
Oh, sing thy song again, And these of mine may pass
As quick as summer rain
Dries on the thirsty grass.
THE SUN-FLOWER.
Thou wouldst not do me wrong, Thou wilt not silent be ;
Thy one, thy only song, Dear Shepherd, teach to me !
THE SUN-FLOWER.
TIxt the slow daylight pale, A willing slave, fast bound to one above,
I wait ; he seems to speed, and change, and fail ; I know he will not move.
I lift my golden orb To his, unsmitten when the roses die, And in my broad and burning disk absorb The splendours of his eye.
His eye is like a clear
Keen flame that searches through me; I must droop Upon my stalk, I cannot reach his sphere ;
To mine he cannot stoop.
I win not my desire, And yet I fail not of my guerdon; lo!
A thousand flickering darts and tongues of fire Around me spread and glow.
SITA.
All ray’d and crown’d, I miss No queenly state until the summer wane, The hours flit by ; none knoweth of my bliss,
And none has guessed my pain.
I follow one above,
I track the shadow of his steps, I grow Most like to him I love
Of all that shines below.
SITA.
Sita, the divine spouse of Rama, is torn from him by evil genii, under whose power she long remains. When, after a protracted separation, Sita is again restored to Rama, he turns from her coldly, under the idea that during her cruel bondage and long wanderings she may have met with contamination, She appeals to the ordeal of fire and flings herself within it, adjuring the flame, as searching all things, to bear witness to her purity. The fire restores her “ faultless, pure, immac-
ulate, one who has never offended against her lord in speech, in heart, in eyes.”
DEATH-SMITTEN with a look
From him she loved, of doubt and question cold,. She turn’d from him she loved without rebuke, And stood amazed ; then spake out keen and bold. As one whose grief already is too old
For fond reproach :
SITA.
** All pain except this pain, To live and meet his cold averted eye ; All shame, except his lofty, still disdain ; All other outrage schemed ’twixt earth and sky I have endured for ages, still upborne By thought of Rama’s love ; I meet his scorn ; Come Fire, and end this undream’d agony.”’
And even while she spake She fell a flame within the flame as light As melts upon the stream a snowy flake, The fire sent forth a thousand lambent bright Swift flickering tongues, each one that did proclaim Her pure and stainless, ‘* Szta, free from blame.”
The flame caress’d her scarlet vesture’s pride, No flower that garlanded her forehead shrank, Her bosom glow’d ; as one that doth deride Her fate she stood serene as though she drank The flame’s fierce breath.
Then sang she, ‘‘ Oh, thou keen Attesting flame! Thou callest me by name, Thou sayest to me, Welcome, free from blame In thought, word, deed, unstain’d! and yet the same Were I, still Sita, still a blameless Queen, Hadst Thou too join’d with all to work me shame !
Had all on Earth made cause With all in Heaven to drag me unto ill,
SITA.
I had been ever pure, and to the laws
That bound me ever true! rememb’ring still,
Rama’s deep eyes, and all the heaven we shared
’Mid the high hills, in many a balmy cleft,
And chasm the warm thunder scarce had left.
Yea ! let my spirit to its depths be bared,
- Still were I pure ! though ages past away,
And found me still the demon’s scoff and prey
Through spells accurst, or left me drifted, driven
Through Hell’s wide vaults; still trampled on, despised,
My soul was his, although our lives were riven,
Yea, scorn’d and outraged, agonised, abhorr’d,
Still I was Rama’s love, and he was Sita’s Lord!
And Thou, oh, champion, late And sure! Thou Fire that searching all things, dost proclaim Me pure and stainless! Sita, free from blame ! Hadst thou, too, leagued thyself with iron Fate, Hadst joined the cruel earth and bitter sky To leave forsaken Sita desolate ; Then from itself unto itself my soul Would witness to the whole ; Still to itself my heart would testify And prove me Sita! Sita still the pride Of Heaven, the cherish’d bride Of Rama, fair and uncontaminate.”
SITA.
She ceased, nor to the sky Nor sun appealing turned ; nor yet the eye Of Rama sought ; but stood as one compelled To speak the words she utter’d, not in pride, Nor wrath nor scorn, but even as impell’d, By steadfast truth. So stood she, self-upheld, And before all the worlds, self-justified.
Early Poems,
—\_+o—_
CHILDHOOD.
ONCE in a garden bounded By many a lofty wall, Where quaint old sentinels, in stone, Kept watch and ward o’er all, But opening southwards, shaded By trees that swept the ground, And kept the turf unfaded And green, the summer round, There was a little lake, and there An island, and a boat That lay ’mid shining water-flags And lily-leaves afloat ; Smooth as the swards around them clipt, Swept only by the wing Of gauzy dragon-fly, that dipt In many a mazy ring, Were those still waters ; all unstirred The rose’s leaf would lie, ; Blown there by summer winds ; the bird Skim, lightly glancing by.
CHILDHOOD.
This was the Haunt of childhood ; Once there I seemed to grow
Among the flowers, and with the fruits To change and ripen slow ;
I watched them through all changes, there Upon the grass I lay
Snowed over by the blossoms light That fell so thick in May ;
I saw the currant strips that hung
. Transparent on the stems
They clothed as in the Eastern tale With many coloured gems ;
I watched the peach’s sunny cheek Turn slowly on the wall,
And with no guess at Nature’s laws Saw many an apple fall ;
Gold-tinted, rosy-tinged, their hues, Were mine, and I as they;
The purple bloom was on my life, The down unbrushed away ;
My world was then like His that first A happy garden knew,
Unworn and fresh, and glistening bright With shining spheres of dew ;
My soul was full of light that passed As through a tinctured pane
In warm and vermeil hues, and cast On all its gorgeous stain ;
The dial on its grassy mound That silent marked the hours,
CHILDHOOD.
Time's footfall then awoke no sound, That only trod on flowers),
The sun-flowers and the moon-flowers (These were lilies white and tall), The ancient griffins that looked down
Upon me from the wall! _ These were for tokens unto me And signs, they seemed to pass Into my life as then I lay At noon-day on the grass, And twined a wondrous history Slow twisting, branch and stem, My garlands binding all the while My Being up with them ; And I knew that in the wild-wood *Mid the meadows, on the hill Were flowers, but unto childhood The best were nearest still ; And I sometimes thought, ‘‘ out yonder I will seek for blossoms too,” But turned again the fonder To those that round me grew; Still have I flowers around me— But some that grow so high I cannot reach unto them, And they drop not till they die ; Still I have flowers around me— ~ But some that lie so low I cannot stoop to pluck them, They must wither where they grow ;
CHILDHOOD.
Still have I flowers to eye more fair, More dear unto the heart
Than those, but scattered here and there They bloom, and far apart ;
I scarce know where to find them, I can never hope again
Within one knot to bind them, As I did so often then.
Soon told were childhood’s treasures— The childish world was small,
But its wonders and its pleasures Were its own—it held them ALL !
Once, in a mansion, looking Upon that garden fair, Was a wide and pleasant parlour And an eastward bedroom; there As on my little bed I lay Before my half-shut eyes Danced dreams of pleasure, that the morn Was sure to realise ; When the sun knocked at my window, And to give him entrance free I sprung, because he never came Without some gift for me! Still night brings visions round my bed As sweet but not so true, And still the morning comes with gifts, But now they are not new;
164
CHILDHOOD.
So I cry not now ‘‘ To-morrow’s come !” My spirit, less elate, For all that it may bring to me Full patiently can wait. F My Evening and my Morning then Made up one perfect Day Of joy, and round the parlour fire My winter garden lay ; I played beside it till I saw The deepening shadows fall, _ And through the twilight come and go The pictures on the wall, This was the hour for stories And wondrous tales, that drew My spirit after them to lands Where all was strange and new; And I listened, and I wondered, Then hastened to resume My journey (broken oft by falls That harmed not) round the room ; T have now of longer journeys O’er rougher roads, to tell, And sorer hurts, without the kiss That used to make them well !
» This was the Home of childhood ;
As in a Fairy Ring Within the circle of its hearth
Was drawn each cherished thing ; I sent no restless thought beyond,
I looked not to the door,
CHILDHOOD.
If the whole world had entered there It could not give me more
Than those that sat around it—all I knew of good and wise,
Spoke for me then upon their lips, And lived within their eyes ;
I had no Future then, no Past, My life was unto me
But one bright ~o0w—the happiness That has no History !
Still hath my heart a hearth, but now Its circle is so wide
That those it burns for, never meet Around it side by side ;
They are severed, they are scattered, And now the twilight’s fall
Too often only comes to me With shadows on the wall;
Soon filled with childhood’s measure, The childish heart was small,
Yet they that made its treasure Were its own—it held them ALL !
Now is that hearth deserted, So warm and bright of yore,
And that pleasant garden—through its paths I shall never wander more ;
It is closed to me as surely As if to bar my way,
CHILDHOOD.
The Flaming Sword before its gate Were turning night and day ; Yet I would not therefore sever My spirit from the light, But strive to widen ever Its circle of delight ; For all things from it taken And all it seeks in vain, Together prest and shaken Shall fill it yet again ; For each dim and shadowy token, Each hint to childhood given, Each promise Earth hath broken Shall yet be kept in Heaven, When joy and peace long-parted Meet in an endless kiss,
And perfect Love is joined at last To pure and perfect bliss !.
For the great and gracious Giver Till he spread both hands to bless
The cup that ever floweth o’er And never holdeth less,
With the blessing without sorrow, With the long and perfect Day
Of light, that hath no morrow To take its joy away,
Lets not the heaped-up measure Within the bosom fall ;
Keeps back its richest treasure Until He gives it ALL |
WINTER.
WINTER.
CoLp, cold ! it is very cold
Without the house ; the year is old!
His pulse is faint, and his blood runs slow,
He lies, like a corpse, in his shroud of snow ;
It was drawn round his limbs by a noiseless sprite ;
He grew white with age in a single night.
Wrap him up close, and cover him deep ;
Nothing is left for him now but to sleep !
Sleep away ! dream away! take no care,
All day falls the snow through the darkened air ;
Fast, fast ! for it knows, firm packed together,
The clouds have laid stores in for wintry weather ;
Dark, dark! likea lazy slave, the sun
Leaves his short half-day’s work all undone;
But the night is clear, and the stars shine forth,
And the fire-flags stream in the frosty north,
And the glistening earth in the moon’s pale ray,
Looks fair with the smile of a softer day :
Red breaks the morn, and the evening glows
With the sea-shell’s blush on the drifted snows,
Rose-tinted pearl ! while ’mid the glooms
The flake-feathered trees show like giant plumes.
No stir awakes in the death-like woods,
In those still enchanted solitudes,
Wreathed in all wild fantastic forms
168 WINTER.
Are the tomb-like halls of the King of Storms,
The streams are all chained, and their prisoned waves Sleep a charméd sleep within crystal caves ;
No stir in the waters, no sound on the air,—
Their inmates find shelter, they only know where ; But cold is the comfort they own at the best,
- When the icicle hangs where the swallow found rest, _ And a few of Earth’s wise things when summer was gay Laid by something safe for a winterly day ;
But the wisest among them have taken asleep, Snug coiled up, and warm, while the snow lies so deep, Where the keen frost may bite, yet can do them no harm, As they dream of the summer and all that is warm: No breath in the valley, no breeze on the hill, No stir in the farm, all is dull, all is chill ; And the cattle lie huddled within the fold,— Cold, cold ! it is very cold.
Warm, warm ! it is so warm,
Within the Heart, that all is warm ! The Heart knows a secret to keep out the chill, Let it come when it likes, and stay as it will, For, the keener it blows, and the deeper it snows, The higher the pure flame of charity glows ! When earth grows unkind to her children, nor cares How soon they may sink to that cold breast of hers ;. Though sHE know not pity, love will not withhold; There are those who have hunger to bear with the cold ; There are homes that are no homes! no work and no
wage,
No sunshine for childhood, no comfort for age,
WINTER.
No food and no fire ; but sickness, with care And poverty, dreary companions! are there.
Oh sweet to sit around the board
That Providence hath blessed,—
And sweet to draw the curtain round our warm and sheltered rest ;
To see the faces at whose smile the household hearth grows bright,
And to feel that, ’mid the darkness, in our dwellings there is light ! ;
If we have done what love might do, and wished that it
_ were more, To keep the grim wolf yet awhile without the poor man’s
door ;
And if our day hath not gone down, without its kind relief,
To some of those its sad dawn woke to misery and grief.
We need not fear the frost and cold ; we have found out a charm
To keep our House, and Home, and Heart, and all our Being warm.
Kind Christmas comes with all its gifts, and absent friends seem near,
And the Christian hails earth’s darkest day for, the brightest in his year ;
And there is peace, and there is joy, and there are anthems sung,
170 - THE DEFORMED CHILD.
As once by angels in the air, when Christmas-time was young ;— And our hearts learn the tones of that happy psalm, Warm, warm ! it is very warm.
THE DEFORMED CHILD.
WHEN Summer days are long and warm, they set my little chair
Without the door, and in the sun they leave me sitting there ;
Then many thoughts come to my mind, that others never know,
About myself, and what I feel, and what was long ago.
There are no less than six of us, and all of them are tall
And stout as any you may see, but I was always small :
The neighbours look at me and say, I grow not with the KESts
Then Father strokes my head and says, The least are sometimes best.
But hearing I was not like them, within my head one . day
It came (strange thoughts that children have!) that I'd been changed away !
THE DEFORMED CHILD. 171
And then I cried—but soon the thought brought comfort to my mind,
If I were not their own, I knew they could not be so kind.
For we are happy in our home as ever people were,
Yet sometimes Father looks as if his heart was full of
> Care’:
When things go wrong about the house, then Mother ‘vexed will be;
But neither of them ever spoke a cross word unto me.
And once, when all was dark, they came to kiss me in my bed, ;
And though they thought I slept quite sound, I heard each word they said.
* Poor little thing! to make thee well, we’d freely give our all;
But God knows best !” and on my cheek I felt a warm tear fall.
And then I longed to sit upright, and tell them not to fret, For that my pains were not so bad, I should be stronger yet; But as the words came to my lips, they seemed to die
away, And then they drew the curtain close, and left me as I
lay.
172 THE DEFORMED CHILD.
And so I did not speak at all, and yet my heart was full, =
And now, when I am sick and ill, for fear it makes them dull
To see my face so pale and worn, I creep to Father’s side,
And press it close against his own, and try the pain to
- hide.
Then upon pleasant Sundays, in the long warm evening hours,
Will Father take me in his arms among the fields and flowers ;
And he’ll be just as pleased himself to see the joy I’m in,
And Mother smiles and says she thinks I look not quite so thin.
But it is best within the house when nights are long and dark,
And two of brothers run from school, and two come in from work ;
And they are all so kind to me, the first word they will say
To Mother, at the door, will be, ‘‘Has Bess been well to-day?”
And though I love them all so well, oe may be loved the best,
And brother John, I scarce know why, seems dearer than the rest ;
THE DEFORMED CHILD. 173
But tired and cross as I may feel, when he comes in at : night
And takes me on his knee and chats—then everything is right !
When once, I know, about some work he went quite far
away,
Oh ! how I wished him back again, and counted every day ;
And when, the first of all, 7 heard his foot upon the stair,
Just for that once I longed to run and leave my little
chair !
Then when I look at other girls they never seem to be So pretty as our Hannah is, or half so neat as she ; But she will soon be leaving us, to settle far away With one she loves, and who has loved her well this many a day.
I sometimes think because I have few pleasures, and no cares,
Wherewith to please or vex myself, they like to tell me theirs ;
For sister talks to me for hours, and tells me much that she
Would never breathe unto a soul unless it were to me.
One night, when we were quite alone, she gave the fire a stir,
And shut the door, and showed the ring that William
bought for her,
174 THE DEFORMED CHILD.
And told me all about her house, and often she has said, ¥
That I shall come to live with them, when she and William wed.
But that I think will scarcely be, for when our Hannah © goes,
- What we shall do for want of her, not one among us knows;
And though there is not much in me, the place she leaves ~ to fill ;
Yet something may be always done, where there is but the will.
Then the kind doctor says, and he is very seldom wrong,
That I some day, when no one thinks; may grow both stout and strong;
And should I be, through all my life, a care unto my friends,
Yet Father says, there are worse cares than God  }
Almighty sends !
And I will think of this, and then I never can feel dull,
But pray to God to make me good, and kind, and dutiful;
And when I think on Him that died, it makes my heart grow light,
To know that feeble things on earth are precious in His sight !
THE DAUGHTER OF THE HALL. 175
THE DAUGHTER OF THE HALL. A STORY OF EVERY DAY.
“Where I was wont to meet her, My true love to my call, Came glimmering through the laurels at quiet even-fall, In the garden, by the turrets of the old manorial hall.”
Ir was at church, one summer morn, my good, my dear old wife,
That first I saw the face that made the sunshine of my life ;
Your look still dwelt upon your book, I do not think you knew
The stolen glances that were cast towards the squire’s pew.
‘Seven blooming Daughters then were there, and one a fair young bride,
And at the head the mother sat and looked adown with pride ;
And well she might! when it was said and sung by great and small,
How sweet a family were they, the ladies at the Hall!
But from her lofty place of pride, could that high dame have guessed
The thought that woke, ah, woe betide! in one poor scholar’s breast 3
176 THE DAUGHTER OF THE HALL,
That Z should dare to look at you! yes, it was boldly done,
The Daughter of the wealthy squire! the vicar’s youngest son.
~ The next time that I saw your face was at the county ball,
There with our county member’s son you led off first of all ;
Low in ‘the country dance Z stood, yet to my ears since then,
There has been music in the sound of ‘‘cross hands, back again !”
Yes, you were fair! your sunny hair, I think I see it now,
Rolled back in many a shining curl high from your open brow 3
No step so light, no smile so bright, as yours within the hall,
Yet with an air that might declare, the lady of the Hall.
And I went home to dream that night of many a spins scene,
But through them all, one form, one face shone forth, my fancy’s Queen ;
Of high-born maids and lowly squires,—and woke from slumber’s thrall,
To see the dawning gild with light the turrets of the Hall,
THE DAUGHTER OF THE HALL. 177
Ah! now I thought, perhaps ske wakes, but not from dreams of me.
My homage can be nought to her, unknown then let it be;
Unknown! uncared for! but just then, Hope stole so slily in,
And something whispered that faint heart might ne’er fair lady win ;
And then I wrote! how many times, in days that are
long past,
Have you and I laughed o’er those rhymes, my first but not my last 5
For in your father’s stately woods does many a tree declare,
(If Time hath spared the letters yet) that Emma’s smile was fair ;
Then term-time came, and with it brought some academic bays,
Ah! dear to youthful scholar’s heart, the hard-won meed of praise !
The county paper will not fail, I thought, to tell her all,
Ves, surely they will speak of me, this morning at the Hall !
Then Fancy flew on burnished wing an aérial race with Time, O’er many a strange and brilliant land, through many a glowing clime ; 593
178 THE DAUGHIER OF THE HALL.
Then like a bright and wandering bird, that answered to my call
Would fold its soft and gleaming plumes upon the ancient Hall.
- Old Time wore on; there dawned a day that brought me to your feet,
Oft have we lived it o’er since then, and still the —— is sweet !
Your sisters sighed, ** True love was all, with or without a purse,”
And once for all your brother said, that Emma might do worse.
The good old Squire ; I see him yet ! the squire of days bygone,
Who had a laugh for every jest, the loudest for his own,
«© My seven fair daughters ! shall I find a lord apiece for all?
A worthy youth, our vicar’s son, and welcome at the Hall!”
Your Lady-mother smoothed her brow, and smiled her stately smile,
And made some show of courtesy to mine within the aisle,
Yet wore throughout a dignified and somewhat frigid micn,
And did not take me to her heart until I was a Dean.
THE LOVERS’ QUARREL. 179
Full fifty years since then have wrought their web of good and ill,
But only seem in heart and thought to bind us closer still!
** Time changes all,” the saying goes, but we can surely prove,
That his cold breath may pass in vain o’er evergreens like Love.
I wonder, when in idler hours I read of sylvan shades,
And noble youths who sought for truth with simple vil- lage maids,
If Zhad found a gentler wife, a truer ’mong them all,
Than SHE who somewhat stooped to me, the Daughter of the Hall!
THE LOVERS’ QUARREL.
LIGHT is the Lover’s quarrel, men say—I think not so,
It is the hand we love the best that deals the hardest blow,
And the wounds that come from it the heart is still too proud to show,
So closes over them; too proud? Nay. Pride is not so strong
As that which fain a hurt would hide although it rankle long,
From soothing that would only chafe, and pity that would wrong ;
180 THE LOVERS’ QUARREL.
For Anger born of Love, although like sweetest things that turn
The bitterest of all, it seem each soft’ning thought to spurn,
Yet owns the country whence it came, and after it will yearn, —
And something there is still that brooks no word or thought unkind, . And seeks amid its very pain some fond excuse to find, For what was dear, and may not all at once be cast behind;
I speak of what I know full well, for thus it chanced of _ yore,
(I know not now where blame should rest, so lay it at the door
Of Love, that having given so much, will still exact the more).
With me and Her I love—one Eve our parting was in scorn,
Oh! dimly, sadly broke the next and many an atfter- dawn,
With sense of something gone from me, and evermore withdrawn;
For Sunrise used within my heart to wake a matin chime
Of bells, that rung me to a strife untold as yet in rhyme,
Though fierce as Dragon-Fight of old—the Lover's against Time!
THE LOVERS’ QUARREL. . 181
Like Errant Knight I pressed him sore and found him hard to kill,
Yet strove with action and emprise to gain upon him still,
And with some task of nobleness each lingering pause to fill.
Between the hours we used to meet ; but now with even flow Lone
His sands might run, I would not try to shake them to and fro,
And his great Chariot-wheels for me might move on swift
or slow,
For all the days that used to shine in characters of light
Upon the Kalends of my life marked out in red and white,
Had faded, when “their Saint no more would bless her Votary’s sight ;
And so I thought I will away, nor linger here alone, To vex my heart out, like a ghost that makes an idle
moan, About the place where joy was once and is for ever
flown ;
Better to see her never more, than meet as now we meet, Yet will I see her once again, I said ; and strove to cheat To sternness and to pride my heart that told me it was
sweet
182 . THE LOVERS’ QUARREL.
To meet her even thus ; I thought, some crowded scene :
were best,
Less room for feelings there to rise that have to be repressed ;
There she may pass me if she will as one among the ~
rest,
And less be there to bring again the thought of things gone by,
And easier for me to bear her changed, averted eye,
And to cold words of courtesy make fitting, due reply.
Small heart had I for revels then, and little graced, I trow, :
The one I went to as I stood with dark, abstracted brow
And folded arms,—I see it all distinct before me now,
The gay and lighted room, the crowd of smiling faces there,
Z smiled (for quickly learnt the stern moralities of Care ;)
“Tt only is that they than I the mask more closely wear.”
Was she among the maskers then ?—that came into the
room
With frank sweet smile, and cheek that blushed in beauty’s conscious bloom ;
I wrapt my spirit at the sight in deeper, thicker gloom,
THE LOVERS’ QUARREL. 153
And to my brain the endless strain more dull and vexing grew,
The dance swept onwards—it were well to play the pageant through ;
I thought, and with a listless step its maze I threaded too,
And knew not she was nigh until my ear her accents met,
*€ You leave us then so soon! Farewell!” and softer, lower yet
In tones that none beside might hear, ‘‘ Forgive, but
don’t forget.”
I looked up at her words, and met an eye whose gentle ray
Sunk timid ’neath my anxious gaze, yet was not turned away,
And the smile that used to be of old, as kind, but not so
gay 5
The ice about my heart gave way, and with a generous shame,
I answered quick, ‘‘ Forgive! nay! now too much from me you claim,
For hard I find it to forgive the only one to blame,
“Unless your kindness intercede, and plead for him awhile,
You that alone in all the world can sooth and reconcile
My wayward spirit with itself,’—she answered by a
smile.
THE OLD FAMILY.
THE OLD FAMILY.
Nor now is given, as of old, unto the free of hand,
And to the liberal of soul, the fulness of the land ;
Or THEY would have been with us still, our i and homes among,
~ The good old family, that held by hill and stream so long.
The oldest tales among us told, the oldest song e’er sung,
Could bring no trace of times when that our goodly tree was young ;
They lived among us, sire and son, among us when they died,
We laid them where their Fathers lie, each resting side by side.
They were so much our own, that still their pleasure was our pride,
When a child was born unto the house, or the heir brought home his bride ;
We owned a part in all they had—it eames that we went shares
In Life, when we partook their joys, and half forgot our cares ;
Oh! when shall we e’er see the like of them we loved, again ?
Where meet such kindly hearts to feel for all the poor man’s pain?
THE OLD FAMILY. 185
When in his hour of gladness zow shall those kind tones be heard,
To make it double with the smile that sweetened every word?
A word from them, a smile, a look, oh! it was sweeter far
Than all the gifts that others give, than all their favours are ;
Yet they were bountiful and free as any that may live,
But with their gifts the blessing came, that money cannot give.
How oft it comes within my mind, the morning of the day,
When we took our leave of them—the last, before they went away:
The beating hearts, the trembling hands, the tongues that strove to tell
Our gratitude and love to them, who knew it all so well.
There was no child but owned their care, no aged soul and poor,
But blessed their shadow, as it fell within the humble door ;
No bed of sickness, where their words of comfort did not
wake ; May He who saw their love to us ¢herr bed in sickness
make!
186 THE OLD FAMILY.
May He be with them in their ways, wherever they may £9,
And give to them the Heritage the faithful only know ;
And they have wealth, that will abide when earthly goods liens
In the poor man’s love, the poor man’s prayer, and the blessing of his heart !
How sad it seemed to miss their words of greeting on our ways,
How-heavily our work went on without their cheering praise ;
We felt like those who lose on earth their refuge and their stay,
When they, the family we loved, went from us far away.
They left with us their treasure,—yes, we hold what they held dear,
The father, oz- good father, laid for ever with us here ;
Not in his day the change came o’er the scenes he loved the best,
He sleeps, nor dreams of what is now, safe gathered to his rest.
The noble-hearted gentleman, who house and hand and heart
So open held, that in his own he only claimed a part ;
THE OLD FAMILY. 187
He bore his state unto the last, the snows of winter fell,* But might not chill the true-born soul that loved us all so well!
How sad it seemed to us to see the velvet lawn unmown,
Weeds springing in the garden that our Lady called her own !
The pleasant lake choked up and dry, and swamped the little boat
That bore the children in their glee so merrily afloat.
Our fine young gentlemen, no more when Autumn days grow dark,
We hear their loud and cheerful tones come ringing through the park ;
Their dogs find other masters now, it seemed to do us wrong
That aught that zzey had liked so well to others should belong.
And strangers now live at the Hall, oh! sad to us and
strange
It seems, to see their places filled, when hearts have known no change ;
Strange voices sounding in our ears, strange faces in the pew,
When Sunday found the fairest ones, the dearest that we knew.
* « A mirthful man was he! the snows of age Fell on him, but they chilled not.”—Scorr.
188 THE OLD FAMILY.
Yet it were evil to complain, the new may be the kind,
But can they be ¢o ws like Them—to whom each heart and mind
Was like a book before them spread, where they might read at will.
And ’mid our errors trace their names, the loved and honoured still.
We feel it still, though from us gone, the smile that was our praise,
The eye that mourned to see our steps withdraw from virtue’s ways ;
The patient words, the gentle deeds, that strove to lead us on
In paths of pleasantness and peace, ¢hey have not surely gone !
We think of Them, that if they come once more to the old place,
Our looks may answer theirs, nor fear to meet them face to face ;
For the land, the land is still their own, and they may come once more,
To flourish where the ancient stock was wont to thrive of yore,
We think of them when Spring sends forth the bud upon the bough,
And wish that they could see how well the young woods promise now ;
BALLAD. 189
When Autumn brings the harvest round, we wish that they could see How well the reapers do their work upon the upland lea.
Oh! things have changed with us, with aus since last they went away,
And youthful brows are marked with care, and hair is mixed with grey ;
And They will look on many a change, on children grown to men,
But the heart,—the heart will be the same to welccme them again !
BALLAD.
**TDo you think of the days that are gone, Jeanie? As ye sit by your fire at night,
Do ye wish that the morn might bring back the time, When your heart and your step were light?”
‘€T think of the days that are gone, Robin, And all that I joyed in them,
But the fairest that ever arose on me I have never wished back again.”
‘Do ye think of the hopes that are gone, Jeanie? As ye sit by your fire at night,
Do ye reckon them o’er, as they faded fast, Like buds in an early blight?”
190 THE IRISH EMIGRANT’S SONG.
“‘T think of the hopes that are gone, Robin, But I mourn not their stay was fleet,
For they fell as the leaves of the red Rose fali, That even in fading are sweet.”
**Do ye think of the friends that are gone, Mage e As ye sit by your fire at night,
Do ye wish they were round you again once more, By the hearth that they made so bright ? ”
‘*T think of the friends that are gone, Robin, They are dear to my heart as then,
But the best and the dearest among them all, I have never wished back again !”
THE IRISH EMIGRANT’S SONG. FOR MUSIC.
ALoNE—amid the darkening woods I hear them lightly pass,
And in the twilight little feet come stealing o’er the grass ;
Kind voices rise when all is still, and call me by my name,
And pleasant faces look on me from out the Pine-wood flame : :
Oh! my Brothers and my Sisters, how I miss you here alone !
Oh! Father and my Mother dear, do you think upon your own?
THE IRISH EMIGRANT'S SONG. 191
Who prays for you each night and morn*—Och hone! Och hone ! Thinking on the days that are long enough agone !
I sit beside the mighty stream that rolls down like a sea,
And think upon the Burn-side where my true love sat by me!
Where we said our sad and parting words the evening of the day, J
The last I spent with them I loved before I came away ;
Where my little Kathleen sat by me, her hand within my
"own,
And wept to think that I should go so far away alone;
It seems to me I see her still—Och hone! Och hone!
Thinking of the days that are long enough agone !
No more the thousand welcomes send their music to my heart,
No more the kind ‘‘ Heaven prosper ye !” when kindred meet and part ;
Amid the trackless forest-wilds a lonely man I stray,
Where never word of greeting comes to cheer me on my way $
Far from the looks I love the best, from each familiar tone,
Here must I live and labour on, alone—alone !
Yet I work, I work and pray for them—Och hone! Och hone !
Thinking on the days that are long enough agone !
* The burden of this songis that of a very ancient Irish ditty, —See LOCKHART’S Life af Scott.
SONGS OF FAREWELL.
SONGS OF FAREWELL PARTING,
** They that my trust must grow to, dwell not here. They are with all my other comforts, Far hence.”
Ou! speak of me, my friends! when I am gone, Bind with my name some old familiar strain, That it may bear a greeting on its tone
From One, heart-woven with its linkéd chain.
For I will speak of you ! your names will rise When the full heart would of its treasure tell, And I will seek in stranger looks and eyes To trace the aspects I have loved so well.
Oh! think of me, my friends ! when I am gone Let not my memory lightly pass away,
With pleasant songs forgotten—or as one
A stranger-guest, abiding but a day.
For I will think of you! a purer ray
Will gild Life’s journey, flung from times of old, And Thought will reckon o’er, when far away, Their gentle memories—its hoarded gold.
Oh ! dream of me, my friends ! when I am gone, Then be your happy slumbers lightly stirred
By tender shadows from the distance thrown, By echoes sweet of some remembered word.
SONGS OF FAREWELL.
For on my visions haunting forms will rise,
And I will seek in sleep a clasping hand,
And I shall look within those much-loved eyes, Once more, within the pleasant dreaming land !
Oh! pray for me, my friends! when I am gone Still with your voices let my name arise, Where once my accents mingled in the tone
Of your sweet hymns and twilight harmonies.
For I will pray for you ! my spirit lone
Will seek the language-that its kindred share ; Yes ! there, beloved friends ! when I am gone It will be mine, dear friends, to meet you ¢here !
SONGS OF FAREWELL. DEATH.
‘* Leaves and clustered fruits, and flowers eterne, Eternal to the world, but not to me.”—Hoop.
THE Spring will come again, dear friends,
The Swallow o’er the Sea ;
The bud will hang upon the bough,
The blossom on the tree ;
And many a pleasant sound will rise to greet her on her way,
The voice of bird, and leaf, and stream, and warm winds in their play ;
554
194 SONGS OF FAREWELL.
Oh! sweet the airs that round her breathe! and bounti- ful is she,
‘She bringeth all the things that fresh, and sweet, and hopeful be ; }
She scatters promise on the Earth with open hand and free,
But not for me, my friends,
But not for me!
Summer will come again, dear friends,
Low murmurs of the Bee
Will rise through the long sunny day
Above the flowery lea ;
The deep and dreamy woods will own the slumbrous spell she weaves,
And send a greeting, mixed with sighs, through all their quivering leaves,
Oh, precious are her glowing gifts! and plenteous is she,
She bringeth all the lovely things that bright and fragrant be;
She scatters fulness on the Earth with lavish hand and free,
But not for me, my friends,
But not for me !
Autumn will come again, dear friends, His spirit-touch will be . With gold upon the harvest field, With crimson on the tree ;
SONGS OF FAREWELL. 195
He passeth o’er the silent woods, they wither at his breath, :
Slow fading in a still decay, a change that is not Death.
Oh ! rich, and liberal, and wise, and provident is he!
He taketh to his Garner-house the things that ripene:’ be; -
He gathereth his store from Earth, all silently—
And he will gather me, my friends,
He will gather me]!
Scattered Poems,
THE EDEL WEISS.
The following exquisite little poem was suggested upon receiving the sweet Alpine flower from Mr. William Howitt.
**T was born in my little shroud, All woolly, warm, and white ;
I live in the mist and the cloud, I live for my own delight.
“‘T see far beneath me crowd The Alpine roses red
And the gentian blue, sun-fed, That makes the valleys bright.
* T bloom for the eagle’s eye, I bloom for the daring hand,
I live but for God, and I die
Unto Him, and at His command !”
GOOD-NIGHT, GOOD-BVE.
A PARTING SONG.
‘* DEEM not these tears that freely fall Are all for love, for sorrow all.
Tis love, ’tis youth, ’tis joy that weep Together, ere they sink to sleep !
***Tis love that kindles at thine eye ; *Tis rapture trembling on thy sigh ; ’Tis all that from my life I miss,
I part from, in thy parting kiss.
Tt is the heart ¢Ay voice hath stirrred, That now would bid its voice be heard, That clasps thee close, that feels thee near, That seeks a word, and finds a tear!”
GOOD-NIGHT, GOOD-BYE,
** SAY not good-bye ! dear friend, from thee A word too sad that word would be. Say not good-bye! Say but good-night, And say it with thy tender, light, Caressing voice, that links the bliss Of yet another day with this,
Say but good-night !
198 FIDELITY REWARDED.
‘© Say not good-bye! say but good-night : A word that blesses in its flight,
In leaving hope of many a kind,
Sweet day like this we leave behind.
Say but good-night! Oh never say
A word that taketh thee away !
Say but good-night ! Good-night !”
FIDELITY REWARDED, /
‘We experimented on dogs—old, and otherwise useless."— Professor RUTHERFORD.
Y I was not useful? So
He says, nor young nor strong. My master ought to know, I’ve followed him so long.
For many and many a day I followed well content, Might I but go the way That he, my master, went.
I listened for his foot,
I strove his thought to scan ; For I was but a brute,
And he I loved was man.
FIDELITY REWARDED.
O’er all that he held dear, A patient watch to keep, With light, attentive ear I listened in my sleep.
The stealthy foot withdrew, The daring hand was stayed ;
My growl the robber knew, And fled the spot dismayed.
I knew my master’s voice, My nature’s bounded plan
Had left my love no choice, And he I loved was man.
And often would I watch
His inmost thought to prove, His hidden will to catch :
A brute can only love.
I waited for a crumb, From off his daily meal
To fall for me: a dumb Poor brute can only feel.
I thought he loved me well,
But when my eye grew dim— I leave the tale I tell
As it is told by him—
GRAND CGEUR.
Some secret hint to track
Of life’s poor trembling flame, He nailed me to a rack,
He pierced and tore my frame.
He saw me slowly die In agonies acute:
For he was man, and I Was nothing but a brute !
“GRAND C@UR POUR GRANDE HEURE.”
‘* AND is it, then, by fate or chance Decreed, that as the ages roll
The world shall be without its France, The body be without its soul ?
Yea ! let them spurn thee with their heel, And plunge within thy heart their steel ; Be thine all anguish life can feel ;
Their best, their worst, let foeman try, Beloved France! thou canst not die !
“No ! not though to dust should grind, And beat thee into fragments small, And scatter thee unto the wind ! Instinct, each fiery particle
THE STAGE COACH.
With life, as is the breath of God, Would kindle into life the clod Whereon it fell ; and thou be chief In glory, as thou art in grief!
** Arise ! and grapple with thy foes, Thy foes without, thy foes within ; And fear not thou to meet and close In pangs of death ! thy travail throes Are these ; a purer life to win ;
Shake forth thy Lilies! let thy Lark Soar, singing still above thy dark, Ensanguined fields; the dawn is nigh ; Beloved France ! thou canst not die!”
September 29th, 1870.
THE STAGE COACH.
‘*¢ CoME now, let us take a journey That costs neither trouble nor care ;
What if where we are going we know not, Nor if we shall ever get there,
What matter! The road is so pleasant, And we pay not a heavy fare.
** What matter, oh! what matter Should even the coach upset,
And all the passengers scatter? Such chances are often met,
HA Y-MAKING.
Our driver might be more steady, But we know-that the best of all
Riders are those that are ready
And willing to meet with a fall.
** Come, quick now, and take your places, , The guard is blowing his horn 3 The horses are in the traces, They have had their feed of corn. London—Paris—wherever it pleases, You may ride in our Coach of State ; We have no luggage to tease us, And we carry but little weight.”
HAY-MAKING.,
s* Many a long, hard-working day
Life brings us ! and many an hour of play ! But they never come now together.
Playing at work, and working at play,
As they came to us children among the hay
In the breath of the warm June weather.
‘* Oft with our little rakes at play Making believe at making hay, With grave and steadfast endeavour 5
THE RIVALS.
Caught by an arm, and out of sight Hurled and hidden, and buried light Tn laughter and hay for ever.
‘* Now pass the hours of work and play With a step more slow, and the summer’s day Grows short, and more cold the weather. Calm is our work now, and quiet our play; And we take them apart as best we may, For they come no more together.”
THE RIVALS.
<¢ WHAT rapture in the twilight dim ! With others standing by to see:
Her words, her smiles, were all for him ; But, oh! she gave her hand to me.
‘* What rapture at the twilight’s close ! He gave her on his bended knee
The wealth of all his garden ; rose And jessamine ; when none could see,
A flower from all the rest she chose ; And oh! she gave that flower to me.
204 ATHANASIUS CONTRA MUNDUM.
‘* What rapture in the twilight dim,
To dance the circling saraband, With others standing by to see,
We stood together hand-in-hand, And Inez gave her hand to him ;
But oh ! she kept her heart for me.”
ATHANASIUS CONTRA MUNDUM. (Zo the memory of David Livingstone.)
*¢ He stood within the wilderness and cried ; From hearts innumerable went up a groan, But voice was none, nor any that replied ;
“Not Europe, vowed to lofty prudence tied To dull convention, colder than a stone ; Not Asia, fierce or fawning, sleek of hide ;
“Nor thou, brute Africa ! a patient, strong Mute ass, between two burthens couchant long, He stood within the wilderness and cried ;
‘* Then all at once, as when a mighty tide Hurls a huge wave before it, heaved and rose The world’s high heart to battle with its foes: ffe stayed within the wilderness and died.”
“ALL THROUGH THE DAY. 205
ALL THROUGH THE DAY.
** Be the day never so long, It ringeth at last unto even-song-” —Queen Elizabeth's Book of Hours.
ALL through the day, my love, watching thine eye, Holding thy hand in mine, I will be nigh ;
I cannot cheer thee, love, yet will I stay;
I will be near thee, love, all through the day.
All through the day, my love, seeking in vain Wings for the hours that pass weighted with pain, All things are drear to thee, nothing is gay ;
Yet I am dear to thee, so I will stay.
All through this day of ours, though it be long, Open for us no flowers, wakens no song ; Reddens the autumn leaf, withers the rose,
All through this way of ours, unto its close.
Worn is thy frame, my love, -wan is thy cheek, Low are thine accents, and broken, and weak ; Yet sweet is our silence, the words that we say Are sweet, as I sit by thee all through the day.
All through the day, my love, all through the day,
Steals the swift shadow on, life flits away ;
Soft will our sleep be then, happy and light,
All through the night, my love, all through the night.”
THEKLA.
THEKLA,
“ This night we must away.”
** Away |—and whither?”
‘* Whither ? There is but one place in the world Where he lies buried.”—
“Tf I could see him, it were well with me.” —COLERIDGE’S Wallenstein.
IF I could see him, it were well with me,— If I might look once more upon his brow,
If I might hear his voice! It may not be: Only the grave—A7s grave—is left me now !
Haste thou with me, true friend! Upon the air Dim phantoms rise, drear echoes Jurk around :
Oh ! linger not—deep quiet waits me zhere, Such as before his time the loved hath found !
Make thou no question : doubting, thou dost wrong The first, the holy impulse of the breast ;
Grief hath deep oracles ; resistless, strong, The voiceless summons drawing me to rest !
If thou hadst loved like me, then hadst thou known That the lorn heart would with its treasure be ; Where he is now,—with Death ! there, there alone,
Beside his grave may life abide for me !
THEKLA. _ 207
There shall my wound be eased, my tears will flow; There will my spirit gather from despair, Strength for a patient communing with woe— All that hath passed from life awaits me there!
All that with thee, beloved ! on my day
Arose and vanished with thee !—light that shed Its blissful colouring around my way,
Yet lingers ¢heve a halo round the dead !
There let us meet ! no alien destiny ~ Pursues us now—our Houses’ deadly strife Is stilled for ever—now, the soul is free, For death hath loosed the tangled coils of life.
Discord and hate were round us: all the air Was dark with treachery—yet in the heart,
Mid those fierce elements, unfolding fair,
- An inner world was ours—a life apart.
Thou art gone hence : far, far above desire Or hope: the changeful planets now for thee May bear no message on their scrolls of fire, To thrill thy soul with boding augury.
With all thy glory round thee thou hast sped, Star-like and swift unto a kindred sphere ; And with thee it is well! Yet hope hath fled,
And life grows cold for her that lingers here,
THE FLAMING OAR,
There is no wish, no future :—evermore The world is desolate—but not the heart : O’er the bright treasure of z¢s garnered store, No change, no after-blight, hath power or part.
For I have lived and loved! It hath been mine, The pure glad sunshine ot our earthly day— Thy earnest, Father ! of the bliss divine That changeth not, that passeth not away !
For I have lived and loved! Oh life and love I feel ye pass together! In your might
Ye bear me onwards, upwards—there, above, No shadow falls o’er your unclouded light !
THE FLAMING OAR.
A burning and flaming oar was the device of the French Admiral, Andre de Lavel; it is still to be seen ina suburb of the town of Melun, as a sign of his fervent and zealous activity for his king and country, more especially by sea, in the govern- ment of naval affairs, Underneath it is the motto —
“POUR UN AULTRE, NON,”
‘*T GIRD me not for every cause,
I answer not to every call,
I do not wear my heart for daws
To peck, nor weep when sparrows fall,
THE SINGER.
But when I give, I give my all,
For her my love, for him my friend,
My steel, my gold, my life I spend ;
My sword shall flash, my blood shall flow For these, But for Another, No!
‘« Show me but cause for quarrel strong, That arms the right against the wrong, That bids me battle with the brave,
To crush the tyrant, free the slave,
Then through the wave I winged will fly, Will cleave with oars the yielding sky,
Will flame through ocean, float through air, Will all things suffer, do and dare,
For friend I love, for cause I know,
I fight! But for aught other, No!”
THE SINGER.
Brrore the loud acclaim that rose To greet her as she came, She bent with lowly grace that seemed Such tribute to disclaim ; With arms meek-folded on her breast And drooping head, she stood ; Then raised a glance that seemed to plead For youth and womanhood ; =/555 SS ————————————eEeE—E—EEEeE——
THE SINGER.
A soft, beseeching smile, a look,
As if all silently The kindness to her heart she took, And put the homage by.
She stood dejected then, methought, A Captive, though a Queen,
Before the throng—when sudden passed A change across her mien ;
Unto her full dilating eye, Unto her slender hand,
There came a light of sovereignty, A gesture of command :
And to her lip an eager flow Of song, that seemed to bear
Her soul away on rushing wings Unto its native air ;
Her eyes was fixed, her cheek flushed bright With power ; she seemed to call
On spirits duteous to her voice At every rise and fall ;
There was no triumph on her brow, No tumult in her breast,
Her soaring soul had won its home, And smiled there as at rest ;
She felt no more those countless eyes Upon her ; she had gained
A region where they troubled not
_ The joy she had attained ;
THE SINGER.
Now, now, she spoke her native speech, An utterance fraught with spells,
The echoes of the heart to reach Within their slumber-cells :
And many a quick unbidden sigh, And starting tear, revealed
How surely at her touch the springs Of feeling were unsealed ;
The Present seemed unto the Past For one sweet moment bound,
With allits broken ties made fast, And all its lost ones found ;
They who were always loved, seemed now Yet more than ever dear ;
Yet closer to the. heart they came : That always were so near:
And trembling back unto the lips As if they ne’er had changed,
Old names returned that had been thence Long severed, long estranged ;
For in the strain, like those that fall On wanderers as they roam,
The exiled spirit found once more Its country and its home !
She ceased, yet on her parted lips A happy smile abode,
As if the sweetness of her song Vet lingered whence it flowed ;
a ee
THE SINGER.
But for a while—her bosom heaved, She was the same no more, The light and spirit fled ; she stood As she had stood before ; Unheard, unheeded to her ear The shouts of rapture came, A-voice had once more power to thrill, That only spoke her name; Unseen, unheeded, at her feet Fell many a bright bouquet, A single flower, in silence given, Was once more sweet than they ; For link by link, her own wild strain
Had drawn her spirit back,
By windings of a silver chain Upon a long-lost track.
And with her song her heart returned, To days for ever gone,
Ere Woman’s gift of Fame was hers, The Many for the One !
F’en thus, Oh Earth! before thee still Thy Poet-Singers stand,
And bear the soul upon their songs Unto its native land ;
And even thus, with loud acclaim The praise of skill, of art,
Is dealt to those who only speak The language of the heart !
THE LITTLE GIRL'S LAMENT7, 213
While they who love and listen best Can little guess or know,
The wounds that from the Singer’s breast Have let such sweetness flow ;
They guess not whence it gushing, starts The clear and piercing tone,
That wins its way to other hearts, Through anguish of its own !
They know not Mastery must spring From conflict and from strife ;
These are not only Songs they sing, They are the Singer’s Life |
THE LITTLE GIRL’S LAMENT.
Is Heaven a long way off, Mother? I watch through all the day
To see my Father coming back, And meet him on the way.
And when the night comes on, I stand Where once I used to wait,
To see him coming from the fields, And meet him at the gate ;
Then I used to put my hand in his, ’ And cared not more to play ;
But I never meet him coming zow, However long I stay.
THE LITTLE GIRL’S LAMENT.
And you tell me he’s in Heaven, and far, Far happier than we ;
And loves us still the same—but how,
Dear Mother, can that be?
For he never left us for a day To market or to fair,
But the best of all that Father saw,
He brought for us to share.
He cared for nothing then but us—
I have heard Father say, That coming back made worth his while Sometimes to go away 3
He used to say he liked our house Far better than the Hall ;
He would not change it for the best,
The grandest place of all:
And if where he is now, Mother, All is so good and fair,
He would have come back long ago, To take us with him there.
He never would be missed from Heaven : I have heard Father say
How many angels God has there,
To praise Him night’and day ;
THE LITTLE GIRL’S LAMENT.
He never would be missed in Heaven, From all that blessed throng ;
And we—oh ! we have missed him here, So sadly and so long!
But if he came to fetch us, then I would hold his hand so fast, I would not let it go again Till all the way was past ;
He’d tell me all that he has seen, But Z would never say
How dull and lonely we have been Since he went far away.
When you raised me to the bed, Mother, And I kissed him on the cheek,
His cheek was pale and very cold, And his voice was low and weak.
And yet I can remember well Each word that he spoke then,
For he said I must be a dear, good girl, And we should meet again !
And oh! but I have tried since then To be good through all the day ;
I have done whatever you bid me, Mother, Yet Father stays away !
216 THE RAILWAY STATION.
Is it because God loves him so ?— I know that in his love
He takes the good away from earth, To live with him above!
Oh ! that God had not loved him so! For then he might have staid
And kissed me as he used at nights, When by his knee I played ;
Oh ! that he had not been so good, So patient, or so kind !
Oh ! had but we been more like him, And not been left behind !
THE RAILWAY STATION.
Nor well nor wisely some have said, ‘‘ Among us Once moved a spirit fair, that now hath fled,” And deemed, that at the hurrying sounds which throng us, Its shining wings for sudden flight were spread 3
Not all the turmoil of the Age of Iron
Can scare that Spirit hence; like some sweet bird That loud harsh voices in its cage environ,
It sings above them all, and will be heard !
THE RAILWAY STATION. 217
Not for the noise of axes or of hammers, Will that sweet bird forsake her chosen nest ; Her warblings pierce through all those deafening clamours, But surer to their echoes in the breast.
And not the Past alone, with all its guerdon
Of twilight sounds and shadows, bids them rise ; But soft, above the noontide heat and burden
Of the stern present, float those melodies ;
- For not with Baron bold, with Minstrel tender, Not with the ringing sound of shield and lance, Not with the Field of Gold in all its splendour, Died out the generous flame of old Romance :
Still, on a nobler strife than tilt or tourney, Rides forth the errant-knight, with brow elate ; Still patient pilgrims take, in hope, their journey ; Still meek and cloistered spirits stand and wait :
Still hath the living, moving world around us, Its legends, fair with honour, bright with truth ; Still, as in tales that in our childhood bound us, Love holds the fond traditions of its youth !
We need not linger o’er the fading traces Of lost Divinities ; or seek to hold
Their serious converse ’mid Earth’s green, waste places, Or by her lonely fountains, as of old :
218 THE RAILWAY STATION.
For, far remote from Nature’s fair creations, Within the busy mart, the crowded street,
With sudden, sweet, unlooked-for revelations Of a bright Presence we may chance to meet ;
F’en zow, beside a restless tide’s commotion, I stand and hear, in broken music swell, Above the ebb and flow of Life’s great ocean, An under-song of greeting and farewell.
For here are Meetings : moments that inherit The hopes and wishes, that through months and years Have held such anxious converse with the spirit,
That now its joy can only speak in tears ;
And here are Partings : hands that soon must sever, Yet clasp the firmer ; heart, that unto heart,
Was ne’er so closely bound before, nor ever So near the other as when now they part ;
And here Time holds his steady pace unbroken, For all that crowds within his narrow scope ; For all the language, uttered and unspoken, That will return when Memory comforts Hope !
One short and hurried moment, and for ever Flies, like a dream, its sweetness and its pain; And, for the hearts that love, the hands that sever, Who knows what meetings are in store again?
LADY ALICE'S SHRIFT, 219
They who are left, unto their homes returning, With musing step, trace o’er each by-gone scene ;
And they upon their journey—doth no yearning, No backward glance revert to what hath been?
Yes ! for a while, perchance, a tear-drop starting, Dims the bright scenes that greet the eye and mind ; But here—as ever in Life’s cup of Parting— Theirs is the bitterness who stay behind !
So in Life’s sternest, last Farewell, may waken A yearning thought, a backward glance be thrown By them who leave: but oh ! how blest the Taken— To those who stay behind when THEY are gone!
LADY ALICE’S SHRIFT.
Ye Iam not prone to weeping, as our sex commonly are— —ButI have that grief lodged here which burns worse than tears drown.”—SHAKESPEARE.
CoME to me, little Sister, thine arms around me twine,
And press upon my fever’d cheek that smooth bright cheek of thine ;
And fold my burning hands in thine that are so cool and soft,
And kiss me, little sister, kiss me tenderly and oft :
220 LADY ALICE’S SHRIFT.
The kisses are so close and kind, they seem to dull the pain,
They know not of—upon my heart they fall like summer rain $3
They fall where all is parched and mae: ! soft and kind are they,
But they cannot draw the arrow forth, or charm its hurt away !
I watched thee in thy sleep last night, when thou didst rise and say,
‘< What of the Revel, Sister? did ye dance until the day?”
And clasped thine arms about my neck half consciously, and then,
E’en with the smile upon thy face, sank back in sleep again ;
And stirred no more till thou didst wake all rosy with the morn ;
The Morn! I watched it slowly glide and glimmer into dawn,
With set and sleepless eyes; yet, oh ! more happy not to know
The sharp return of sense to ill—the wakening to woe!
The day is past, I know not how, and it is night again ;
I did not think to speak, nor cast the shadow of my pain
On that young heart of thine, but love for me hath made it wise,
And there is soothing in thy voice, and comfort in thine eyes 3
LADY ALICE'S SHRIFT. 221
And the darkness and the silence for my spirit are too strong $ ,
My heart, it is a Fear to me, a place where spectres throng,
And whisper it—and doleful things have made their dwelling there,
T dare not sit alone with them, to commune with despair ;
And yet it is a little while, a little while—a day,
Since it fluttered light within my breast, and trifles made it gay. ‘
Isee the mirror where_I stood last night, and lingered there,
Well pleased to hear thee jest and say, I never looked so fair ;
Oh ! what a world of hopes and fears lay hid beneath the smile
I heard thee with, and spoke not, thought was all so sweet the while :
There is no vanity in Love,—yet fain it would be fair,
It would é¢ a/Z things for the loved, and I knew He would be there !
He had been absent, silent long, and absence is unkind,
And on the mist that silence draws about the heart and mind
Cold shadows flit, and formless doubts loom dim, but these I knew
Would scatter at his greeting smile as when the sun breaks through ;
222 LADY ALICE'S SHRIFT.
Thou know’st that picture in the Hall, the lady likea | Bride,
So bright and queenly, with her lip of sweetness and of pride ; :
There is a legend writ beneath—a bleeding heart in twain,—
Yet on her browa look that tells the story far more —s
Of how, within these halls she trod a measure out, nor stayed
For deathful tidings crowding fast, of love and trust betrayed,
And friends betraying,—still she moved with steady step and eye, é
And chid the music for its pause ‘sound like my heart, sound high.”
She was a Daughter of our House, her eyes were on my soul
Last night, they followed me, their light was asa fiery scroll,
Tread in them ‘Dance! dance thy youth thy bloom, thy life away,
Thou never canst be happy more, it is well thou shouldst be gay.
“Dance, till the flowers fall from thy brow and wither on thy breast ;
Dance, wherefore shouldst Zou stay or pause, that never more mayst rest ?
LADY ALICE’S SHRIFT. 223
Our lot is one—Dance on, dance on, thou dost but end the show, And close the measure that I trod two hundred years ago.”
Not so; she died,—her spirit passed in that proud smile, and I—
Oh ! Sister, there is that in me that cannot rest or die ;
The grave is full of quietness—forgetfulness is deep,
And Death is far away from me, as far away as Sleep.
I must move on, as then I moved, when on my ear fell words
Light spoken by a stranger tongue, yet were they very swords,
I turned and saw him in the throng, and One was by his side
(It needed not those words to tell), his fair affianced Bride.
Yet I danced on as if I trod on air, my cheek was bright,
And ready smiles came to my lip, and fancies gay and light ;
Oh! Pride has martyrdoms whereon no pitying eye looks down,
The thorn without the fadeless Rose, the Cross without the Crown !
We met; her eyes were raised to mine, I heard her whisper then ‘6 Who is that lovely lady?” what answer came again
224 LADY ALICE'S SHRIFT.
I know not: she is young like Thee and innocent and
gay, — Yet 7am young ; at least it seems I was so jane 2
And I am fair; at least Iam the same; there is no trace
Of change in aught that once he thought so lovely in my face ;
There is no change in aught within that made me dear before ;
The same? Yes! I am still the same, and therefore. prized no more,
Yet I was prized ; I was beloved ; I was not all deceived,
And something was in very deed of all that I believed ;
There was exchange that hath gone on since times that were of old,
When the trader gives his glittering beads for the simple Indian’s gold !
And mine was given ; it comes not back ; though trampled in the dust,
It bears the image on it stamped in days of hope and trust ;
The fond, false faith so quickly learnt, the heart unlearneth slow, —
For the soul hath lovéd Idols, and after them will go,
Yea! though they turn to its decay! through all the shower of pain That falls like fire upon my heart, I seem to hear again
LADY ALICE’S SHRIFT. 225
Words whispered softly,—only words, —vain echoes from a day,
} That never can return again, yet will not pass away.
All things have end, the night wore on, I wished not for
, its close,
Oh! for the wretched there is nought so dreadful as repose ;
The dull slow torture of the mind, the fever-pangs that fill
The heavy blank that is not rest: I would be dancing still !
I was like some poor houseless One, that through a splendid town
With sad and undelighted eye still wanders up and down,
With listless step that nothing seeks, nor cares where it may roam,
Yet must move ever on, because he knows he has no Home !
There was a crowd about the door; I saw a child that took
His mother by the gown, a child with wan and wasted look :
‘* That is an angel (low he spoke) you may know her by her hair,
Ask her when she goes back to Heaven to take us with her there.”
are
| 226 LADY ALICE’S SHRIFT.
The mother shook her head, and smiled a care-worn smile, and then q.
Looked from me to her sickly child, and back to me again
With eyes that wandered from my face to scan my robe’s rich fold,
And rested longest on the furs that wrapt me from the cold,
With wistful gaze that measured then by silken robe and gem How far was I from want and woe, from all that weighed | on them :
Poor Child! Poor Mother ! then I thought, if envy be
your sin,
Soon would your spirits be assoiled, could ye but look within !
PART II.
* Only the firmest and most constant hearts God sets to act the stoutest, hardest parts.” —Old Play. Softly she turned to her sister fair,
Fondly she kissed her on brow and cheek, Silent as though on her spirit there
Struggled a thought that she could not speak ; Only she looked on a Rose, and said
‘* Soon was the flower of its bloom bereft, Yet cast it not, fading, away for dead,
Still in its leaves may be sweetness left !”
LADY ALICE'S SHRIFT,
Softly she spake with herself alone, “Courage, my heart, and fail not yet, Strive ! for not yet is the Day thine own, Thou hast forgiven, thou must forget ! Ere thou hadst found thee a star to guide, Dark were the seas that were thine to cross, Strongly against thee set in the tide: Now thou art safe, yet hast suffered loss !
Sore hath the battle against thee gone, Keen were the arrows within thee set Ere thou hadst girded thine armour on, And oft will the archers vex thee yet ; Ere thou hadst found thee a shelter, stern Gathered the storm o’er thy pathway ; long After the rain will the clouds return, And thou must onwards, so yet be strong.”
Softly she prayed with herself alone, ** Father ! forgive me, that with my lot
Wrestling in darkness, I strove with Thee, Blindly and vainly, and knew it not !
Yet have my words against Thee been strong ; Now will I humble my soul to dust,
Lord ! unto Thee have I done this wrong, Not that I grieved o’er a broken trust—
‘Had I not grieved, I had never loved ; (Sore may we weep, and yet not repine)
228
LADY ALICE’S SHRIFT.
But that I looked upon woe unmoved, Saying ‘there never was grief like mine :’ But that I turned with a mind estranged From all that Thou gavest me yet to hold, When once I had seen it grow dim and changed, The Love that I stored in my heart for gold:
“© Vet Thou wilt pardon; with Thee above Still is there mercy, that fails below ; Thou that didst give to the heart its Love, Thou that dost send to the heart its Woe, Knowest alone what it hath to bear, Wilful and weak,—and Thou waitest long Till it return from its wild despair, And thou art patient, for Thou art strong.”
Not like the Dweller that day and night Wounding himself among tombs, made moan Over the grave of a lost delight, Yet had her spirit a chamber lone ; Where, like the Ruler of old, that kept Till he might reach it, a steadfast mien, Oft she withdrew for a while and wept ; Leaving it still with a brow serene.
LOVE IN DEATH.
LOVE IN DEATH.
In the year 1821 a woman perished in a snow-storm while passing over the Green Mountains in Vermont. She had an infant with her, who was found alive and well in the morning, carefully wrapt in the mother’s clothing.
On the death-darkened air,
Through the wild storm, amid the drifting snows, A voice of murmured soothing blent with prayer, Solemn in trustful tenderness, arose.
A mother’s spirit in its parting clung
Unto her child—a mother’s soul was stirred Through all its depths—a mother’s fondness hung, And trembled on each faint and faltering word © Of blessing and farewell; and, as the bird -Plucks the soft plumage from its downy breast
To shield its young, and cowers with quivering wing More closely o’er them, to her side she prest
Her babe, and strove, with warmth and sheltering, To frame within her clasping arms a nest :
«Sleep ! oh, my baby, sleep ! the night draws on, Sleep once again upon thy poor mother’s breast ; Ere yet the morning dawns I shall be gone,
And thou no more will know such place of rest }
Colder and yet more cold,
Dark with the storm the wild winds round us sweep, Yet still above thy slumber, as of old,
Thy mother watches. Sleep, thou dear one, sleep!
LOVE IN DEATH.
Closer and closer still ~ Nestle unto me, darling, safe from harm ; Cold, cold, is all without, and deathly chill, Only the heart—thy mother’s heart—is warm.
‘© Vet there it will be cool,— Yes, even there, my child ! and, oh, how soon. The snow drifts thickly round us—fold by fold Around the sinking form, the weary feet That may no longer bear us o’er the wild Silent and swift, a wreathéd winding-sheet Is closely drawn: but not for thee, my child! No, not for thee ! my parting soul hath striven With Him, the merciful—unto this hour, Unto its love, its anguish, hath been given A spirit of prevailing and of power ;— And I have borne it from thee! To his breast Death folds me close as I fold thee to mine; Cold kisses are upon my cheek—to rest, To sleep they woo me, soft and deep as thine: A heavy mist steals on—I feel my breath Drawn slowly from me; yet my love shall keep Its watch above thee still, and thou shalt sleep, Sleep safely, sweetly, in the arms of DEATH, And wake to Life once more! Kind eyes shall weep And kindly hearts be troubled, when they see The sweet unconscious smiling of thy face ; For thou wilt smile, and bear no thought of me.
Too young art thou for grief, Too young for Love, my child, for memory !
LOVE IN DEATH.
Yet not less fond the last, the lingering kiss, Yet not less fervent from the heart the prayer ; Because I know thou wilt, darling, miss
Thy mother in her fondness, in her care !
But he will think of me— Thy Father. Thou wilt grow up by his side, And even bring the thought of her that died Lonely, but lonely, blessing him and thee.
The flower—the flower may fall When it hath shielded in its folded breast
The bud of promise, loveliest,
Most dear of all.
And he will not be lone In sorrow or in joy, Thy voice shall fill The silence of his soul with many a tone That once was mine, and whisper to him still Of things long past, and I shall look at him Through thy sweet eyes—young loving eyes that shine In light and tenderness when these are dim, Shall answer his with smiles that once were mine,
Sleep, dearest ! in the night Of death thy mother’s arms around thee twine More closely, that her spirit in its flight, May send a message of its love on thine.
‘*The snows will melt away, And green leaves rustle light o’er hill and plain 5 Through the sweet scent of hidden waters stirred, And the clear shining after summer rain,
LOVE IN DEATH.
The blade will spring ; then on strong wing the bird Will rise to the blue heaven, ascending slow ; The fisher will go forth upon the lake, The hunter to the forest with his bow 3 But far beyond the flight i Of Indian arrow, far beyond the ken Of mountain eagle in his soaring might, I shall have passed, returning not again : These ancient Hills shall wake Like giants from their slumber at the breath Of Spring, and from their lofty summits shake The icy chains of stillness and of death ; But not till they shall hear A sound, and move in trembling from their place, Not till the mountains and the rocks in fear Shall flee, and leave where they have been no trace, May Larise. O Saviour! earth and Heaven Shall pass, but Thou endurest. Unto Thee I yield my spirit ; Father, bless Thou me! Bless with Thy love the child that Thou hast given !”
And in that prayer her fervent spirit passed.
The deep night fell, the keen and hurrying blast Sang her wild dirge; the straining clasp grew cold, Yet pressed the little one with rigid hold
Still to her heart ; when morning came the child Woke peaceful in its Mother’s arms and smiled.
A CHILD'S GARDEN.
A CHILD’S GARDEN.
SEEK in the hill, and seek in the vale
For foxglove, and broom, and heather ;
Seek in the woods for the primrose pale,
Seek for the hyacinths, dim and frail,
And plant them all close together.
Flowers that are bold, and flowers that are shy, The drooping bell, and the starry eye
That looks bright in the cheerless weather. And fling-in all seeds that twine and that trail To bind them safe together ;
Then plant the sunflower and the lily tall, Tulip and Crown Imperial ;
With a blush-red rose for the heart of June Set in the midst of all, and say
A charm to make them come up as soon
As the mustard and cress that were sown last May, And be all in bloom together !
Emblem of youth’s warm heart, thick sown With blossoms that need fear no weather, With wingéd dreams, and hopes half blown, With flowers that love to bloom alone,
And flowers that bloom together.
GUESSING.
GUESSING.
CHILDHOOD is the time for guessing ! Every morning brings unbidden
Some sweet gift, half shown, half hidden ; Some kind promise seldom broken, Some bright wondrous fairy token. Oh! what stores are thine of blessing ! Oh ! what joy is thine in guessing
At the hiding, at the showing
Of life’s daily Miracle !
Secrets in the wild rose blowing ! Shut within the cowslip’s bell !
Youth thou art the time for guessing ! Life before thine eager eyes
Holds each day some gentle prize,
And for thee with fond caressing
Still prepares some bright surprise ; Bids thee guess, and for thy pleasure Hides ’mid flowers and leaves a treasure Gleaming golden; and with ‘‘ Follow, Follow,” o’er the sun-lit hill,
Lures thee, and through darkling hollow, With a heart untiring still.
Life, what bringest thou for guessing In thy long, calm after-day ?
GOING TO BED.
Ever on our journey pressing,
Known to us both end and way,
Thou no more with us will play
At ‘‘hiding, seeking.” Gone thy pleasing Wiles, with all thy cheating, teazing. Bring us now some steadfast blessing, Keep it firm within our hold, :
For our hearts are done with guessing, And thy secrets all are told.
GOING TO BED.
‘« Tr is time to go to bed.”
Oh ! how soon the words are spoken, Oh ! how sweet a spell is broken When these words of fate are said— ‘*Tt is time to go to bed.”
Ts it time to go to bed ?
Surely bed awhile can wait
Till the pleasant tale is read
At our Father’s knee; how cheery Burns the fire ! we are not weary ; Why should it be time for bed
_ Just because the clock strikes eight ? While they talk, let us be hiding Just behind the great arm-chairs ;
It may be they will forget us,
It may be that they will let us
NOAH?S ARK.
Stay to supper, stay to prayers ;
Go at last with them upstairs,
Hand in hand, with Father, Mother ; Kisses given, and ‘‘ good nights” said, *Twill be time for Sister, Brother, Time for me to go to bed !
NOAH’S ARK.
Many a story told,
Earth ! thy tale survives ; In a quiet fold
Leading happy lives, Dwell this old world’s old Fathers with their wives.
‘From the tight packed box O’er the carpet spread, Oh! what peaceful flocks In the fire-light red Wander, from rude shocks Duly shepherdéd.
Loved with equal love,
Prized with equal care,
Raven then and Dove,
But the dearest there
Are still the spotted Ladybird And the springing Grasshopper.
THE LITTLE BUILDERS. 237
Now does childish play That sweet tale rehearse Told by Prophet grey, Sung in Sybil’s verse, Of a Coming Day,
Of a vanquish’d curse.
See the Cow and Bear
Together dwell and feed,
Ox and Lion there
In sweet peace agreed;
Wolf and Lamb one pasture share, With a little child to lead,
THE LITTLE BUILDERS. A THOUGHT FROM ST. FRANCES DE SALES,
Tue Saint looked on the child and said ‘© All men must build ; upon the sand Or rock, with eager heart and hand
All men must build ; but I with thee, Dear child, in thy simplicity
Will build in patience undismayed.
I will not twine for love a bower,
I will not raise for pride a tower
To reach to heaven. What ruins lie On earth ! and in the heart a cry
GOD’S GARDEN.
Will rise from many a palace old Because of doleful things the fold ; But I will learn from thee, dear child, The secret of all loss and gain.
Thou smilest when a careless hand Or hasty step destroys the pain And.cost of all that thou hast planned, And then, unsaddened, unperplexed, Content to see thy work in vain,
Art ready with a mind unvexed
From the first stone to build again.”
GOD’S GARDEN. FROM THE GERMAN OF ARNDT.
‘* These are thy wonders, Lord of Love ! To make us see we are but flowers that glide, Which when we once can find and prove, Thou hast a garden for us where to bide.” Oh! that I once past changing were Fast in God’s Paradise, where no flower can wither |” —GEORGE HERBERT,
EARTH is a garden fair,
Where sweetest flow’rets blend, Our Lord himself with care
Its happy blooms will tend ;
GOD'S GARDEN.
With patient love and true, He watcheth o’er his flowers, - And freshens them with showers, With sunshine and with dew.
The sweetest flow’ret there, What may it be but Love? The soother of man’s care, The bliss of Saints above— It is the red, red Rose, That must with thorns abide, And see its gentle pride Droop—when the storm-wind blows,
The flower that God holds dear, The nighest unto love, Sheds many a blessing here Known but to Him above; Its name is MEEKNESS Zhere. On Earth the violet sweet Breathes fragrant at our feet, And knows not she is fair!
FAITH is the third sweet flower, It gives its odorous bloom, Unto a joyless hour, When all beside is gloom ; Thus, on the gale of night The Cereus sheds its soul, When clear from Pole to Pole The golden stars shine bright.
GOD'S GARDEN.
Sweet Hore! thou art no less
God’s gentle child and dear, What floweret may express
Thy gracious presence here? Thy likeness we may trace,
When the pale Snowdrops bring
Words from the coming Spring, In soft unspoken grace.
And thou, true-hearted flower,* Whose bright and cheerful eye Gleams fair through sun and shower, In fearless CONSTANCY 3 The image thine to bring Of steadfast love, whose power Keeps for each changeful hour Some bloom unwithering !
And thou that lookest down, As with an Angel’s mien, With white resplendent Crown, The garden’s peerless Queen— Pure Lily! on thy smile Undimmed by earthly stain, The likeness doth remain Of spirits free from guile.
* The Pansy, called in German, je /anger je lieber, ‘‘ the longer the more dear.” The name of this flower seems sacred in all languages to the utterance of some “gentle and affectionate thought,”
GOD’S GARDEN.
And many a bud and bell, Unnumbered yet and fair, Nurtured and tended well, Hath the Good Gardener there; How hard were it to choose Among their bright array, The happy flower-souls gay, Tn their sun-coloured hues.
And yet if choice were made, Oh Lily ! thou wert mine, Pure, as a spirit’s shade, Thy radiant petals shine, Thy gaze so meekly fair, Is ever fixed above, As if in yearning love, It sought for kindred there!
Oh Thou! the Garden’s light, Through whom its blooms endure ! Make me unto Thy sight, Make me so white and pure Then may I joyful rise Where reigneth purity, And with the just and THEE Bloom ever in the skies !
242 CHILD AMONG THE ROCKS,
CHILD AMONG THE ROCKS.
UNDERNEATH thy feet are rocks, and o’er thee ~ Hang the heavy cliffs, and still before thee Ocean stretches till it meets the sky ;
Seest thou the white sea-birds rising, falling
On the breakers? Hearest thou the calling
Of the winds that wail and hurry by?
Dost thou watch the ships slow sailing, nearer Lies the world, oh young Columbus! Dearer Than each far-sought prize,
Rich in joy—in wonder still unfailing,
Star, and shell, and glistening see-weed trailing In the little pool that nearest lies.
Childhood’s realm is rich, yet straitly bounded, Like a vale by giant hill surrounded ;
Lies it now hidden, safe and sweet,
Warm ’mid sheltering rocks that guard and hide it, Heaven around, within it, and above it,
Heaven beneath its feet !
A STORY BY THE FIRE.
A STORY BY THE FIRE.
CHILDREN love to hear of children,
T will tell of a little child
Who dwelt alone with his mother
By the edge of a forest wild.
One summer eve from the forest,
Late, late down the grassy track
The child came back with lingering step, And looks oft turning back.
§¢Oh! Mother !” he said, ‘‘in the forest I have met with a little child,
All day he played with me—all day
He talked with me and smiled ;
At last he left me alone, but then
He gave me this rosebud red ;
And said he would come to me again When all its leaves were spread.
«J will put my rosebud in a glass,
I will watch it night and day,
Dear little friend, wilt thou come again, Wilt thou come by my side to play?
I will seek for strawberries—the best
Of all shall be for thee ;
I will show thee the eggs in the linnet’s nes None knoweth of but me.”
GRANDMOTHER NODDING.
At morn, beside the window-sill, Awakes a bird’s clear song ;
But all within the house was still, The child was sleeping long.
The mother went to the little room— With alLits leaves outspread
She saw a rose in fullest bloom ; And in the little bed,
A child that did not breathe or stir, A little happy child
Who had met his little friend again, And in the meeting smiled.
GRANDMOTHER NODDING.
GRANDMOTHER’s nodding, and while she is taking An afternoon slumber, the children are breaking Open the bellows, ’tis only to find
Out where the wind lives; oh, when you are waking Will you be angry, Granny, and scold
Over the loss of your bellows old ?
Or be proud of your children’s march of mind? Hark, do you hear the noise they are making? Grandmother’s nodding, the earth has grown old ; We see she is grey, we feel her shaking ;
All her strange secrets that she has hidden
Away from her children, they snatch unbidden,
GOOD-NIGHT. 245
While she is sleeping—what locks are breaking, What coffers are rifled ! oh, when you are waking Will you be angry, Granny, and scold?
Or be pleased with the change of your children’s making ?
GOOD-NIGHT.
FROM THE GERMAN OF THEODOR KORNER.
(Set to Music tn three parts by Mr. Henry Leslie.)
GOOD-NIGHT }
Let all labours cease with light !
Day hath glided to its close,
Let the busy hands repose
Till the morrow rises bright ! Good-night !
Go to rest ! Be weary lids in closing blest ! Hush’d to stillness every sound
On the watcher’s quiet round— Night murmurs low to every breast ; Go to rest !
246 THE-MOURNING OF THE GAEL.
Softly sleep ! Blissful vision hover deep ! By the couch whence peace is driven, By fond love, in dreams from heaven, May the dear One vigil keep ! Softlysleep !
Good-night ! Slumber till the morrow’s light ! Slumber—till the morning breaking Bring fresh care with its awakening ; Fearless in the Father’s sight, Good-night !
THE MOURNING OF THE GAEL.
The Highlanders are wont to this day to mingle a degree of solemn mirth in their mourning, and something akin to melancholy with their mirth. The usual aversion to think or speak of those who have been beloved and lost is less known to this grave and enthusiastic race than it is to others. You hear not only the young mention (as is everywhere usual) the char- acter and the merits of parents, who have in the course of nature predeceased them, but the widowed partner speaks in ordinary conversation of the lost spouse; and what is still stranger, the parents allude frequently to the valour or beauty of the child whom they have interred. The Scottish High- landers appear to regard the separation of friends by Death as something less absolute and complete than it is generally
THE MOURNING OF THE GAEL. 247
esteemed in other countries; and converse of the dear con- nexions who have sought the grave before them, as if they had gone upon a long journey, on which they themselves must soon follow.—The Fair Maid of Perth. 11th Chap.
+ ‘* YE weep not o’er your loved ones, as we weep— Sons of the rock-bound glen and mountain lone ! Your calm and steadfast spirits may not own The touch of weakness; yet can Memory sleep With folded wings where Love was once so deep? We stand upon our silent hearths alone,
Peopling the gloom with faces that are gone, While with our hearts we sad communion keep : But ye around the board where friends are met Give open greeting to your fellow-men ;
With steady voice and earnest eyes unwet,
Ye speak of 7em—the vanish’d ! as if then, Their smile made sunshine round you; as if yet The silent voice might answer yours again !”
Il.
** We speak of them because we love them well. They have not left us! and we shed no tear
That they are with us still—more pure, more dear ! Our hearts have not yet learned to say farewell ! Their voices died not for us in the knell
That told us they were gone! When none are near, They speak to us through rustling branches sere,
As our old pines give back the wild winds swell— And voices from the happy Past have spoken
248 THE MOURNING OF THE GAEL,
In tales they loved, in songs they used to sing : |
As* other friends depart, they bear a token,
An earnest of the Faith to which we cling, a
That the bright chain of Love is strained, not | broken ; i : an
And comfort comes with our remembering.”
* An affecting custom prevails among the Highlanders of sending messages through dying friends to those who have gone before,
Printed by WALTER Scort, Felling, Newcastle-on-Tyne
THE CANTERBURY POETS.
EDITED BY WILLIAM SHARP. With Introductory Notices by various Contributors.
In SHILLING MONTHLY VOLUMES, SQUARE 8VO. Well Printed on Fine Toned Paper, with Red-Line Border, and Strongly Bound in Cloth. Each Volume contains from 300 to 350 pages.
Cloth, Red mages - Is. Red Roan, Gilt Edges, 2s. 6d Cloth, Uncut Edges- + 1s. | Pad Morocco, Gilt Hdges - 5s
VOLUMES ALREADY ISSUED,
Ben Jonson,
Byron (2 Vols.)
Days of the Year,
Sonnets of Europe,
Allan Ramsay.
Sydney Dobell.
Pope.
Heine,
Beaumont and Fletcher Chatterton, Bowles, Lamb, etc, Burns. Poems, Early English Poetry. Burns. Songs. Sea Music, Marlowe. Herrick. -
Ballades and Rondeaus,
< ° Irish Minstrelsy.
Victor Hugo. Milton’s Paradise Lost, Cowper. Jacobite Songs and Ss espeare: Ballads.
Songs, Poems, and Sonnets. | Australian Ballads, Emerson, Moore’s Poems, Sonnets of this Century.| Border Ballads, Whitman, Song-Tide. £cott. Marmion, etc. Odes of Horace,
Scott. Lady of the Lake, etc. | Ozsian.
Praed, Elfin Music,
Hoge. Southey.
Goldsmith, Chaucer,
Mackay’s Love Letters. | Poems of Wild Life. Spenser. Paradise Regained. «;
Children of the Poets. Crabbe. London: WALTER Scott, 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.
VOLS. L TO XIV. NOW READY, a : RE-ISSUE IN MONTHLY VOLUMES, ONE SHILLING EACH,
STRONGLY BOUND IN CLOTH, Uniform in size and style with the Camelot Series, -
WA ESOS am TALES OF THE BORDERS
AND OF SCOTLAND:
HISTORICAL, TRADITIONARY, AND IMAGINATIVE. REVISED By ALEXANDER LEIGHTON.
No collection of tales published in a serial form ever enjoyed so great a popularity as-‘‘ THE TALES OF THE BORDERS ;” and the secret of their success lies in the fact that they are stories in the truest sense of the word, illustrating in a graphie and natural style the manners and customs, trials and serrows, sins and backslidings, of the men and women of whom they treat. The heroes and hervines of these admirable stories belong to every rank of life, from the king and noble to the humble peasant.
The Scotsman says :—‘* Those who have read the tales in the unwieldy tomes in which they are to be found in the libraries will welcome the publication of this neat, handy, and well- printed edition.” :
The Dundee Adwertiser says :—“ Considering how attractive are these tales, whether regarded as illustrating Scottish life or as entertaining items of romance, there can be no doubt of their continued Popaanty. We last read them in volumes the
’ size of a family Bible, and we are glad to have an opportunity to renew our acquaintance with them in a form so much more handy and elegant.”
EACH VOLUME COMPLETE IN ITSELF.
London: WALTER ScomT?T, 24 Warwicl “ane, Paternoster Row,
_MONTALY SHILLING VOLUMES. CLOTH, CUT OR UNCUT EDGES.
GREAT WRITERS.
A Rew Series of Critical Biographies. Edited by PRorrssor E. S. ROBERTSON. ‘
e: ALREADY ISSUED— LIFE OF LONGFELLOW. By Prof. E. S. ROBERTSON. LIFE OF COLERIDGE. By Hatt Calne. LIFE OF DICKENS. By FRANK T. MARZIALS. LIFE OF D. G. ROSSETTI. By JosepH KNIGHT. LIFE OF SAMUEL JOHNSON. By Col. F. Grant. LIFE OF DARWIN. By G. T. BEeTTANyY. CHARLOTTE BRONTH. By AUGUSTINE BIRRELLt. LIFE OF CARLYLE. By RicHarp Garnett, LL.D. LIFE OF ADAM SMITH. By R. B. HALDANE, M.P. LIFE OF KEATS. By W. M. Rossertr. LIFE OF SHELLEY. By WILLIAM SHARP. LIFE OF SMOLLETT. By Davip Hannay, LIFE OF GOLDSMITH. By Austin Dosson, LIFE OF SCOTT. By Professor YONGE. LIFE OF BURNS. By Professor BLACKIE. LIFE OF VICTOR HUGO. By FRANK T. MARZIALS. LIFE OF EMERSON. By RicHARD GaRNErt, LL.D. LIFE OF GOETHE. By JAMEs SIME. _LIFE OF CONGREVE. By EDMUND GOSSE. LIFE OF BUNYAN. By Canon VENABLES. LIFE OF CRABBE, By T. E. KEBBEL, M.A, LIFE OF HEINE. By WILLIAM SHARP, : Ready December 22nd. LIFE OF MILL. By W. L. CouRTNEY. A complete Bibliography to each volume, compiled by” "i J. P. ANDERSON of the British Museum.
LIBRARY EDITION OF “GREAT WRITERS.”
An Issue of all the Volumes in this Series will be published, printed on large paper of extra quality, in handsome binding, Demy 8vo, price 2s. 6d. per volume. ‘
London; WALTER ScoTt, 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.
THE CAMELOT SERIES.
CLOTH, CUT OR UNCUT EDGES,
New Comprehensive Edition of Favourite Prose Works. Edited by ERNEST RHYS. in SHILLING Monthly Volumes, Crown 8vo. ‘
VOLUMES ALREADY ISSUED.
Romance of King Arthur, Thoreau’s Walden, Confessions of an English _ Opium-Eater, Landor’s Conversations, Plutarch’s Lives, Sir T. Browne's Religio Medici, etc. Essays and Letters of P. B. Shelley. Prose Writings of Swift, My Study Windows, Great English Painters, Lord Byron’s Letters, Essays by Leigh Hunt, Longfellow’s Prose. Great Musical Composers Marcus Aurelius, Specimen Days in America, White’s Natural History of Selborne.
Captain Singleton.
Essays by Mazzini.
Prose Writings of
Heinrich Heine,
Reynolds’ Discourses,
The Lover: Papers of Steele and Addison.
Burns’s Letters.
Volsunga Saga,
Sartor Resartus,
Select Writings of Emerson.
Seneca’s Morals,
Democratic Vistas,
Life of Lord Herbert.
English Prose,
The Pillars of Society,
Fairy and Folk Tales.
Epictetus.
Essays on the English -
Poets. Essays of Dr. Johnson.
The Series is issued in two styles of Binding—Red Cloth, Cu’
Edges; and Dark Blue Cloth, Uncut Edges.
Hither Style, 1s.
London: WALTER Scott, 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.
34 wt et Bb Ae oe
Windsor Series of Poetical Xnthologies,
Printed on Antique-Paper. Crown 8vo. Bound in Blue Cloth, - each with suitable Hmblematic Design on Cover, Price 3/6. Also in various Calf and Morocco Bindings.
Women's Voices. An Antholo of the most Characteristic Poems by English, Scotch, and Irish Women. Edited by Mrs. William Sharp.
Sonnets of this Century. With an Exhaustive and Critical Essay on the Sonnet. Edited by William
The Children of the Poets. An Anthology from English and American Writers of Three Centuries. Edited
by Professor Eric S. Robertson.
Sacred Song. A Volume of Religious Verse. Selected and arranged, with Notes, by Samuel Waddington.
A Century of Australian Sore Selected and Edited by Douglas B. W. Sladen, B.A., Oxon.
Jacobite Songs and Ballads. Selected and Edited, with Notes, by G. S. Macquoid.
Irish Minstrelsy. Edited, with Notes and Intro- duction, by H. Halliday Sparling.
The Sonnets of Europe. A Volume of Trans- lations. Selected and arranged, wiih Notes, by Samuel Waddington.
Early English and Scottish Poetry. Selected and Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by H. Macaulay Fitzgibbon.
Ballads of the North Countrie. Edited, with Introduction, by Graham R. Tomson.
Songs and Poems of the Sea. An Anthology
fi OP Pesins Descriptive of the Sea. Edited by Mrs. William Sharp.
Songs and Poems of Fairyland. An Anthology of English Fairy Poetry. Selected and arranged, with an
Introduction, by Arthur Edward Waite.
London: WALTER Scott, 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.
100th THOUSAND. Crown 800, 440 Pages, Price One Shilling.
6 Daily Telegraph.” —‘‘ Decidedly a book with a purpose.”
“ Scotsman.” —‘‘ A vigorous, clever, and almost ferocious exposure, in the form of a story, of the numerous shams and injustices,”
“ Newcastle Weekly Chronicle.”—‘‘ Trenchant in sarcasm, warm in commendation of high purpose. . . . A somewhat remarkable book,”
“ London Figaro.”—**Té cannot be said that the author _is partial; clergy and Nonconformist divines, Liberals and Conservatives, lawyers and tradesmen, all come under his lash. . . . The sketches are worth reading. Some of the characters are portrayed with considerable skill.”
‘* May the Lord deliver us from all Cant: may the Lord, whatever else He do or forbear, teach us to look facts honestly.in the face, and to beware (with a kind of shudder) of smearing them over with our despicable and damnahle palaver into irrecognisability, and so falsifying the Lord’s own Gospels to His unhappy blockheads of Children, all staggering down to Gehenna and the everlasting Swine’s- trough, for want of Gospels.
“O Heaven! it is the most accursed sin of man; and done everywhere at present, on the streets and high places at noonday ! Yen re T say and pray as my chiof
orison, May the Lord deliver us from it.”—Letter from Carlyle to Hmerson.
Loudon: WALTER SCOTT, 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row
VOL. I. READY OCTOBER 25th. _ Crown 8v0, about 350 pp. each, Cloth Cover, 2/6 per Vol. Half Polished Morocco, gilt top, 5/-.
COUNT TOLSTOI’S WORKS
_ Mr. Walter Scott has the pleasure to announce that he has made arrangements to publish, in Monthly Volumes, a series f translations of works by the eminent Russian novelist, Count Lyof N. Tolstoi. These translations, direct from the Russian, are by Nathan Haskell Dole, and admirably reproduce the spirit and style of the original. The English reading public will be introduced to an entirely new series of works by one who is probably the greatest living master of fiction in Europe, and one upon whose personality and opinions,—social, ethical, and religious,—a unique attention is concentrated. To those un- familiar with the charm of Russian fiction, and especially with the works of Count Tolstoi, these volumes will come as a new revelation of power.
The Series will begin with
A RUSSIAN PROPRIETOR, AND OTHER STORIES. By Count LYOF. N. TOLSTOL
This volume, which is representative of Count Tolstoi’s literary activity between 1852 and 1859, will fittingly serve asa prelude and introduction to those which follow. Besides its own interest, much of it has the interest of disguised autobio- graphy; Prince Nekhliudof, the ‘ Russian Proprietor,’ suggests the youthful figure of Count Tolstoi himself in one of his early experiences ; the ‘ Recollections of a Scorer,’ and ‘ Two Hussars,’ are regaided as reminiscent of Count Tolstoi’s gambling days. Both must have been suggested by some such terrible experience as that told of the Count’s gambling-debt in the Caucasus. ‘Lucerne’ and ‘Albert,’ two other stories of the volume, are also evidently transcripts from the author’sown experience. The strange young protector of the wandering. singer in the one, the shadowy Prince Nekhliudof in the other, are both Count Tolstoi himself in phases quite distinct from those in which he is familiar at present. ‘Albert,’ in its peculiar realism and pathos, is one of Count Tolstoi’s most exquisite sketches, and a striking example of his literary method.
London; WALTER Scort, 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.
THE NOVOCASTRIAN SERIES. Square 8vo, Price One Shilling each.
POLICE SERGEANT C. ai:
- THE STORY OF A CRIME. | By REGINALD BARNETT.
«The plot is ingenious, the interest is well sustained through- out, and the style is distinctly above that of the ordinary ‘shilling shocker.’ At times, indeed, Mr. Barnett reminds us of Gaboriau, whose M. Lecoq (as M. Lecog was in his younger days) the policeman-hero resembles to a considerable degree.”—Graphic.
JACK DUDLIEY’'S WIFE. By E. M. DAVY, Author of ‘‘ A Prince of Como,” &c.
“The tale is written with excellent skill, and succeeds in holding the interest well up from first to last.”—Scotsman.
OAK-BOUGH end WATTLE-BLOSSOM.
STORIES AND SKETCHES BY AUSTRALIANS IN ENGLAND, Edited by A. PATCHETT MARTIN.
VANEH’S INVENTION: AN ELECTRICAL ROMANCE, By WALTER MILBANK. “The story is capitally told.”—Scotsman.
The Policeman’s Lantern;
STRANGE STORIES OF LONDON LIFE. By JAMES GREENWOOD, ‘‘ The Amateur Casual.” London: WALTER SCOTT, 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row-
