4 A B g
P 5 « £
ra
en +t
me
- Chit
Ate Scar
Sra =
5 ACADEMIC SPEAKER; OR,’
A SELECTION
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES, & ~ _ ORATION S, ODES, SCENES, AND SPEECHES,
FROM THE BEST WRITERS, PROPER TO BE READ AND RECITED BY YOUTH AT SCHOOL, —
F. y TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED
ELEMENTS OF GESTURE; 3 OR, PLAIN AND EASY DIRECTIONS FOR-
KEEPING THE BODY IN A GRACEFUL POSTFION, AND ACQUIRING
Ree A SIMPLE AND UNAFFECTED STYLE OF ACTION; se
¢ Explained and Illustrated by Plates. . AP
The E EIGHTH Edition, with Algeration: and considerable yee,
BY JOHN WALKER,
AUTHOR OF THE CRITICAL PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY, ELEMENTS OF ELOCUTION, &c.
; Mihi falli multhm videntur, qui solos esse Atticos credunt tenues, et lucidos, et significantes, sed quadam eloquentie frugalitate Eonbenton, ac mahum semper intra pallium continentes, » QUINTIL,
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR CADELL AND DAVIES 5 G. WILKIE 5 LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN 5; LAW AND WHITTAKER; > J. MAWMAN 5 , BALDWIN, CRADOCK, AND JOY; WALKER AND EDWARDS 5 ‘AND SIMPKIN AND MARSHALL,
1517.
TO THE | REV. DR. THOMSON,
KENSINGTON.
STR, Ty the present Publication has any degree of merit, it Is, ina great measure, owing to you. The liberal encouragement you gave me, when I first proposed teaching at your school, induced me to exertions which I should never have made without. the assistance of so able a friend. ‘These exertions have produced the present Pub- lication; which, however it may fail in other respects, affords me an opportunity of expressing my obligations, and of con- gratulating you on the successful expe- riment you have made of uniting the Az
S iV DEDICATION.
most extensive study of the Greek and
Latin classics with a regular course of reading and speaking English. The suc-
cess of this system has already been proved | by several of your pupils in both Univer-
sities; and the encouragement it daily re-
ceives from a discerning public, is an un- equivocal testimony of its merit.
T am, Sir,
With great respect,
Your obliged humble servant, : J. WALKER. No. 64, Lower Harley street, ;
Cavendish-Square, " Jan. 1, 1789. ;
<
eS
- _
s
gi 3 ~
St bs ‘S eae ¢ oe 4
~
~N
=~ ++ ee = * : Cae 3 leeeaney =_--<----O
st;
ELEMENTS OF GESTURE.
mae SECTION I. ar On the speaking of Speeches at Schools.
Exocution -has, for some years past, been an object of attention in the most respectable schools in the kingdom. <A laudable ambition of instructing youth in the pronunciation and delivery of their native language, has made English speeches a very conspicuous part of those annual exhibitions of oratory which do them so much credit.
This attention to English pronunciation has induced several ‘ingenious men to compile | Exercises in Elocution for the use of schools, which have answered very useful purposes ; but none, so far as I have seen, have attempted _ to give us a regular system of Gesture, suited
to the wants and capacities of school-boys, Mr. Burgh, in his Art of Speaking, has given us a system of the Passions; and has shown us how they appear in the countenance, and operate on the body; but this system, how- ever useful to people of riper years, is too delicate and complicated to be taught in schools. Indeed, the exact adaptation of the action to the word, and the word to the action, as Shakspeare calls it, is the most difficult part of delivery, and therefore, to say nothing of dis- tracting their attention with two very difficult things at the same time, can never be taught perfectly to children. But that’ boys should
vi ELEMENTS OF GESTURE. _
stand motionless, while they are pronouncing the most impassioned language, is extremely absurd, and unnatural; and that they should sprawl into an awkward, ungain, and desultory action, is still more offensive and disgust What then remains, but that such a general
style of ‘action be adopted as shall be easily conceived, and easily executed; which, though not expressive of any particular passion, shall, at least, not appear to be totally devoid of passion ;—which shall always keep the body in a graceful position, and shall so vary in mo- tions, at proper intervals, as to seem the subject Operating on the speaker, and “not the speaker on the subject ?—This, it will be confessed, is a great desideratum; and an attempt to do this, is the principal object of the present essay.
The difficulty of describing action by words will be allowed by every one; and if we were néver to give any instructions but such as should completely answer our wishes, this dif- ficulty would be a good reason for not at- tempting to give any description of it. But there are many degrees between conveying a precise idea.of a thing, and no idea at all. Besides, in this part of delivery, instruction may be conveyed by the eye; and this organ, as Horace observes*, is a much more rapid vehicle of knowledge than the ear. This ve- hicle is addressed on the present occasion, and
* Segnius irritant animos demissa se aurem,
Quam quz sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, et que . Ipse sibi tradit spectator. Hor. Ars Poetica.
ELEMENTS OF GESTURE. vii
plates, representing the attitudes which are described, are annexed to the several descrip- tions, which, it is not doubted, will greatly - facilitate the reader’s conception.
The first plate represents the attitude in which a boy should always place himself when he begins to speak. He should rest the whole weight of his body on the right leg; the other, just touching the ground, at the distance at which it would naturally fali, if lifted up to show that the body does not bear upon it. The knees should be straight, and braced; and the body, though perfectly straight, not  per- pendicular, but inclining as far to the right as a firm position on the right leg will permit. The right-arm must then be held out with the palm open, the fingers straight, and close, the thumb almost as distant from them as it will go; and the flat of the hand neither horizontal nor ver- tical, but exactly between both. The position.
_ of the arm, perhaps, will be best described, by supposing an oblong hollow square, formed by the measure of four arms, -as in Plate the First, where the arm, in its true position, forms the diagonal of such an imaginary figure: so that, if lines were drawn at right angles from the shoulder, extending downwards, forwards, and sideways, the arm will form an angle of forty- five degrees every way.
When the pupil has pronounced one sentence in the position thus described, the hand, as if lifeless, must drop down to the side, the very
a 1 w® ;
af
vill ELEMENTS OF GESTURE.
moment the last accented word is pronounced ; and the body, without altering the place of the feet, poize itself on the left leg, while the left hand raises itself into exactly the same position as the right was before, and continues in this position till the end of the next sentence, when it drops down on the side, as if dead ; and the body, poizing itself on the right leg as before, continues with the right arm extended, till the end of the succeeding sentence, and so on from right to left, and from left to right, alternately, till the speech is ended.
-. Great care must be taken that the pupil end one sentence completely before he begin an- other. He must let the arm drop to the side, and continue, for a moment, in that posture in which he concluded, before he poizes his body — on the other leg, and raises the other arm into the diagonal position before described; both which should be done before he begins to pro- nounce the next sentence. Care must also be . taken, in shifting the body from one leg to the other,: that the feet do not alter their distance. In altering the position of the body, the feet > will necessarily alter their position a little; — but this change must be made by turning the toes in a somewhat different direction, without suffering them to shift their ground. The heels, in this transition, change their place, but not the toes. The toes may be considered as pivots, on which the body turns from side to side.
If the pupil’s knees are not well formed, or
Fe Seas So . ne ae ; ; . ELEMENTS OF GESTURE. 1x
incline inwards, he must be taught to keep his legs at as great a distance as possible, and to ‘incline his body so much to that side, on which the arm is extended, as to oblige him to rest the opposite leg upon the toe; and this will, in a great measure, hide the defect of his make. In‘the same manner, ifthe arm be too long, or the elbow incline inwards, it will be proper to make him turn the palm of his hand downwards, so as to make it perfectly horizontal. This will infallibly incline the elbow outwards, and pre- vent the worst position the arm can possibly fall into, which is that of inclining the elbow to the body. This position of the hand so neces- sarily keeps the elbow out, that it would not be improper to make the pupil sometimes practise it, though he may have no defect in his make ; as an occasional alteration of the former po- sition to this, may often be necessary, both for — the sake of justness and variety. These two ~ last. positions of the legs ae arms are described in Plate Second. .
When the pupil has got the habit of holding his hand and arm properly, he may be taught to move it. In this motion, he must be careful to keep the arm from the body. He must nei- ther draw the elbow backwards, nor suffer it to approach to the side ; but, while the hand and lower joint of the’arm are curving towards the shoulder, the whole arm, with the elbow form- ing nearly an angle of a square, should move upwards from the shoulder, in the same posi-
A3
.@
bi ELEMENTS OF GESTURE.
tion as when, gracefully, taking off the hat;
that is, with the elbow extended from the side, and the upper joint of the arm nearly on a line with the shoulder, and forming an angle of a square with the body (See Plate III.): this motion of the arm will naturally bring the hand, with the palm downwards, into a horizontal po- sition ; and when it approaches to the head, the arm should, with a jerk, be suddenly straight-
ened into its first position, at the very moment
the emphatical word is pronounced. This co- incidence of the hand and voice will greatly en- force the pronunciation; and if they keep time, they will be in tune as it were to each other, and to force and energy add harmony and variety. As this motion of the arm is:somewhat com- plicated, and may be found difficult to execute, _ it would be advisable to let the pupil, at first, speak without any motion of the arm at all. After some time, he will naturally fall into a small curvature of the elbow, to beat time, as it were, to the emphatic word; and if, in doing this, he is constantly urged to raise the elbow, and to keep it at a distance from the body, the action of the arm will, naturally, grow up into _ that we have just described. So the diagonal position of the arm, though the most graceful and easy when the body is at rest, may be too difficult for boys to fall into at first; and there- fore it may be necessary, in order to avoid the worst extreme, for some time, to make them extend the arm as far from the body as they
Tobeplaced Sheet Ar
4
very
: ‘ " ra © 5 . : ELEMENTS OF GESTURE, xi
can, in a somewhat similar direction, but higher from the ground, and inclining more to the back. Great care must be taken to keep the hand open, and the thumb at some distanée from the fingers ; and particular attention must be paid to keeping the hand in an exact line with the lower part of the arm, so as not to bend at the wrist, either when. it is held out, without n otion, or when it gives the emphatic stroke. And, above all, the ~ body must be kept in a straight line with the. leg on which it bears, and not suffered to bend to the opposite side. —
At first, it may not be improper for the teacher, after placing the pupil in the position, Plate I. to stand at some distance exactly op- posite to him in the same position, the right and left sides only reversed ; and, while the pupil is speaking, to show him, by example, the action he is to make use of. In this case, the teacher’s left hand will correspond to the pupil’s right, by which means he will see, as in a looking-glass, how to regulate his gesture, and will soon catch the method of doing it by himself. i
It is expected the master will be a little dis- couraged at the awkward figure his pupil makes in his first attempts to teach him. But this is no more than what happens in dancing, fencing, or any other exercise which depends on habit. By practice, the pupil will soon begin to feel his position,- and be easy in it. Those positions, which were at first distressing to him, he will fall ‘ into naturally; and if they are such as are really
e xi ELEMENTS OF GESTURE,
é graceful and becoming, (and such, it is pre- sumed, are those which have been just de- scribed,) they will be adopted with more facility
than any other that can be taught him.
. SECTION Il. On the acting of Plays at Schools.
THOUGH the acting of plays at schools has been: universally supposed a very useful prac- tice, it has of late years been much laid aside. The advantages arising from it have not been judged equal to the inconveniences ; and the speaking of single speeches, or the acting of single scenes, has been generally substituted in its stead. Indeed, when we consider the lead- _ ing principle and prevailing sentiments of most “plays, we shall not wonder that they are not always thought to be the most suitable employ- ment for youth at school; nor, when we reflect on the long interruption to the common school- exercises, which the preparation for a play must necessarily occasion, shall we think it consistent with general improvement. But, to wave every objection from prudence or morality, it may be confidently affirmed, that the acting of a play is not so conducive to improvement in elocution, as the speaking of single speeches. : In the first place, the acting of plays is, of all kinds of delivery, the most difficult, and therefore cannot be the most suitable exercise for boys at school. In the next place, a dra- matic performance requires so much attention
FD be placed Sheet A,
: - 2 $ . 7 "ELEMENTS OF GESTURED® xiii
*
to the deportment of the body, so varied an ex- pression of the passions, and so strict an ad- herence to character, that elocution is in danger _ of being neglected: besides; exact propriety of
action, and a nice discrimination@E the passions, however essential on the stage, are but of secon- dary importance inaschool. It isa plain, open, distinct, and forcible pronunciation, which school- boys should aim at; and not that quick transition from one passion to another, that archness of look, and that jew de theatre, as it is called, so essential to a tolerable dramatic exhibition, and which actors themselves can scarcely arrive at. In short, it is speaking rather than acting which school-boys should be taught; while the per- formance of plays is calculated to teach them acting rather than speaking.
But there is a contrary extreme into which many teachers are apt to run, and chiefly those who are incapable of speaking themselves; and that is, to condemn every thing which is vehe- ment and forcible, as theatrical. It is an old trick to depreciate what we cannot ‘attain; and calling a spirited pronunciation theatrical, is but an artful method of hiding our own in- ability of speaking with force and energy. But though school-boys ought not to be taught those nice touches which form the greatest diffi- culties in the profession of an actor, they should not be too much restrained from an exertion. of voice, so necessary to strengthening the organs of sound, because they may sometimes be too
xiv ELEMENTS OF GESTURE.
loud and vociferous. Perhaps nine out of ten, instead of too much confidence, and too vio- lent a manner of speaking, which these teachers seem so much to dread, have, as Dr. Johnson calls it, a frigid equality, a stupid languor, and a torpid apathy. These must be roused by something strong and excessive, or they will never rise even to mediocrity; while the few who have a tendency to rant are very easily re claimed, and ought to be treated in pronuncia~ tion and action as Quintilian advises us to do in composition; that is, we should rather allow of an exuberance, than by too much correctness, check the vigour and luxuriancy of nature. Though school-boys, therefore, ought not to be taught the finenesses of acting, they should as much as possible be accustomed to speak such Speeches as require a full, open, animated pronunciation: for which purpose they should be confined chiefly to Orations, Odes, and such single Speeches of plays as are in the declama- tory and vehement style. But as there are many scenes of plays, which are justly reckoned among the finest compositions in the language, some of these may be adopted among the upper class of boys, and those more particularly who have the best deportment; for action in scenes will be found much more difficult than in single speeches. And here it will be necessary to give some additional instructions respecting action ; as a speaker who delivers himself singly to an auditory, and one who addresses another speaker
in view of an auditory, are under very different
predicaments: the first has only one object to
address, the last has two: for, if a speaker on the stage were to address the person he speaks to, without any regard to the point of view in which he stands with respect to the audience,
he would be apt to turn his back on them, and
to place himself in such positions as would
be highly ungraceful and disgusting. When a
scene, therefore, is represented, it is necessary that the two personages who speak should form
a sort of picture, and place themselves in a- position agreeable te the laws of perspective.
In order to do this, it will be necessary that
each of them should stand obliquely, and chiefly make use of one hand; that is, supposing the stage or platform where they stand to be a quadrangle, each speaker should respectively
face that corner of it next to the audience, and use that hand, and rest upon that leg, which is
next to the person he speaks to, and which is
farthest from the audience. This disposition
is absolutely necessary to form any thing like a
picturesque grouping of objects; and without
it, that.is, if both speakers use the right hand,
and stand exactly fronting each other, the im-
propriety will be palpable, and the spectacle
disgusting.
It need scarcely be noted, that if the speaker, in a scene uses that hand which is next the audience, he ought likewise to poize his body upon the same leg: this is almost an invariable
XVi ELEMENTS OF GESTURE.
rule in action: the hand should act on that side only on which the body bears. .Good actors. and speakers may sometimes depart from this - rule; but such only will know when to do it with propriety. .
Occasion may be taken in the course off the scene to change sides. One speaker, at the end of an impassioned speech, may cross over to the place of the other; while the latter, at the same moment, crosses over to the place of the former. This, however, must be done with great care, and so as to keep the back from being turned to the audience; but if this transition be per- formed adroitly, jit will have a very good effect in varying the position of the speakers, and giving each an opportunity of using his right hand—the most favourable to grace and ex- pression. And if, from so humble a scene as the school, we may be permitted to raise our observations to the senate, it might. be hinted that gentlemen on each side of the house, while addressing the chair, can with grace and pro- priety only make use of one hand; namely, that which is next to the Speaker: and it may be observed in passing, that to all the other advantages of speaking which are supposed to belong to one side of the house—may be added, the graceful use of the right hand,
The better to conceive the position of two speakers in a scene, a plate is given, represent-_ ing their respective attitudes: and it must be carefully noted, that when they are not speaking,
ELEMENTS OF GESTURE. XVii
the arms must hang in their natural place, by the sides, unless what is spoken by one is of such importance as to excite agitation and sur- prise in the other. But if we should be sparing of gesture at all times; we should be more par- ticularly so when we are not speaking. ; _ From what has: been laid down, it will evi- dently appear how much more difficult and complicated is the action of a scene than that of a single speech; and, in teaching both to chil- dren, how necessary it is to adopt as simple and easy a method as possible. The easiest method of conveying instruction in this point will be sufficiently difficult ; and, therefore, the avoiding of awkwardness and impropriety should be more the object of instruction than the conveying of beauties.
There are, indeed, some masters who are against teaching boys any action at all, and are for leaving them in this point entirely to nature*. Itis happy, however, that they do not leave that action to nature which is aequired by dancing ; the deportment of their pupils would soon con- vince them they were imposed on by the sound of words. Improved and beautiful nature is the object of the painter’s pencil, the poet’s pen, and the rhetorician’s action, and not that sordid and common nature which is perfectly rude and uncultivated. Nature directs us to art, and art
* ——-—. Ego nec studium sine divite vena, Nec rude quid prosit video ingeniumn. : é ony Hor, Ars Poetica.
Xviil ELEMENTS OF GESTURE.
selects and polishes the beauties of nature. It is not sufficient for an orator, says Quintilian, that he is a man; he must be an improved and cultivated man; he must be a man favoured by nature and fashioned by art. 3
But the necessity of adopting some method of teaching action is too evident to need proof. Boys will infallibly contract-some action; to require them to stand stock-still while they are speaking an impassioned speech, is not only ex- acting a very difficult task from them, but is in a great measure checking their natural exertions. If they are left to themselves, they will in all probability fall into very wild and ungraceful action, which, when once formed into a habit, can scarcely ever be corrected: giving them, therefore, a general outline of good action, must be of the utmost consequence to their progress and improvement in pronunciation.
The great use, therefore, of a system of action like the present, is, that a boy will never be em- barrassed for want of knowing what to do with his legs and arms; nor will he bestow that at- tention on his action, which ought to be directed to his pronunciation: he will always be in a position which will not disgrace his figure; and _when this gesture is easy to him, it may serve as a groundwork to something more perfect ; he may, either by his own genius, or his master’s Instructions, butid some other action upon it, which may in time give it additional force and variety.
ELEMENTS OF GESTURE. xix
_. Thus, what seemed either unworthy the at- . tention, or too difficult for the execution of others. the author of the present publication has ven- tured to attempt. A conviction of the necessity of teaching some system of action, and the abun- dant success of the present system in one of the most respectable academies near London, has determined him to publish it for the use of such seminaries as make English Pronunciation a part of their discipline. From the common prejudice against any new methods of teaching, and often from the trouble attending them, he does not fatter himself that the present production will meet with a very cordial reception at first; but hopes that time will justify him in this, as it has done in some other attempts to improve the art of reading and speaking.
As the present compilation is more particu- larly calculated for speaking, such pieces are se- lected as are the most proper for pronouncing by heart. Such Parliamentary Debates are chosen as: were selected and arranged by Dr. Johnson when Pitt and Pulteney shone with unrivalled lustre. These are so abridged as to form a good exhibition of about half an hour, for the upper boys in the school, and chiefly those who have not confidence enough to shew them- selves in a single speech. The ease with which most of them may be pronounced, and the cover they afford to modest diffidence, make them peculiarly suitable to a considerable number of boys in every school,
%
xX ELEMENTS OF GESTURE.
- The different pieces are classed under five heads, namely, the Declamatory, the Vehement, the Deliberative or Argumentative, the Pa- thetic, and the Comic ; and though the compiler is no great friend to the latter kind of speeches, as they require acting rather than speaking, yet as some boys are found to have a strong turn for
-Comic Humour, and other teachers may be of a different opinion in this point, he has given them a place in this collection.. This arrange- ment will, he flatters himself, be found of some use, as it ascends from the easiest to the most difficult species of speaking... All boys can de- claim, or recite such speeches as have little or no passion in them; many can express anger, rage, and fury ; not near so many can pronounce a soliloquy with weight and meaning; but few can touch the tender passions, and still fewer can succeed in comedy. This last species of speaking seems indeed more peculiarly the gift of nature than any of the rest; and the comic speaker, like the poet, must be born, not made.
It may not be useless to observe, that boys should be classed in this, as in every other kind of instruction, according to their abilities; that a class should not consist of more than ten; that about eight or ten lines of some speech should be read first by the teacher, then by the boy who reads best, and then by therest in order, all having a book of the same kind, and all reading the same portion. This portion they must be ordered to get by heart against the next lesson ; and then
ELEMENTS OF GESTURE. XXI
the first boy must speak it, standing at some dis- tance before the rest, in the manner directed in the plates: the second boy must succeed him, and so on till they have all spoken: after which another portion must be read to them, which they must read and speak in the same manner as before. When they have gone through a speech in this manner by portions, the two or three first boys may be ordered, against the next lesson, to speak the whole speech; the next lesson two or three more, and so on to the rest. This will excite emulation, and give the teacher an opportunity of ranking them according to their merit. mas ;
With respect to rules for pronunciation, the teacher must be referred to the Rhetorical Grammar, where it is presumed are to be found a collection of the easiest and most definite rules for Reading and Speaking that have hitherto appeared in our language.
Advertisement to the Sixth Edition.
_TueE reception the Public has given to the five former editions of this work, has induced the Author to make some very considerable Alterations and Additions, which he flat- ters himself will render it more useful. In these Additions he has been solicitous to give as much original matter as he could ; and such as has not-been too much blown upon (as Mr. Addison expresses it) in other compilations of the same kind. Ki ;
CONTENTS..¢ 7
PART ie "% e
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
A Debate in the Year 1732, on a Motion for continuing the A Debate in the Year 1734, on a ibe for giving Prizes A Delate in the Yeur 1740, on a Vote of Thanks to the King 7 ae Year 1740, on a Bill for preventing Mer- chants from raising the Wages of Seamen in time of War.
Morning Hymn of Adam and Eve - Belial’s Speech dissuading from War The Youth and the Philosopher = - Prologue to Cato = ~ Cato’s Senate - - ~ + «2 Orestes, Ambassador to Pyrrhus - King Henry and Lord Chief-Justice
PART Ii. DECLAMATION.
: Page Brutus on the Death of Ceasar - - - - - = Shaks. 65 Douglas to Lord Randolph -'- ~ - - - - Home 66 Uthello’s Apology to the Senate - - - - - ~ Shaks. 67 The Bishop of Carlisle in Richard II - - - = ibid. 69 Lord Clifford’s Speech to Henry VI - - - - ibid. 70 Greatness and Sublimity of the Mind - - - Akenside. 71 The Pleasures arising from Novelty - - - = ibid. 73 Scale of Animal Existence - - -~ - - - ~ Pope. 75 Social Duties arising from Nature - - - - - ibid. 76 On Taste. Its Universality and Diversity - - Aken. 77 ‘Chorus to the first Act of HenryV. - - + - Shaks. 79 Chorus to the second Act of Henry V.- - - - ibid. 80 Henry the V.’s Condemnation of Treason - - - ibid. 81 The Character of Rumour - - « - = + ibid. 83 Chorus to the third Act of Henry V. so as bid. 83 Virtue our Duty and highest Interest - + = Pope. 85 The Miseries of Royalty - - - - + - Shaks. 86 The Folly of Procrastination» < - - + - Young. 88 Gloucester’s Speech to the Nobles « - > - Shaks. 89
Milton. 90 - - ibid. 92 Whitehead. 95 - Pope. 96 Addison. 97 - Philips. 102 - Shaks. 105
XXXII
 Nicholaus’s Speech for Nicias -- .« «
Brutus and Cassius, in J. Cesar - -
CONTENTS.
Demosthenes against Philip - - fischines against Demosthenes ~ Demosthenes against ZEschines - Hannibal to his Soldiers - + - T. Quintius to the Roman People Cicero’s Oration against Verres -
PART Il.
VEHEMENT PASSION.
_ Richmond encouraging his Soldiers - -
Marcellus’s Speech to the Mob, J. Cesar Antony’s Soliloquy « Se Casar’s Body - Alexander, on passing the Granicus = ~= Zanga’s Joy and Remorse on his Plot - - Zanga encouraging Alonzo to kill his Wife Henry V. to his Soldiers at Hurfleur - Henry V. io his Soldiers at Agincourt
Moloch’s Oration for War - - - - OS and Marcus on Cesar’s Sticcess
Faulconbridge und King John - - -
Gloucester and Hastings, in J. Shore » KK, Henry and Hotspur - - - - - KK. Henry and Prince of Wales) - - Vanoc and Valens, inthe Briton - - Brutus and Cassius, in J. Cesar - -
PART Iv.
REFLECTION AND ARGUMENT.
Brutus’s Soliloquy upon killing Cesar - Hamiet’s Soliloquy upon his own Conduct Hamlet's Soliloquy upon Life and Death | Hamlet's Soliloquy upon his Delay - = Cato’s Soliloquy upon Immortality - - - The Judgment of Hercules - - - + -
| Mr, Pym’s Speech against Lord Strafford
Lord Digby, in Favour of Lord Str afford Lord Strafford’s Defence - - -
Lord Mansfield’s Speech in Favour of Wilkes
Lord Mansfield’s Speech against Privilege Douglas’s Account of the Hermit - - - Different Degrees of Beauty in Objects »
- Shaks, -« ibid. Taree ibid.
133 134 135
e, ibid.
- = ibid.
~ Shaks..
- ibid. Milton. Addison.
-— Toang.
Shaks.
- ibid, - Rowe,
- ibid.
Philips. — - Shaks. ~
- -Shaks., = yn Ibid, - « Ibid. - »- ibid. - Addison,
- onic. - » Aken;
= -Shaks. -
171 172 173 174 176 477 181 183 186 188 191 194 195
XXiV CONTENTS. XIV. Milton's Lamentation of his Blindness sia ne oe 10 XV. The Drowning Fly hes =e “7°77 = 19 XVI. Odeon St. Cacilia’s Day - ~ - - = = = =Pope. 200 XVII. Odeto Truth - - - - - - - - > ~ + Mason, 204
PART V. GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
I, Hamlet's Soliloquy on his Mother's Marriage = = Shaks. 207
Il. Buckingham going to Execution - - - - = + ibid. 208 Ili. - Henry the IV.’s Soliloquy on Sleep- - - = = ~ ibid. 209 IV. Soliloquy of. the King in Hamlet - - + - + ~ ibid. 210 V. . Cato’s Speech on the Death of his Som - - +. Addison. 212 VI. Hymn to Adversity - - - - = + = + - Gray. 213
VII. Odeon a Prospect of Eton College - = - = = ibid. 214 VIII, Satan’s Address tothe Sun - = - - - - - Milton, 217 IX. Antony's Oration over Cesar’s Body - - - = Shaks. 220
X. Samson deploring his Caen ane tinge =“. = 223
XI. The Bard - - - foe - Gray. 226 XII. Pindaric Ode sent ‘to Mrs. Cote - ee es, - 251 XIII. Ode on the Passions - - - “- - - ‘Collins 235 XIV. Bolingbroke and Richard's Extra into Lonion - Shaks. 239 XV. Scroop and Richard II.. - - - - - - - = ibid. 240 XVI, Henry TV. and Prince of Wales - - - - + ibid, 242 XVII. Wolsey and Cromwell - - - = + - - = = ibid. 245 XVIIL. “Aletes and Ilyssus, in Creusa - - - - + Whitehead. 247 XIX. Juba and Syphax,in Cato- - - = © = = Addison. 251 XX. Parting of Hector und Andromache- - - = = Pope. 255 MXI. The Fate of Painting and modern Languages -. ibid. 959 PART VI. COMIC HUMOUR, I. Jaques on Fools and the Stages of Life- - - -
TI, Clown on Rules of Gunrtelling = . = sans TLL es IU. Townand Country Mice - - - - - - - - Pope. 964 IV. sop and the Beau - - - ages nee Vanbruch, 266
V. Fable of the Belly and Members cos ee ee Shaks. 271 VI. Description of Queen Mab - - - - - «= ~ shid. o7
VII. Fable of the Cameleon - - - - - 2's 2. 2 c S a. ‘VIII. The Monkey who had travelled - - - - - - Ga i as oS Ele and Modern Music compared - - - - - - 282
. amilton’s Buwn = = - « -« « = « » - Swift. 285
wait. PART Asvex13 i ae PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES,
Fone en
eg 1 Parliamentary Dai? in iheVeur 1732, “upon a “Motion ‘or continuing the Number ff Troops i in the Service of “His Majette
-* “SPEAKERS, Sir William Strickland, a. ~ Lord Morpeth, ee - Mr. Barnard, her
oe "Lord a Mr. Noel, _ Mr. Plomer, he aaah Shippen, a Sir William Yonge, “Sir Robert Walpole, —_— Sir William Wyndham, Mr. Horace Walpole, Mr. Henry Pelham, Mr. Pulteney.
é Sees William Se
__ Sir, iicnechlas Rial TuoveH the public fei epSility is appilge ad fally” estas blished, I. think it absolutely necessary for us to keep up a respectable. number. of troops, till we see how those mea- sures, by. which the public tranquillity has been established, shall be approved.of by. the other Powers of Europe, who haye mot, yet declared. their sentiments upon this subject : I therefore, humbly. move, Sir, that the number of effective men for, guards and. garrisons, in Great Britain, and for Guernsey and: Jersey, for the ensuing year, shall beI7,154 invalids, and 555: men; which the six mdependent com- panies consist of, for the service of the Highlands; in all 17,709. effective’ men, commission og non-commission officers ‘included.
Lord Morpeth.
: SIR,—Though I should be sorry to see my country ex- posed to danger, for want of a sufficient number of. troops ‘ to defend it in any emergency, I should be equally sorry to . : B
‘
2 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
see our liberties exposed to danger by the awe these troops — may create in the minds of the people: besides, Sir, there is another reason which ought to weigh with every lover of his country ; and that is, the expense of these troops. Shall we, at the end of an expensive war, when our pockets have been drained, and our credit stretched, continue these ex- penses, and entail them on our posterity? No, Sir; abs- — tracted from the danger of so many standing troops, the expense of them appears to be too great for our present re- sources ; and therefore, if some troops are absolutely neces- sary, I humbly move, that their number be no more than 12,000 effective men. ,
' Lord Hervey.
SIR,—Though the peace and tranquillity of this nation both at home and abroad, be now, by his Majesty’s wise conduct, established, in all probability, upon a firm and lasting foundation, yet a wise people ought always to’ be’ upon their guard against the worst that may happen.
We must not imagine that we have no enemies, or that they have lost their former watchfulness. As long as we have a good and brave army for our support, they know they dare not break out into any open acts of violence; but | the many scandalous and seditious libels that are every day published against the government, and the many scribblers that are employed to vilify and asperse his Majesty, and his administration, and to Sow disaffection among the people, is an evident sign that we have as yet many enemies, even. within our bosom, who would probably think of making use of other weapons than the pen, if we should be so un- wise as to afford them the least hopes of success by making a great reduction in our army; and therefore I am for con-
tinuing the army, for this year at least, upon the footings that. was at first proposed. .
_ PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES, 8 '‘ mEhiet t ‘ ‘ : a ; = import Mr. Plomer. . SIR,—I cannot help observing, that the most weighty argument made use of by the noble Lord who spoke last, seems to be, that there is a great number of scribblers em- ployed to write against the government; but, for my part, Sir, I cannot see why that should be thought a sufficient reason for keeping up a standard army of soldiers. If scrib- bling gives the government any uneasiness, or makes them dream of danger, I think the best way would be to employ ‘an army of ‘scribblers to defend them ; for I doubt:not but a sufficient number of such may be found, who will list upon that side where they expect to make the most advantage.
Sir William Yonge.
- SIR,—The question now before us is not any way re- ‘Jating to the preservation or the loss of our liberties ; we are hot to suppose, we cannot suppose, that his Majesty is to employ the forces we are to keep on foot in any illegal way, or that he is to make use of them, or of any other means, to encroach upon the liberties of our country. We have had sufficient experience of his Majesty’s wisdom and good- ness, not to entertain the least suspicion of any such design. All'that his Majesty wants is, that we will take care to keep up a parliamentary force sufficient for enabling him to re- pel any attack that may be made upon our country, or upon our constitution. His Majesty desires nothing but what ‘may be necessary for preserving us in the happy and quiet state in which we are at present, and for continuing and protecting the free enjoyment of those liberties and privi- leges, for which he has always shown so great a regard. While this is the use to be made of our standing army, I eannot think that the number proposed is at all too large ; and if any other use were to be made of them, I hope I
Bz
4. PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
should be as ready as any man in this House to oppose any
such measures; but as long’ as the continuation of the army
depends upon the resolution of Parliament, from. year to
year, there. is, I think, no danger of any such measures
being entered upon, or even so much as thought of. The
Parliament will, always have it. in their power to put a stop
to such measures in their infancy, andilong before they can be made effectual, or so much as brought to any maturity;
and I hope. it-never will be imagined, that the Parliament
will) join. in’ any measure for enslaving the people: I shall
therefore, Sir, give my vote for keeping. up he pubes of forces proposed.
Str William Wyndham:
SIR,—It has always been looked ‘upon as contrary to the constitution, and inconsistent with the liberties of this country, to keep up.a standing army in time of peace. This is a,;maxim that has been handed down to us from our fore- fathers, and is certainly as true a maxim as any that ever was, or ever can.be, laid down for the preservation of our happy constitution. His Majesty. has been. most graciously pleased to assure us, from: the throne, that the expectations he has given us, from time. to time, of seeing the general tranquillity. of Europe restored and. established, are. now fully answered:,..What have we.more to expect? Do we hope ever to see.a time when all the powers of Europe will-be, even to outward appearance, ‘so fully satisfied and. pleased, that no jealousies or private animosities shall seem | to-remain? The hope is vain; the thing. is impossible: for “those very measures which make one easy, will always give: some appearance of disquiet to another. Besides; the: ‘ambition of princes is such, that’ no general satisfaction can: be expected, nor can a profound tranquillity be hoped for,, to remain for any time, without,some disturbance. Either!
| AMENTARY DEBATES. © 5 now is Se time (for us to reduce: a part of our army,or ‘such a time. will never, happen; ,and this nation must always be obliged tobe at the expense of maintain- ing a numerous. regular army, and lie. exposed to have its erties and. privileges trampled upon by the means of that ‘army, whenever. we shall have a King weak or ambitious enough, or & seberapes i wicked. gonqughs to. engage in- som measures. © _ Sir, the brave and: bold cant which the British ‘niljants naturally have, is well known; our enemies have often felt it to their cost: I hope the same spirit still remains ; I hope ave have men enow in Britain, who have resolution to de- fend themselves against any invasion whatever, were there not so much.as one red coat in the whole kingdom, It is upon the bravery of our subjects, upon the natural courage of our men, that we ought principally to,depend for the pro- tection and safety of our country against a foreign enemy ;: by trusting to this we have continued for many years to be'a hap- py and a free people ; and, as soon as we begin to put our trust in any thing else, our happiness and our liberty will beat an end, and a state of misery and slavery must.soon after ensue, _ As to the disaffection that is pretended to be in the coun- try, it is nothing due a pretence; and it will always be a pretence. I hope, Sir, it is so inconsiderable, that our or- dinary civil officers are sufficient to seize, and our common jails capable of holding, all the disaffected in the kingdom ; but I must say, that the continuing of a standing army, even from year to year, will certainly make the disaffection increase, and will make it spread through all. parts of the kingdom. It is my opinion, Sir, that the affections of the people ought to be measured by the affections of their re- presentatives in Parliament; it has always been so hitherto; the subjects, when they suspected that the crown was mak- ing any encroachments upon their liberties, always pleased
6 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
themselves with the thoughts that they could find a sure re~ dress from their representatives assembled in Parliament: upon them they always depend for a certain remedy for all their real, or even imaginary wrongs: but if'this House shall thus, from year to year, agree to the continuance of a stand-— ing army, I am afraid this will no longer continue to be a rule for measuring the people’s affections: the people will begin to look upou us, not as their representatives, or as the guardians of their liberties, but as the insignificant tools of a Court, and the hireling supporters of an Administration.
Mr. Henry Pelham.
SIR,—Notwithstanding the fears and appreaeiaei of. the honourable gentleman who spoke last, I cannot think, as long as the army is regularly paid, and strict discipline is kept up, that the people can meet with an injustice from them ; for, as long as they are subject to be reduced or dis= banded by the Parliament, whenever it is thought conve- nient, they can never be employed against. the liberties and privileges of the subject ; and therefore I do not believe that the small number now proposed can ever raise any discon= tents or jealousies in the minds of the people: but while there is so much disaffection to the government at home, we must be weak indeed to deprive ourselves of the means of security. This disaffection is doubted of by some gentle- men ; but, though it may be dormant, it'is certainly not quite extinguished : this will appear from the late speech of a common-councilman in the city of London; who, when a petition was presented for pulling down the old conduit in Cheapside, and erecting the statue of King William in its place, told them, that this would be only removing one nui- sance to set up another. This is a sufficient. proof that we ought to be upon our guard ; and therefore I heartily agree to the number of troops originally proposed.
pARUIANENTARY. DEBATES. = 7
x RS / / ieee Mr. Baward.
a ate ‘ ent Oe t
; SIR cannot agree to the continuing the anny: on the footing proposed, because his Majesty has assured us that ‘there is a profound tranquillity abroad; and if there be any party at home against the protestant succession, I am con- vinced it is so insignificant, that it is not worth taking notice of. The setting up, or not setting up, of King William’s statue, can be no argument for proving that there is a spirit of Jacobitism in the country. For my part, I wish the pro- posal had been agreed to, and that the statue had been set up: but I am sure that the late opposition that was made to it, and the refusing to set it up in the place proposed for it, did not proceed from any disaffection to the Government, or from any dislike of the Revolution; there were many other reasons to be assigned for that refusal, which, by the gene- rality of the people who were concerned in that matter, were ‘thought to be of weight enough to give their negative at that time.
Mr. Horace Walpole. 4 SIR,—The present question is about an army which is to be kept up according to law, and by and with the consent and approbation of the people. If we look into the Petition of Right itself, what does it say? Why, that an army raised or kept up, without consent of Parliament, is contrary to the constitution ; but it is never said, that an army kept up by consent of Parliament is illegal, or any way contrary to our happy constitution. A parliamentary army never did any harmto this nation; but reductions of that army have often been fatal. I have been assured, by a Minister of very great consequence, that the reducing of our army, after the peace of Ryswick, very much encouraged the Court of France to take such measures, and to make such bold steps,
8 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. as they afterwards did. They would have been much more cautious, if we had kept ourselves in a capacity of pouring — ina numerous army upon them; but they saw we had put — it out of our power, and therefore they despised us. 7 After all, Sir, I would not have the friends to the present establishment think themselves absolutely safe and secure. It is not to be supposed, but that his Majesty has still some private enemies, even in our own country. People may © say what they please about the treatment the petition for erecting King William’s statue lately met with, but I look upon it as an affront designedly put upon the Revolution 5 and I am sure it never could have met with so much con- — tempt from any thing but a spirit of Jacobitism still sub- sisting in the country, which can never be destroyed but by taking from them all hopes of success ; and this can only be — done by keeping up an army sufficient to defend us against __ their utmost efforts. -
Mr. Noel.
SIR,—I cannot say but I very much approve of his Majesty’s speech at the beginning of this session: I am glad ' to observe that his Majesty has therein declared, in so strong terms, his affection for his people ; but, from the motion — that has been made for such a number of troops, I think the © speech ought to have concluded with these words: That his Majesty, to show his affection to his people, would — quarter upon them for next year but eighteen thousand ~ men.
Now, Sir, to say nothing of the danger of keeping up — such a body of mercenaries, the burden of supporting them ~ must be intolerable. I submit, indeed, to the amendment made by a noble Lord, for a smaller number of forces than was at first proposed: I mean twelve thousand rather than eighteen thousand, only as it is the smaller evil, and not be~ —
9
_eause Jsidieketimtwataber: now necessary for our. preserva- tion, nor because I'think any number ought ever to be ad-
| into our establishment, or considered as a Pest of our eonstitution, on ccgeaieaebats whatsoever.
eh : pani GES < es a : Fe: , sggeyen esnioDMr. ‘Shippen. :
_ Mr. SPEAKER, —I see this question in the same light with those gentlemen who are of opinion, that the determi- nation of it will show the people of Great Britain, whether they are to enjoy the civil constitution with all its tights and privileges, or to endure a military government with all its _ inconveniences and oppressions. |
However harsh this assertion may sound, it is so eat founded, that if we cannot now hope for a reduction of the army, we may for ever despair of it. For this is the con- juncture, this is the erisis, when the people of Great Britain may with reason and justice expect (Ihad almost ‘said de- mand) an exemption from every unnecessary tax; and as none is more grievous at all times, so none seems to be more unnecessary at this time, than that which is occasioned by maintaining an extraordinary number of land forces. Such an exemption must be acceptable to his Majesty, who has been most graciously pleased to open the session with declar-
ing, That it is a pleasure to him to give ease to his subjects, whenever the welfare of the public will admit of it. Since, then, his Majesty has so gloriously performed his part, let us not be wanting on ours. Let'us take the earliest oppor- tunity of convincing those we represent, that they are im- mediately to reap the fruit of bis Royal labours, and that all their grievances will be gradually redressed. Let us begin with reducing the army, and making them sensible that it is not intended they should any longer bear the burden and inconveniences of war, in a day of profound peace and uni- versal tranquillity. If we fail in this great point, the people, Bo
10 | PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
who did not resign their understandings when they dele- gated their power to us, know they have a right to judge i for themselves. They will not be imposed upon by appear- — ances; they will be apt, notwithstanding all the fine words © they hear, and all the fine speeches they read, to call this — boasted success, these promised blessings, no more than a mere delusion, a golden dream, a chimerical and visionary scene of happiness. vs rs - I wish, therefore, the honourable person who moved this question, and the other gentlemen wio have been his coad- — jutors in the support of it, had been a little more explicit. I wish, instead of reviving the old exploded argument of disaffection and Jacobitism—I wish, instead of rambling so — widely from the point in debate, they would have dealt more candidly with their audience, and told us plainly whether they think a standing force will always be necessary to pre- serve and secure our present happy settlement; or whether they think the civil constitution of this kingdom so weakly and so imperfectly framed, as to want something of the mi- litary power to strengthen and sustain it. If they entertain either of these notions, they must give me leave to take no- tice, that such an insinuation is unjust, and the argument odious: since it is a very gross reflection on our present happy settlement; which is founded on the principles of li- berty; and which you know, Sir, was intended to rectify all the errors, and to reform all the abuses, of preceding reigns; Isay, it is a very gross reflection on our present settlement, to suppose that his Majesty cannot wear his crown in safety, but by burdening the nation with the con- stant charge of maintaining near cicbicla thousand men; but by establishing a force which will perpetually interfere with the hberty of his subjects, and consequently shake the foun- dation of his throne. For, however changeable the counsels and actions of Ministers may be, the nature of things is per-
—_— . ti is | etal ‘that what has been the con- stant, ‘the certain cause of destruction to other governments,, should, by any new schemes, by any refinements in poli- a be made the sole, or at least,, the chief security. of his lajesty’ s crown.
_ As, therefore, it is the glory of our ancestors, that they have maintained our constitution, in opposition to all the attempts of innovation, and that they have transmitted it entire to their posterity; so will it be a mark of eternal in- famy to that generation, in whose time it shall happen, either by the ambition of the Prince, or by the treachery of the Ministry, or by the slavishness of the People, to be sur~ rendered or destroyed.,
Str Robert Walpole:
SIR,—I find the gentlemen who oppose the motion made: by my honourable: facad: have all along argued, as if the number of forces now proposed were to be kept up against law, or to be continued for ever; whereas the very design. of the motion made to this House, is in order to have a law for keeping them up ; and all that the gentleman. wants by his motion is, that they shall be continued for this. year only. ‘The case, then, before us is, Whether it will be more proper, and more for the benefit of the nation, to. keep up the num- ° ber proposed for one year, or by an. ill-timed. frugality to re- duce some part of them, and thereby, expose the nation to be contemned and. despised by our neighbours around us, and that ata time when the public tranquillity is but just settled, and before we can know whether some of our neighbouring - Powers are. satisfied or not. Nations, as well as private men, must accommodate their measures to the times they live in. The circumstances of Europe are now much altered from what they were in former days; but a few years ago,
12, PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. there was ‘no such thing in Europe as what we now ‘call a ‘standing “army ; 3 . there was ‘nothing but the militia for any
country ; and therefore it was no way “necessary for us to
have any thing else. If we quarrelled with an my of our neighbours, we were sure they had nothing but n militia to bring against Us 5 our militia was, and I hope still ‘is, a
good ; as theirs; ‘but I do not believe that : any man will say,
,
that the militia of any country can be made fully as good as
regular troops, bred up ‘to discipline, and accustomed to command, for 1 many years 5 the thing is impossible, and is so looked on by all the powers of Europe. There is not now a sovereign state in Europe but keeps a body of regu- lar troops in its pay; there are none of our neighbours but
what keep-a much greater number than we do; and there- —
fore it is become in a manner absolutely necessary for us to
keep some: we must have some regular troops to oppose — to those that may upon a sudden emergency be brought —
against us, and to obstruct and to oppose their passage, ‘till we have time to raise more. The only question is, how
great a number we ought to keep, and in what manner they ;
ought to be. kept up, so as not to be dangerous to our con- stitution.
As to the preventing of any danger arising from the re- gular ferces kept up, I do not think there can be a better method proposed than that of keeping them up only by au- thority of Parliament, and continuing them only from year
to year. . By this method, Sir, they must always be depen- -
dant on, and subservient to, the Parliament or People, and consequently can never be made use of for any thing but
for the preservation and safety of the people against all at- —
tempts, foreign and domestic; and while they are kept up in this manner, they will always be a terror to our enemies, without subjecting us to any of those misfortunes which
RLTAMENTS 18 other sctillece’ have Tad ee ia standing army, T'find,  repres nted by some gentlemen, who have’ spoken: upon é other side of the question, as not'to be depended upon, even by the King, whose service ‘they aré in. I grant that an army of Britta? subjects, whatever way kept up or mo- delled, is not to be trusted to by a King who makes any attempts: upon the liberties of the People ; but if an army, ‘ yaised and maintained without the consent of Parliament, is not to be trusted to by a King who has such designs, how _ much less can any man depend, for the execution of such ' designs, upon an army such as we have at present ; an army raised, kept up, and maintained by the People; an army that may be dismissed by them when they please; and an army that is commanded by gentlemen of some of the best estates and families amongst us, who never can be supposed capable of joining in any measures for enslaving a country, where they have so great an interest, and where their an- ~cestors have so ofien signalized themselves in the cause of liberty? It is not therefore to be imagined, that ever such an army can be of any dangerous consequence to our liber- ties, were they much more numerous than they are proposed to be.
Mr. Pulteney.
~ SIR,—We have heard a great deal about parliamentary armies, and about an army continued from year to year. . I always have been, Sir, and always shall be, ‘against a stand- ing army of any kind; to me it is a terrible thing, whether under that of parliamentary, or any other designation ; a standing army is still a standing army, whatever name it be called by; they are a body of men distinct from the body of the people; they are governed by different laws, and blind obedience and an entire submission to the erders of their
14 PARLIAMENTARY: DEBATES.
commanding officer is their only principle. The nations around us, Sir, are already enslaved, and haye been enslaved ° by those very means; by means of their standing armies they have every one lost their liberties ; it is, indeed, im- : possible, that the liberties of the people can be preserved in any country where a numerous standing army is kept up. — Shall we then take any of our measures from the examples of our neighbours? No, Sir, on the contrary, from their misfortunes we ought to learn to avoid those rocks upon which they have split.”
It signifies nothing to tell me, that our army is com-— manded by such gentlemen as cannot be supposed to join in — any measures for enslaving their country. It may beso; I hope it is so; I have a very good opinion of many gentle- — men now in the army; I believe they would not join in any — such measures; but their lives are uncertain, nor can we be sure how long they may be continued in command; they . may be all dismissed in a moment, and proper tools of power — put in their room. Besides, Sir, we know the passions of men; we know how dangerous it is to trust the best of men with too much power, Where was there a braver army than that under Julius Caesar? Where was there ever an army that had served their country more faithfully ? That army was commanded generally by the best citizens. of Rome, by men of great fortune and figure in their coun- try; yet that army enslaved their country. The affections. of the soldiers towards their country, the honour and inte- grity of the under-officers, are not to be depended on; by the military ‘law, the administration of justice is so quick, and the punishments so severe, that neither officer nor sol- dier dares offer to dispute the orders of his supreme com- mander; he must not consult his own inclinations; if an. officer were commanded to pull his own father out of this.
ARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 15
House, he must do it; he dares not disobey ; immediate -
death would be the sure consequence of the least grumbling, And if an officer were sent into the court of Requests, ac- companied by a body of musketeers with screwed bayonets, ‘and with orders to tell us what we ought to do, and how we were to vote,—I know what would be the duty of this House, I know it would be our duty to order the officer to be taken and hanged up at the door of the lobby: but, Sir, I doubt much if such a spirit could be found in this House, or in any House of Commons that will ever be in England. > Sir, I talk not of imaginary things; I talk of what has
happened to an English House of Commons, and from an
English army ; not only froth an English army, but an army that was raised by that very House of Commions, an army
_ that was paid by them, and an army that was commanded
by generals appointed by them. Therefore, do not let us vainly imagine, that an army raised and maintained by au-
“thority of Parliament will always be submissive to them: if
an army be so numerous as to have it in their power to over-
‘awe the Parliament, they will be submissive as long as the
Parliament does nothing to disoblige their favourite General ; but when that case happens, I am afraid that, in place of the Parliament’s dismissing the army, the army will dismiss the Parliament, as they have done heretofore. Nor does the Jegality or illegality of that Parliament, or of that army, alter the case; for, with respect to that army, and accord- ing to their way of thinking, the Parliament dismissed by them was a legal Parliament; they were an army raised and maintained according to law; and_at first they were raised, as they imagined, for the preservation of those liber- ties which they afterwards destroyed. _
It has been urged, Sir, that whoever is for the Protestant succession, must be for continuing the army: for that very geason, Sir, I am against continuing the army. J know
16 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. that neither the Protestant succession in his Mojesty’s most illustrious house, nor any succession, can ever. be safe, as long as there is a standing army in the country. Armies, Sir, have no regard to hereditary succession. The first two Cesars at Rome did pretty well, and found means to keep their armies in tolerable subjection, because the — Generals and Officers were all their own creatures. But how did it fare with their successors? Was not every one of them named by the army, without any regard to hereditary right, or to any right? A cobbler, a gardener, or any man who happened to raise himself in the army, and could gain | their affections, was made Emperor of the World. Was not — every succeeding Emperor raised to the Throne, or tumbled — headlong into the dust, according to the mere whim or mad phrenzy of the soldiers. * We are told, this army is desired to be continued but for one year longer, or for a limited term of years. How ab-_ surd is this distinction! Is there any army in the world con-_ tmued for any term of years? Does the most absolute Mo- narch tell his army, that he is to continue them for any number of years, or any number of months? How long have — we already: continued our army from year to year? And if it thus continues, wherein will it differ from the standing . armies of those countries which have already submitted their necks to the yoke? We are now come to the Rubicon ; our army is now to be reduced, or it never will; from his " Majesty’s own mouth we are assured of profound tranquil- lity abroad; we know there is one at home} if this is not a proper time, if these circumstances do pot afford usa safe opportunity for reducing, at least; a part of our regular forces, we never can expect to see any reduction; and this nation, already overburdened with debts and taxes, must be loaded with a heavy charge of perpetually supporting a numerous standing army, and remain for ever exposed to the
wy
y futur King or Ministey les ‘shall ‘take it in> ataie ‘do so, and bp a a Eee ‘care. to —_— ‘the fer'that purposes waves? teseuw site, Pabst
I. A ME or Debate, in the Year 1734, on a Motion giving any Prizes that may be taken in a War with Spe ‘to the Officers and Seamen concerned 4 in taking them.
SPEAKERS, _ Mr, Pulteney, . Mr. Henry. Fox, ~ Sir W. Poe” “The Speaker, j Sir W. Wyndham, Mr. Winnington, Sir R. Walpole, - Mr. Hay, Sir J. Barnard, Mr, Wright.
a se: Mr. Pulteney.
us -Syr, é : ’ Tue advanced season of the year, together with the ape prehension of a rupture happening between Spain and Great Britain, before our next meeting, makes it necessary for us to enter into such measures as may render the war, should it happen, successful on our part. By the resolu- tions which we have already come to this session, we have enabled his Majesty to provide for war; we have declared our readiness to stand by him, in whatever measures he may find necessary for vindicating the honour of his Crown, for procuring reparation to his injured subjects, and satis- faction for the insults that have been put upon the nation. At the same time, Sir, these resolutions are upon the clearest proofs of an insolent, unjustifiable conduct on the part of Spain, and which, without a very ample satisfaction on
Fi
eet PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
their part, must unavoidably occasion a war betwixt the two nations before next sessions of Parliament. _ ‘aa _ At present, therefore, I shall humbly move, that an act made in the sixth year of Queen Anne, and to continue only during that war, may be revived, by which it is enacted, “ That if any vessel shall be taken by any ship of war or “ privateer, and condemned as prize, the officers and sea~ «men concerned in taking her shall have the sole interest “and property in the ship and cargo so taken.”
Sir William Yonge.
SIR,—I believe gentlemen will be pretty much disappointed, when I assure them that I do not rise up to oppose this bill. I cannot, however, avoid taking notice how different the time and manner, in which the bill mentioned was brought in, is from the time and manner in which the honourable gentles man proposes to bring in his bill.
As to the time, Sir; the former bill was passed, after the nation had been five or six years in actual war; therefore neither we nor our allies could suffer by any precipitate de= claration of such measure as this is. By the bill in Queen Anne’s reign, we did not make one nation in Europe our enemy; we gave no jealousy to our allies; we put the Crown under no difficulties: but I shall subpait it to gen- tlemen’s consideration, how far it is possible to avoid these inconveniences, should such a bill pass at present. It would perhaps, Sir, be looked upon as anticipating the debate, should I enter upon any discussion of our present situation at home and abroad. This is a consideration which will be much more proper when the bill is brought before us. Thus much only I will venture to say, that I shall never be either afraid or ashamed of opposing any bill which may tend to plunge this nation into a doubtful, and, perhaps, ruinous war,
“
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 19 ae Having said thus much, Sir, with regard to the timing of | this bill, give me leave just to touch upon the manner in which it is brought in. I am old enough, Sir, to remember, that when the bill, passed the sixth year of Queen Anne, for the purposes mentioned by the honourable gentleman, was brought in, the crown had previously given up its title to the share which it claimed in the prizes. We had likewise re- gard to the rights of the Lord High Admiral. Gentlemen will consider, if we can properly bring in a bill of this na- ture, without some previous steps of this kind. However, as I am entirely ignorant of the shape in which the bill may ‘appear, I shall not oppose its being brought in, -
Sir William Wyndham.
SIR,—The honourable gentleman, who spoke last, did not, indeed, oppose the motion for bringing inthis bill; but he took care to let gentlemen know, that he thought it a very wrong thing to bring it in at all. But I hope gentle- men will not be so far prepossessed against it as to think it a bad bill, because one gentleman does not think it fit for his purpose. As to what the honourable gentleman said about the time in which the bill is moved for—instead of being sorry with him that it is too precipitate, I am sorry we are so late in moving it. We are not, indeed, in actual war. with the Spaniards, but I am sure they are at war with us, and have been so these twenty years; therefore it is now high time for us to show them, that we dare make war upon them. r
The honourable gentleman’s other objection was to the manner in which this bill is to be brought in. I believe, Sir, it is as regularly moved for as any other bill of the same or a like nature ever was. We have, indeed, had no previous notice from the Crown of a cession of its right in
20 PARLIAMENTARY, DEBATES.
the prizes; but I apprehend there is no occasion for it, as. will appear when the bill is broughtin. As to what the’ honourable gentleman said about the Crown’s ae giving up its share of the prizes, if it is a fact, it discovere great wisdom and honesty in the Ministry in advising the Crown to such a cession; but I apprehend the cession, which - the honourable gentleman means, was no other than a para~ graph in a speech from the Throne, three or four years be= fore the act, from which you have, heard the. paragraph | read, was passed, and which, I believe, had no weight with the House of Commons which passed this act. » The honours able gentleman mentioned the rights of the Lord High Ad- miral. Ifthe Lord High Admiral has any claim against this” bill, I dare say the gentleman, in whom that great office is vested, will take care that no future Lord High Admiral shall suffer for want of an opposition to any invasion upon his right. I hope, too, gentlemen will not be amused by any assertions or insinuations, as if this bill were disrespect ful to the Crown, or prejudicial to any of the great officers:
it can-he of prejudice to none but to. those who are of Prejuiey dice to the nation.
Str Robert Walpole.
SIR,—I do not rise up now to give my anita to ree bill before us: I only. intend at present to point out a few inconveniences that to me appear to lie against it; which, upon our farther progress, may be worthy our consideration. At the same time I own myself to be under great dif- ficulties.‘ On the one hand, should I vote for measures that must either inevitably plunge us into an expensive and uncertain war, or make the conclusion of a safe and honour- able peace more difficult, I shall act contrary to my own private opinion, contrary to the duty T owe to his. Majesty, from the station I have the honour to: possess in his councils,
o
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 21 nd contrary to what I owe my country from the seat I have in this. House ; on the other hand, I am too sensible of the many violences committed.and seizures made by the Spa- niards, to oppose any thing that carries a probability of con- tributing to the satisfaction which is due to our injured mer= chants, to the honour of the nation, and the dignity oa Wes Crown of Great Britain, é /LAmow how un peyealaasbaiibaipiatecaiss on the side of peace; and I know likewise, that every thing that comes from a. Minister’ that has a tendency that way, is looked. upon. as proceeding from his fear of war. I have been long ‘used to hear these, reflections ; but I have always disregarded a popularity that was not acquired by a hearty zeal for the public-interest ; and I have been long enough in this House tosee, that the most steady opposers of popularity, founded upon any other views, have lived to receive the thanks of ‘their country for that opposition. The experience, Sir, of this has often encouraged me to oppose popular measures when they were wrong, and sometimes to promote un- popular ones, if they were right. The experience of this, Sir, has made me lay before you my objections with regard to the passing of the present bill. But at the same time, Sir, I am as much against throwing cold water upon the zeal: which this House has shown with -regard to the in- sults offered to our country, as any gentleman here: nay, Sir, give me leave to say, that my own interest is con- cerned; and, had I no other,-is a strong motive for our doing every thing that can procure us just satisfaction. I know, Sir, how far Ministers are accountable for the coun- gel they give their Sovereign, and how far this House, in former times, looked upon them as answerable for'the con- duct of the Sovereign; and I think, Sir, they should be answerable. It is but a mean excuse for a Minister, when any wrong step is made in; government, that he is not ac
62 -~—«~PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
countable for the event of measures that never were advised by him, and when he was over-ruled by his superiors. I have always disdained these mean subterfuges; and ie what face can I again appear in this House, if full and amp} satisfaction is not made to us, or, at least, if we do not do” our utmost to obtain it, either by fair and peaceable means, or by exerting all our strength in case a war becomes nec sary? If my country should call me to an aecount, I would. very willingly take upon me the blame of every step that has been made by the government since I had the honour to enter into the Administration. _As to the common notion of Ministers being afraid to enter into a war, Ido not un= derstand upon what it can be grounded. For my part, B never could see any cause, either from reason, or my own experience, to imagine that a Minister is not as safe in time’ of war, as in time of peace. Nay, Sir, if we are to judge’ by reason, alone, it is the interest of a Minister, conscious! of any mismanagement, that there should be a war, because by a war the eyes of the public are diverted from examin- ing into his conduct; nor is he accountable for the bad success of a war, as he is, for that of an Administration. So ill-grounded a notion, therefore, can have no weight with gentlemen who judge for themselves; and such gen- tlemen, I doubt not, will attribute my backwardness to a war, not to a fear of inquiry, but to a real concern for the good of the nation. :
¥
Sir John Barnard.
SIR,—This bill is in every part so evidently otlcaleeell for the ends proposed by it, that Iam greatly surprised that the honourable gentleman who.spoke last against it, and who, by his fore-known disapprobation, has raised all the opposi- tion it has met with, can see the clauses he objects to in so disadvantageous alight. If am persuaded, if gentlemen had
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 23 seriously reflected on the design and natural consequences of such a bill, they would have spared these objections, The
end, Sir, proposed by it, is to prevent a war; and the way to obtain this end is, by a public act of the Legisla- ture, to make it known to all the world, that we have raised. the ardour, and encouraged the hopes, of our seamen; that we have animated all our fellow-subjects, i in case a peace is refused, to distress the enemy, by seizing their wealth and possessions, and consequently diminishing their power. “All the arguments, therefore, brought against the bill, on the supposition that it will tend to plunge us into a war, are drawn from wrong conclusions. Instead, Sir, of precipi- tating 1 us into a war, this bill must hasten on a peace. By it. We ate assisting the Ministry; we are strengthening their hands; we are giving weight to their negotiations; we are letting Spain see, that we are in earnest to secure our rights ya safe and honourable peace, or to vindicate them by a Vigorous war. Ina word, Sir, if the warmest friend of the Ministry, if the honourable gentleman who spoke last had himself been forming measures to procure a peace, he could not have thought on a more ready and more effectual expe- dient than this bill.
- Mr. Henry Fox. --SIR,—The bill, now under our consideration, is, in my ‘opinion, of the greatest importance ; greater, perhaps, than gentlemen commonly apprehend. The question with me is, not whether such or such clauses of the bill are proper for our assent, but whether this is a proper time for pass- ing such a bill? Were we in an actual war with Spain, I do not deny but there are several clauses in this bill which-might very much conduce towards rendering it suc- cessful on our parts: but, Sir, as his Majesty has not thought fit to declare that matters are come to such an exe
-
24 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
tremity as to render it ipl to make up matters with- out our entering into a war, I should think it extremely imprudent in us to userp that part of the royal, ay sae which in effect we do, should we pass” this bill into al Besides, Sir, I think it can be proved to demonstration, that the passing of this bill in any shape, at this juncture, must greatly alarm, not only the Spaniards and the Frene but even our most favourite allies. Nay, more, Sir, ¢ own merchants, I am afraid, would, in case of an imm diate rupture with Spain, be the greatest sufferers. Thi Sir, must happen, not only by the great insurance whic has in this country been made upon those effects, which possibly may come into the hands of our privateers ar ships of war, but by the concerns they. have with Dutch, the French, and all other European nations. . Con merce is of a very delicate nature; and whatever. affect: too sensibly one part of the trading interest, must necessas rily affect the whole. Therefore, Sir, I think it would be highly improper for us to pass.a bill that must give such < shock to our allies, as our passing this bill at this juncture must certainly do. If the instances of his. Majesty, for 2 fair and honourable peace, should be ineffectual, it is, very probable that such bill will be then thought of. ‘But we ought by no means to anticipate the rupture, by doing any thing that may render it unavoidable. I shall not trouble the House farther at present; other gentlemen, I dare” say will speak more fully upon the question: but I thought my bare negative was not sufficient upon this occasion, withou my showing publicly how pointedly Iam against our pass: ing this bill. ; 7 |
= The Speaker.
GENTLEMEN, —Though the debate upon this bill "ha extended. to a. bei deeaiiie. length, I must beg leave to re
| ENTARY DEBATES. 25
tnind you that the House is not yet in a Committee upon it.
I must therefore take the liberty to interrupt the debate, by
calling the attention of the House to another subject, which
is, to the amendments of the Corn-bill. Gentlemen know
very well, that this day they are to have a conference, with the Lords about some amendments to another bill.
As I believe the conference will not continue long, per-. haps not half an hour, and very little time will be spent in
reporting it, I thought the most proper way of proceeding
on the business of the day was, first to consider the amend- ~ ments of the Corn-bill, then go to the conference; and when gentlemen are returned from the conference, which may be about half an hour after two o’olock, to call in the order of the day, for which the present motion is made, This, gentlemen, is the scheme which I had digested with myself, and I wish it may be agreeable to the House.
ROE
Mr. Pulteney.
SIR,—When I made the motion, it was not with a de- sign to put the House to any inconvenience, or to interrupt the other business of the day.. But since the session of. Parliament is now so far advanced, that, if I am rightly informed, it will continue but three days longer; and since this Bill is of the greatest consequence to the trade and welfare of the Nation, and, if we do not go through it to- day in the Committee, it is in danger of being dropped entirely, I thought it necessary to press the consideration of it. The ‘Corn-bill, I know, though of less importance, will, when we enter upon it, engross much of our time; of which part may be saved by putting off the report for a day, because gentlemen will have leisure to concert the amendments among themselves, and the House will perhaps escape the trouble of a debate. But the Bill in my hand is
€
96 +PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. -
of a different nature; it is a Bill in which we are all equally — concerned, a Bill for which the public are anxious, and — which claims all the attention we can give. In my humble opinion, therefore, gentlemen can never be more usefully employed, than in seriously examining how it may be — amended and altered so as best to answer the ends for which —
_ it is calculated. For these reasons, Sir, I shall hese leave re sO Med
sist upon my motion. thee ei Mr, A ceatiapey 4 _ SIR,—I do not believe there is a gentleman in ve Homes ; -who remembers a single instance of the order of the day q being: called for before two o’clock. It has always been the. . method of this House to receive reports before any other a business was. engaged i in; and I have now, Sir, in my hand, 4 the Report of a Committee upon the amendments to a Bill, ; upon which. the House has bestowed more time and con- . ‘sideration, than upon any Bill that has been before it this session.’ I shall not dispute the importance of the Bill, © which the honourable gentleman has in his hand; but surely, Sir, gentlemen have no reason to complain of the - reception it has met with from the House, It has been twice — read, and ordered to be committed, in as short a time’as any 3 Bill could be at the end of a session, and amidst such a multiplicity of public business. Nay, it has been debated for R: a considerable time, and is now only interrupted till some ~ business is dispatched which ought necessarily to come before . it.» It is therefore, Sir, I think, but reasonable, that the re- = port I have now in my hand be now received, and that the Bill, for which this honorable gentleman interests himself, should take its turn in a regular way. ¥ The. Speaker, . : y That, I must confess, is my opinion ; and I could wish, » for the sake of avoiding any farther a that the honor- ; f able gentleman would agree to it. im
ar:
~ SIR, —Though I nial ey Gell be excused from re- tracting the motion I have made, yet your judgment shall. alway: have great influence with me: if therefore gentle- . yen will be pleased ‘to agree to your proposal, I am con- “ tent that the report which the honourable gentleman ao ; to make, be now received.
a 3 Mr. Winstbigton. : hag ‘SIR,—As gentlemen seem agreed in the rrepreys and justice of your request, I shall beg leave to move, that if the consideration of the amendments to the Corn-bill should not be concluded before two o’clock,. when we are to have- a conference with the House of Lords, that a farther con=_ sideration ‘of these amendments shall be resumed when the conference is over, and that the House go upon no other business till tha of the Corn-bill is finished.
Sze ay tae Mr. Pulteney. ican
-SIR,—If ere is either faith, honour, or common casiee among gentlemen, this motion ought not to be agreed to. I appeal to every gentleman in the House, if I did not retract my motion from a deference to your judgment, which - influenced me to agree to what is contrary to my ‘own. You were pleased, Sir, to inform us, how you had digested the business of the day in your own mind: and, in conse- quence of your proposal, we were immediately after the conference to enter upon the order of the day, This, Sir, I agreed to, and not one gentleman expressed his dissent. With what face then can gentlemen make a motion so con-_ trary to what they agreed to scarce a minute ago? This, Sir, is I own a very extraordinary manner of proceeding among gentlemen ; and for that reason, Sir, were it for no other, I hope this House will never agree to so pernicious a precedent.
c2
oa
98 | PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
Mr. Faget oe Line di SiR,—I do not know how just a construction the Lense able gentleman, who spoke last, has put upon your words 5 — - but Iam sure I understood them in a manner quite different: ’ from what he seems to have done. It never entered, Sir, into my mind to think that we were to leave the Corn-bilk abruptly, and not proceed again in it when the House comés from the conference. I could wish indeed that gentlemen had met with no difficulties in the amendments, that we might have gone into a Committee upon the honourable Gentleman’s motion when we returned from the conference. But, Sir, as this is a Bill of very great consequence to the cities of London and Westminster, I hope gentlemen will be pleased to consider, that if they should postpone it now, it may not, perhaps, be ready for the royal assent this ses- sion, and that, before the next, extortion may proceed to greater enormities, and the grievance become too heavy to” be borne. A man, Sir, must always be the best judge of his own intentions ; and I declare I never had an intention of leaving this bill unfinished, in order to proceed upon another, which, however fond some gentlemen are of it, may perhaps, when carefully examined, not be found of such importance as they imagine.
* Mr, Hay.
SIR,—As the present dispute between the honourable gentlemen seems to turn upon a matter of fact, I rise to _ give evidence to what I believe to be the truth. In my ‘opinion, Sir, the honourable gentleman, who proposed that the House should proceed upon the amendments to the Corn-bill, never dropped a single word from which it could’ be inferred, that he should be willing that the House should leave the Bill without completing it, in ‘order ta
_ PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 39 examine another Bill, only because it is so much a favourite with. the honourable gentleman ‘who adopted it. Me Sir, one gentleman has a fondness for a Bill, which perhaps — : has cost him some trouble in preparing and bringing itinto > the House, sure it is very reasonable to indulge another gentleman in the same partiality for one that has cost the ' House so much time and trouble in examining, canvassing -and amending it, as the Bill for the regulation of the ice _.of corn has done. . For this reason, Sir, I am for resuming the Conshterseen of this Bill; and when we have gone through it, I shall with all my iaaart agree to our examining the other Bill if the House shall think proper. In the mean time, Sir, I can- “not see with what reason the honourable gentleman, who made the motion first, should accuse gentlemen, of breach of faith, honour, and common justice, for not understand- ing your words in the very-same manner with: himself. Nor indeed do I think a matter of this small importance ought to. have taken up so much of our time. . Nobody Opposes our going into a Committee upon this Bill: only let us do it at a convenient time, without postponing other business that ought to have the preference. Therefore, Sir, I am entirely of opinion that we ought to resume the con- sideration of the amendments to the Bill for regulating the price of corn.
Mr. Pulteney.
SIR,—From what was last spoken, I can easily foresee the fate of the Bill I have now in my hand., I can discern, _ through all these thin disguises, that some gentlemen have recourse fo a mere expedient to hinder us from continuing _ the debate upon a Bill, against.which no show of reason or argument can be advanced. I hate, Sir, all expedients,
«
30 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. é _and I disdain all Ministers who use them. Some Ministers, Sir, there are, who live upon expedients, and who cannot do their dirty work without them. 'Expedients, Sir, in the hands of weak ministers, are the instruments in’ defeating the most beneficial, and promoting the most destructive measures. Some Ministers know, Sir, that the Bill for which I now stand up, is a Bill that leaves no room for cobweb negotiations, inconsistent treaties, or mock expe- ditions for the future; and that, Sir, is the reason why this method is made use of to undermine it. If I had been capable of acting as the honourable gentleman’ who spoke — last has suggested, I might have had many opportunities of taking the advantage of a thin House, either to bring in or. throw out Bills of the greatest consequence. I appeal to. every gentleman who hears me, if it has not been manyttimes- in. my power to have dropped in even upon a land-tax bill, with half a dozen of my friends, and to have thrown it ont. | But, Sir, I always disdained these arts; the Bill, Sir, for which I have laboured, will I hope recommend itself to every gentleman, who has a just view of his country’s ho-— nour; and if it is decreed that it must fall to the ground, IT shall at least have the satisfaction of doing my duty honestly as an Englishman, and a Member of this House. One good consequence, I am persuaded, will attend it: my countrymen will learn, by the fate of it, what they are to expect ; they will learn, Sir, whether we are tamely to
submit to insolence and oppression, or to seize the means of tas
Sir Robert Walpole.
-SIR,—-Though the manner in which the honourable gen- tleman who spoke last delivered himself, may well excuse me. from saying any thing, in answer to a speech so very unparliamentary, and so very inconsistent with all the rules
PARLIA 31 Bor wT ee yet 1 think T ought RS tne « so much regard to t ‘the House as to declare that T abhor dirty expe- dients as much as the honourable gentleman would be oa to do. As for his common-place railing against nisters, it gives me ' very little trouble, so long as I. am ‘conscious I do not deserve to have it applied to me. ” Were: “Lambitious of showing my wit, I might have a fair oppor- tunity of doing it, by « exercising ‘it against mock-patriots, as much as the honourable gentleman has been pleased to do _ against corrupt ministers, and both perhaps might be equally “instructive. But railing of all kinds, Sir, has always been © ‘looked upon as the last expedient of disappointed ambition, and a poor ‘expedient it is. Were I one who for many ‘years had unsuccessfully endeavoured, by all the arts that malice and falsehood could suggest, to work myself into those posts and dignities that I outwardly affected to despise, 1 know not but my temper might be so far soured as to in- “duce me to make use of this expedient ; but really, Sir, if I did, I should make but a very poor figure in the world. Why the honourable gentleman should suppose there was ‘any premeditated design in the Ministry to throw out his favourite Bill, I cannot comprehend. I believe every gen- tleman here will in his own mind acquit the Ministry of any such design, when he reflects upon the circumstance that gave rise to this debate. I appeal to the judgment of by unbiassed lover of his country, as-by this judgment I wish to stand or fall.
Mr. Wright.
SIR,—I doubt not but every gentleman in this House feels himself as much hurt as I am at the present debate : how must it affect every lover of parliamentary decorum. to see gentlemen of the first abilities descend to personal re- proaches, and take up the time of the House, that time
32 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 4
which is so precious, at this important crisis, in breaking through every regulation, which our ancestors have so wisely settled for the dispatch of national business! This business, Sir, calls loudly upon us to put an end to the present con- tention ; and, if I may be allowed an opinion im this case, nothing is so likely to do it, as reverting to the origin of the dispute : the question is, Sir, whether the Bill which has been already debated, or the Corn-bill, should be resumed _ after the conference with the Lords is over? Now, Sir, as it depends principally upon you to ciear up the fact that gave’ rise to the debate, I shall take the liberty to beg that you would inform the House how the matter stands, and doubt not but each of the contending parties will cheerfully acqui= esce in your decision. (All Chair! Chair! Chair 2.
‘
The Speaker.
GENTLEMEN,—I am extremely sorry that any thing which fell from me should have given occasion to a debate’ of this kind, and it is a very disagreeable business to be obliged to declare my opinion in the present case: how- ever, Gentlemen, as you call upon me so loudly and so ‘unanimously: to do it, I will, without regard to any persons or to any distinctions, inform the House of my real senti- ments. When I made this controverted proposal, I thought there was but very little to do in the Corn-bill, and that it might have been easily over before the hour appointed for the conference ; and indeed I must, in justice to the honour- able gentleman who made the first motion, declare, that, as I understood it, he retracted his motion upon the suppo- sition that the House complied with the terms which I pro- posed. These terms were, that we should, after the con- ference was over, immediately go into a Committee upon the honourable gentleman’s Bill, As no objection was
f
\ : & PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. © ee. S
‘made to what I suggested, either by the Pitredie gentle- — man who made the last motion, or any of his friends, I did indeed take it for granted that the terms of my proposal _were actually-agreed to. However, I shall be very happy, if what I am now going to suggest can contribute to make up this breach. The conference will probably be over in half an hour, during which time all proceedings on business in this House are at a stand, and gentlemen may thereby have an opportunity of preparing matters so as to render it easy for the House to dispatch the Corn-bill in.a very short time: I shall therefore take the liberty to propose, that after gentlemen are returned from’ the conference, the House shall proceed for half an hour upon the Corn-bill, and then resolve into a Committee on the other. If the Corn-bill cannot be dispatched in half an hour, I hope gentlemen will be pleased to agree with. our meeting to-morrow ; and: if they will come early, I believe we shall have time sag el for going through the Corn-bill, and receiving the report of ‘the other Bill. ;
Mr, Pulteney.
SIR,—I own the warmth of my temper transported me, when I spoke last, into some expressions, for which I am now very sorry. But what man, treated as I was, could have avoided some excess? As you, Sir, have been so can- did-as to.inform the House of the truth of the matter, and so kind as to propose the method of’ our proceeding, L entirely agree with your proposal.. I hope it is fully under- stood by gentlemen, and that there will be no mistakes about it wher the proper time comes.
34 ee meen +235 “ag ~ III. A Parliamentary Debate on a Vote of Thanks to , the Rg. for his Speech, and upon an Inquiry into the State of the Nation, in the X1Vth Year of George Il. 17 40. ees 4
SPEAKERS, : Mr. Herbert, Sir R. Walpole, ~ Lord Noel Somerset, Mr. Pultency, “Mr. Gibbon, Mr. Phillips, Mr. Shippen, Mr. Trevor. Mr. Herbert.
MR. SPEAKER,—As his Majesty has summoned a new Parliament, and has been graciously pleased to communicate his intentions to us by the speech we have just heard, it seems absolutely necessary for us to vote an address of thanks.
To address the Throne on the present occasion, is a cus- tom, which, as it is founded on reason and decency, has - always been observed by the Commons of Great Britain ; nor do I suspect this House of any intention to omit these forms of respect to his Majesty, which our ancestors always paid even to Princes whose conduct and designs gave them no claim to reverence or gratitude.
To‘continue therefore, Sir, a practice which the nature of government itself makes necessary, and which cannot but be _ acknowledged to be in a peculiar degree proper under a Prince whose personal virtues are so generally known, I
hope for the indulgence of this House in the liberty which I shall take of proposing an address to this effect :—
‘ To return his Majesty the Thanks of the House for hid
« Royal care in prosecuting the war with Spain; and that,
Rtthay DEBATES oe
es octet answer the great and necessary purposes of it, ¥
=i pe Jouse will offer such advice as becomes. faithful and
* dui al subjects, and ‘grant such effectual supplies a as shall
_ © enable his Majesty to “support and assist his friends and
ae at such times, and in such manner, as the exigency . . and circumstances of affairs shall require’? ~
Sth ath Mr. Trevor. is a a , -* SIR,—As the necessity of an address to tis Majesty can- not be disputed, the only question on this occasion must be, whether the address now proposed be such as it may “become this House to offer in the present conjuncture of affairs.
In an address, Sir, it is necessary to preserve at once the - “respect due to our Sovereign, and the dignity which may justly be assumed by the representatives of the people of Great Britain ; a people, whose birth-right gives them a €laim to approach their Sovereign, not indeed without the utmost respect, but with language which absolute Mo- -narchs never hear from the slaves by whom they are sur- rounded.
~ This respect and dignity appear to me e to be very apples united in the address now proposed, in which we join with our professions of duty our offers of advice, and assert our _ claim to the direction of the national expenses by our pro- mise to grant the necessary supplies.
As there cannot therefore, in my opinion,. Sir, be any thing added to the address now offered; and as there appears to me no necessity of any alteration or omission, I second the motion.
Lord Noel Somerset.
SIR,—Though I am far from intending to lessen, by trifling objections, the zeal which the honourable gentle«
6 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
man who proposed the address has shown for protolignahall * public business, yet, as it is very inconsistent with the duty :
of a Member of this House to prefer civility to truth, and — to sacrifice to ceremony or complaisance the interest of his country, I think it necessary to declare my opinion, that though the address proposed may admit of many amend- | ments, which I leave to other gentlemen to make, I think — the addition of one clause absolutely necessary; that his —
4
5
3
Majesty mzy be desired not to engage this nation in a war —
for the preservation of his foreign dominions ; dominions, which, as they are in themselves independent of the Crown
of Great Britain, and governed by different laws, and by a~
4
different right, have been separated by an express clause — from these kingdoms, in the act to which his Majesty owes ;
his titles to the throne.
This request, Sir, is at this time parietal expedient, | when the Continent is in confusion, and the territories of — Hanover are endangered by the approach of the French —
forces. Besides, as nothing is more fatal than groundless
expectations of assistance, it may contribute to the safety of — that people, to shew them that they are to depend upon —
- their own strength, to call their forces together, to fortify
their towns, and guard their avenues ; and that, if they sit
indolent and careless, in confidence that the power of Great |
Britain will be employed in their defence, they will only give their enemies an easy conquest, and enslave themselves
and their posterity to a foreign power. I move therefore — that his Majesty be desired in our address, not to engage —
these kingdoms in a war for {be preservation of his foreign dominions,
Mr. Shippen.
SIR,—I know not how. successfully I may repeat asser- tions, in this House, for which I have formerly been cen-
~
=” : Ror .
| ‘PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. a7
*sured, and which few other members have hitherto main- tained; but I rise. with confidence that I shall be at least acknowledged to act consistently with myself, in seconding the noble person who spoke last ; and I am convinced that
"many who differ from me in opinion, would be glad to boast of resembling my steadiness of conduct.
But steadiness, Sir, is the effect only of integrity : he that
speaks always what he thinks, and endeavours by diligent inquiry to think aright before he ventures to declare his sen- timents ; he that follows, in his searches, no leader but rea+ son, nor expects any reward from them but the advantage of discovering truth, and the pleasures of communicating it, will not easily change his opinion, because it will seldom be easy to show, that he who has honestly inquired mae truth hhas failed to attain it. _~ For my part, I am neither ashamed nor afraid to affirm, that thirty years have made no change in any of my political opinions ; I am now grown old in this House; but that _ experience, which is the consequence of age, has only con- firmed the principles with which I entered it many years ago; time has verified the predictions which I formerly uttered, and I have seen my conjectures ripened into know- ledge.
I should be therefore without excuse if either terror could affright, or the hope of advantage allure me, from the decla- ration of my opinions; opinions, which I was not deterred from asserting, when the prospect of a longer life than I can now expect, might have added to the temptations of am- bition; or aggravated the terrors of poverty and disgrace ; opinions, for which I would willingly have suffered the severest censures, even when I had espoused them only in compliance with reason, without the infallible certainty of experience.
Of truth, it has been always observed, Sir, that every day
en ~ “|
3
38 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. adds to its establishment, and that falsehoods, however spe="
cious, however supported by power, or established by cof federacies, are unable to stand before the strokes of tim against the inconveniences and vexations of long life, may be set the ‘pleasure of discovering truth ; perhaps the only pleasure that age affords. Nor is it a slight satisfaction, to a man not utterly infatuated or depraved, to find opportu-— nities of rectifying his notions, and regulating his conduct} by n new lights. 5
But much greater is the happiness of that man, to whom every day brings a new proof of the reasonableness of his former determinations, and who finds, by the most un- erring test, that his life has been spent in promoting doc-. trines beneficial to mankind. This, Sir, is the happiness which I now enjoy, and for which those who never shall attain it must look for an ‘equivalent in lucrative ‘employ- ments, honorary titles, pompous equipages, and splendid palaces.
These, Sir, are the advantages which are to be gained by} a seasonable variation of principles, and by a ready compli- ance with the prevailing fashion of opinions ; advantages, which I indeed cannot envy when they are purchased at so high a price, but of which age and observation haye too fre~ quently shown me the unbounded influence ; and to which I cannot deny that I have always ascribed the instability of conduct, and inconsistency of assertions, which I have dis- covered in many men, whose. abilities I have no reason to depreciate, and of whom I cannot but believe they would easily distinguish truth, were no falsehood recommended to them by the glittering ornaments of wealth and power.
If there are in'this new Parliament any men devoted to their private’ interest, and who prefer the gratification of their passions to the safety and happiness of their country, who Can riot without remorse in'the plunder of their cons
Pa
+ =
e eis ines = ‘stituents, 1 ° ean forget the anguish of ‘gailt“in’ the. Noise , the pomp of a drawing-room, or the glare of an editeigs,” and think expensive wickedness and the gaieties of folly equivalent to the fair fame of fidelity and the peace
virtue, to them I shall speak to no purpose; for I am far from imagining any power in my language to gain those ‘to truth who have resigned their hearts to avarice or am- bition, or to prevail upon men to change. opinions which ~ they have indeed never believed, though they are bired to assert them. For there is a degree of wickedness which no reproof or argument can reclaim, as there is a degree of stupidity which no instruction can enlighten. Fa ioe
To exempt myself therefore from such guilt, to. discharge the trust conferred on me by my Country, and to perform the duty which I owe to my King, I sta up to second this motion, . ,
Mr. Gibbon.
- SIR,—It is well known, that the ‘speeches from the Throne, though pronounced by the: King, are always con- sidered as the compositions of the Ministry, upon whom any false assertions should be charged, as the informers and counsellors of the Crown. —
It is well known likewise, that whenever this House returns thanks to the King for any measures that haye been pursued, those measures are supposed to be approved by them, and that approbation may be pleaded by the Minister in his defence, whenever he shall be required to answer for the event of his counsels.
It is therefore, in my,opinion, extremely unreasonable to propose that thanks should be returned to his Majesty for his royal care in prosecuting the war against Spain ; for, what has been the consequence of that care, for which our
i ) PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES,
thanks are to be with so much solemnity returned, but de- feats, disgrace, and losses ; ; the ruin of our merchants, the imprisonment of our sailors, idle shows of armaments, and useless expenses? ‘ i What are the events which are to be record in an im- partial account of this war; a war, provoked by so long a train of insults and injuries, and carried on with so appa- ~ rent inequality of forces? Have we destroyed the fleets, of our enemies, fired their towns, and laid their fortresses in ruins? Have we conquered their colonies, and plundered | their. cities, and reduced them to a necessity of receding from their unjust claims, and repaying the plunder of our: merchants? Are their Embassadors now soliciting peace at the Court of Great Britain, or applying to the neigh= bouring Princes to moderate the resentment of their vietow ' rious enemies? T am afraid that the effects of our preparations, es formidable, are very different ; they have only raised dis- content among our r countrymen, and contempt among our- enemies. : [ hope no man will be so unjust, or can be so ignorant, as to insinuate or believe, that I impute any part of our miscarriages.to the personal conduct of his Majesty, or that I think his Majesty’s concern for the prosperity of his! people unworthy of the warmest and sincerest gratitude. If the address were confined to the inspection of our Sove- reign alone, I should ‘be very far from censuring or ridi- culing it; for his Majesty has not the event of war in his power, nor can he confer upon hig Ministers or Generals that knowledge which they have neglected to acquire, or that capacity which nature has denied them. He may perform more than we have a right to expect, and yet be une. successful; he may deserve the utmost gratitude, even, : : i
a
f
ee ne DEBATES. 4l
when, by t the misconduct of his servants, erties is dis- tressed. B Y
_ But, Sir, in drawing up an address, we should remember that we are declaring our sentiments, not only to his Ma- jesty, but to all Europe; to our allies, our enemies, and our posterity; that this address will be understood, just like all others, that thanks offered in this manner by custom, signify approbation; and that therefore we must at present repress our gratitude, because it cau only bring into con- opt our Sovereign and ourselves.
~ _ Sir Robert Walpole. _
SIR,—I am very far from thinking that the war against Spain has been so unsuccessful as some gentlemen have re- presented it; that the losses which we have suffered have been_ more frequent than we had_reason to expect from the situation of our enemies, and the course of our trade; or our defeats such as the common chance of war does not often produce, even when the inequality of the contending powers is incontestable, and the ultimate event as near to certainty as the nature of human affairs ever can admit. .
Nor am I convinced, Sir, even though it should be allow- ed that no exaggeration has been made of our miscarriages, that the impropriety of an address of thanks to his Majesty, for his royal care in the management of the war, is gross and flagrant: for if it be allowed, that-his Majesty may be in- nocent of all the misconduct that has produced our defeats ; that he may have formed schemes wisely, which were un- skilfully prosecuted; that even valour and knowledge con- curring, will not always obtain success; and that therefore some losses may be suffered, and some defeats received, though not only his Majesty gave the wisest directions, but his officers executed them with the utmost diligence and fidelity ; how will it appear from our ill success, that our
¢
- tenes
42 -—s«* PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
Sovereign oes not deserve our gratitude? And if it shall ap- pear to us that our thanks are merited, who shall restrain us from offering them in the most public and solemn manner?
For my part, I think no consideration worthy of regar in competition with truth and justice; and therefore sha never forbear any expression of duty to my Sovereign, fe fear of the ridicule of our secret, or the Beeches of our public, enemies.
With regard to the address nied our considehitione if it be allowed either that we have not been unsuccessful in any opprobrious degree, or that ill success does not necessarily imply any defect in the conduct of his Majesty, or debar us ‘from the right of acknowledging his goodness and his wis dom, I think, Sir, no objection can be made to the form of expression now proposed; in which, all sounding and pompous language, all declamatory exaggeration and ‘studied figures of speech, all appearance of exultation, and all the farce of rhetoric, are carefully avoided, and nothing inserted that may disgust the most delicate, or raise scruples in the most sincere. : =
Yet, Sir, that we may not waste our time upon trivial diss putes, when the nation expects relief from our counsels; ‘that we may not suspend the prosecution of the war by complaint of past defeats, or retard that assistance and ad- vice which our Sovereign demands, by inquiring whether it may be more proper to thank or to counsel him; 1 am willing, for the sake of unanimity, that this clause should be omitted, and hope that no other part of the address can afford room for objection. }
Mr. Pulteney.
~SIR,—It is no wonder that the right honourable ‘gentle- man willingly consents to the omission of this clause, which could be inserted for no other purpose, than that he might
_" ed. Bey s ARLI Aiwa ny oui 43 viited ‘it to ‘lie resentment which it must naturally pro- duce ; and, by an appearance of modesty and compliance, pass easily through the first day, and obviate a severe in- quiries: that might be designed. He is too well acquainted with the opinion of many whom the nation hath chosen to represent them, and with the universal clamours of the people ; too aecurately in- formed of the state of our enemies, and too conscious how much his secret machinations have hindered our success; to expect or hope that we should meet here to return thanks for the management of the war; of a war, in which no- thing has been attempted by his direction that was tikely to succeed, and in whieh no advantage has been gained, but by acting without orders and against his hopes.
That I do not charge him, Sir, without reason, or invent accusations only to obstruct his measures, or to gratify my
own resentment ; that I do not eagerly catch flying calum~ -
fies, prolong the date of casual reproaches, encourage the malignity of the envious, or adopt the suspicions of the me- lancholy: that I do not impose upon myself by a warm imagination, and endeavour to communicate to others, im- pressions which I have only received myself from prejudice, will be proved from a review of his ‘conduct since the be- ginning of our dispute with Spain; in which it will be found that he has been guilty not only of single errors, but of deliberate treachery ; that he has always co-operated with nur enemies, and sacrificed to his private interest the hap- piness and the honour of the British nation.
How long our merchants were plundered, ‘our sailors en- Javed, and our colonies intimidated, without resentment 5 1ow long the Spaniards usurped the dominion of the seas, arched our ships at pleasure, confiscated the cargoes with- ut controul, and tortured our fellow-subjects with impunity, ‘annot but be remembered. Not only every gentleman in
wh
“44 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
this Wiaase, but every man in the Nation, however indolent, ignorant, or obscure, can tell. what barbarities were exer-
cised, what ravages were committed, what complaints we
made, and how they were received. It is universally kno that this gentleman, and those whom he has gained | by pen: sions and employments, treated the lamentations of ruineé families, and the outcries of tortured Britons, as the cla
mours of sedition, as designed to inflame the hed a embarrass the Government. yi Such has been the conduct for which we are desired t return thanks in an humble and dutifal address ; such ar the transactions which we are to recommend to the approba tion of our constituents, and such the triumphs upon whicl we must congratulate our Sovereign. : 4 For my part, Sir, I cannot but think that silence i is to gentle a censure for that wickedness for which no Janguag Mas yet provided a name. Murder, parricide, and treason are modest appellations, when compared with that condue ‘by which a King is betrayed, and a nation ruined, unde pretence of promoting its interest, by a man trusted wit the administration of public affairs. 5 Let us therefore, Sir, if it be thought improper to lay be fore his Majesty the sentiments of his people in their fu extent, at least not endeavour to conceal them from him Jet us, at least, address him in such a manner as may git him some occasion to inquire into the late transaction which have for many years been such, that even but t know them is to condemn them: and that the authors « these transactions may be brought to light, I move that th ‘House may go into an inquiry into the state of the nation. a a Sir Robert Walpole. | SIR,—Though I am far from being either confounded « intimidated by this heavy charge, though 1 am confidel
, eres DEBATES. 45
hat all the measures so clamourously censured will admit of L very ‘easy vindication, and that whenever they are explained hey will t be approved ; yet as an accusation so complicated -annot be refuted, without a long recapitulation of past vents, and a deduction of many particular circumstances, ome of which may require evidence, and some a very mi- nute explication, T cannot think this a proper day for engag- ing in a controversy, which it is my interest should be tho- roughly discussed.
“At present, Sir, I shall content myself with fae assertions ike those by which I am accused, and hope they will not be heard with less attention, or received with less ¢redit. For surely it was never denied to any man to defend himself with the same weapons with which he is attacked. ‘I shall there- fore, Sir, make no scruple to assert, that the treasure of the public has been employed with the utmost frugality, to pro- mote the purposes for which it was granted ; that our foreign affairs have been transacted with the utmost fidelity, in pur- suance of long consultations; and shall venture to add, that our success has not been such as ought to produce any suspicion of negligence or treachery.
That our design against Carthagena was defeated, cannot be denied: but what war has been one continued series of success ? In the late war with France, of which the conduct has been so lavishly celebrated, did no designs miscarry ?. If we conquered at Ramillies, were we not in our turn beaten at Almanza? If we destroyed the French ships, was it not always with some loss of our own? And since the suffer- ings of our merchants have been mentioned with so much acrimony, does not the list of ships taken in that war prove that the depredations of privateers cannot be entirely pre- vented?
The disappointment, Sir, of the public expectation by the return of the fleets, has been charged upon the Admi- -
rs
horror and detestation, That the “Ministry haye
had not been equal, failed of being gratified.
~ serving the practice of the opponents of the Ministry, what
46. PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. _ :
nistration as a crime too enormous to be mentioned without
elements i in their power, that they do not prescribe the cou $ of the wind, is a sufficient proof of their negligence ané weakness ; with as much justice is it charged w them that the expectations of the populace, which they did not raise, and to which; perhaps, the conquest of a kingdon
I am very far from hoping or desiring that the Hous should be satisfied with a defence like this; I know, by ob
fallacies may be concealed in general assertions, and am.so far from wishing to evade a more strict inquiry, that if the gentleman who has thus publicly and confidently sce
_the Ministry, will name a day for inquiring into the state of
the nation, though I think such an inquiry absolutely unne- cessary, I will second his motion.
Mr. Phillips.
SIR,—I should be much surprised to hear the motion made by the honourable gentleman who spoke last but one, opposed by any Member of this House: a motion, founded in justice, supported by precedent, and warranted by neces- sity. Not only justice to the Nation, but justice to those that have been in the Administration, calls for an inquiry, that every man’s actions may speak for him, and that cen
3 % 3 ; i
i d
sure may be confined to those only that have deserved ite
Surely no innocent man can be under any apprehensions. from the strictest examination of his conduct ; those fears. attend the guilty only. . : ~The honourable gentleman who spoke last seems to think: an inquiry unnecessary. I beg leave to ask, Will any gen- tleman in this House undertake to defend the measures that
-
a vo J i / i r = < ; TA RY DEBATES. 47
an say, that, the wretched condition we are in is the. effect
chance only? Shall there be the least suspicion of misma
agement, and a British House of Commons not inquire ~ t? How much more at a time when the nation is re=. ~ to the last extremity, by corrupt, weak, and pusilla-~ imous -measures? Shall the fatality which has attended - ery s step of our conduct for so many years past infect this louse a so, and throw/us into a lethargy? Surely, no. The vice. f the nation calls for an inquiry: our credit abroad~ innot be supported without it; and the reputation of every an in” ‘this House is nearly annie’ in it. In vain shall e attempt to retrieve our lost: honour by pursuing new - easures, if we do not first censure and punish the authors. ’ the. old: in vain-shall we attempt to gain. allies, and» }convince them that we are in earnest in the prosecution ' the war against our enemies abroad, unless we first’ call jose to an account that have been their secret abettors and icouragers at home. If ever there was a cause for an inquiry into past trans- ° tions, it is now. Have not large sums of money been ised in times of peace, and no debts paid? large armies ‘ised in timés of war, and no services performed ? Have we of negotiated ourselves out of all our allies, and all our edit? ‘Treaty after treaty, convention after convention : 1d what did these all end in, but war? How has that war sen conducted ? Why, shamefully, scandalously, to the icouragement of the enemy, and the dishonour of the na- on: large fleets fitted out to fight the seas only, and re- rn shattered and torn to Spithead, while the enemy were ery day seizing our ships for want of cruizers and con- ys, and neighbouring nations taking this advantage to ipplant us in trade. A gallant Admiral was, indeed, sent the West Indies, but sent too late, and not supported
e been oP ae eens years past? Will any gentle- ;
rs
48 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
when there: another was sent to the Mediterranean, but with what intent I know not, unless it was to cover an em- - barkation of Spanish troops for Italy. %
Shall a British House of Commons not inquire into aa ‘causes of these things? They must; they will, Sir, or for- feit all the reputation they have hitherto gained. And if these are to be inquired inte, what better method than by a select committee to be chosen by ballot? It is a parlia- mentary method that has been attended with good conse- quences to the nation, but fatal ones, indeed, to those that have made an abuse of power; and it is unaccountable to me, that any other but such, or those that have a mind. to screen them, should make an opposition to it. For my ow part, if it were the case of my brother, if he were inno- cent, I should think this the properest method to make that innocence appear; and if he were guilty, I should think it the greatest crime in me to endeavour to screen him from national justice ; therefore I am most heartily for the motion.
Aill,—Motion! motion! motion!
BERET EAS TEMAS. ees 1e3re te 8 + OE pen H4
IV. A : Debate, in the dete ae of _ Beorge II. 1740, on @ Bill for preventing. Merchants | from ed the Wages of Seamen in time of War, and thereby in-
ducing them to avoid his Majesty’ s Service.
mer Sis pertfic-
mide 2 SPEAKERS,
Meir.
oe. _ ‘Sir Charles Wager, Mr. Pitt,
ee Mr. For, Mr. Winnington,
as . Sir R. Walpole, Mr. Horace Walpole, Sir J. Barnard, _—--_—s Mr. :«Lyjtelton.
: . Sir Charles Wager.
Sir, *
AS there is a bill just eg ‘into the House for the ‘encouragement of Seamen, and the more speedily manning the fleet, I rise to propose a clause, in which it may be enacted, that no merchants, or bodies corporate or politic,’ shall hire sailors at higher wages than thirty-five shillings for the month, on pain of forfeiting treble the value of the sum so agreed for; I propose also that this law may commence after fifteen days, and may continue for a time to be agreed upon by the House. ‘f
Sir, the necessity of this clause must be so apparent to: every gentleman acquainted with naval and commercial af- fairs, that as no opposition can be apprehended, very few arguments will be necessary to introduce it.
How much the public calamities of war are improved by the sailors to their own private advantage, how generally they shun the public service in hopes of receiving exorbitant wages from the merchants, and how much they extort from the merchants by threatening to leave their service for that
D
50 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
of the Crown, is universally known by every efficer of the navy, and every commander of a trading vessel. 64
A law, therefore, Sir, to restrain them in time of war from such exorbitant demands; to deprive them of those prospects, which have often no other effect than to lull them - to idleness, while they skulk about in expectation of higher wages; and to hinder them from deceiving themselves, — embarrassing the merchants, and neglecting the general in-— terest of their country, is undoubtedly just. It is just, Sir, because, in regard to the public, it 1s necessary to prevent the greatest calamity that can fall upon a people, that of re= ceiving laws from the most implacable of our enemies; and it is just, because with respect to particular men, it has no tendency but to suppress idleness, fraud, and extortion. :
~ Mr. For. ~ ‘ : - $TR,—I have no objection to any part of this clause, except the day proposed for the commencement: to make a_ law against any pernicious practice, to which there are_ strong temptations, and to give those, whose interest may incite them to it, time to effect their schemes before the law shall begin to operate, seems not very consistent either with wisdom or vigilance.
It is not denied, Sir, that the merchants are betrayed, by
that regard to private interest which prevails too frequently _ over nobler views, to bribe away from the service of the Crown, by large rewards, those sailors whose assistance is. now so necessary to the Public; and therefore it is not to be imagined that they will not employ their utmost diligence to improve the interval, which the Bill allows, in making contracts for the ensuing year, and that the sailors will not eagerly engage themselves before this law shall precludg their prospect of advantage, |
As therefore to make no law, ane to make a law that will not be observed, is in consequence the same; and as the time
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 51
allowed by the clause, as it now stands, may make the whole provision ineffectual, it is my opinion; that either it - ought to begin to operate to-morrow, or that we ought to | a the whole affair in its present state.
Sir Robert Walpole.
 SIR,—Nothing has a greater appearance of injustice, than to punish men by virtue of a law with which they are not acquainted ; the law therefore is always supposed to be known by those who have offended it, because it is the duty of every man to know it; and certainly it ought to be the care of the Legislature, that those whom the | law will affect, may have a possibility’ of knowing it, and that those may not be punished for failing in their duty whom nothing but inevitable ignorance has betrayed into offence.
’ But if the operation of this law should commence to-mor- row, what numbers may break it, and suffer for the breach of it involuntarily, and without design! and how shall we vindicate ourselves for having been accessary to the crime which we censure and punish ?
- Str John Barnard.
' SIR,—Notwithstanding the impatience and resentment with which some men see their mistakes and ignorance detected, notwithstanding the reverence which neglect and haste are said to be entitled to from this Assembly, I shall openly declare, without the apprehension of being confuted, that this bill was drawn up without consideration, and is defended without being understood ; that after all the amendments which have been admitted, and all the addi- tions proposed, it will be oppressive and ineffectual,—a chaos of absurdities and a monument of ignorance.
Sir Robert Walpole. SIR,—The business of this Assembly is, to examine the eause before us; but to deviate from so necessary an in- D2
52 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
quiry into loud acclamations against the whole bill, is to obstruct the course of the debate, to perplex our attention, — and interrupt the Parliament in its deliberations upon ques= tions, in the determination of which the Public is nearly | concerned.
The war, Sir, in which we are now engaged, and I may add, engaged by the general request of the whole nation, can be prosecuted only by the assistance of the seamen, from, whom it is not expected that they will sacrifice their im-/ mediate advantage to the security of their country. Public. spirit, ‘where it is to be found, is the result of reflection, refined by study, and exalted by education ; ‘and it is not to. be hoped for amongst those whom low fortahe has con=. demned to perpetual. drudgery. It must therefore be neces~_ sary to supply the defect of education, and to produce, by salutary ecoercions, effects which it is in vain to = from other causes.
That the service of the sailors will be set up to sale bt auction, and that the merchants will bid against the govern-. ment, is incontestable: nor is there any doubt that they will be able to offer the highest price, because they will take care to repay themselves by raising the value of their goods. Thus, without some restraint upon the merchants, our ene~ mies, who are not deterred by their form of government from any method, which policy can invent, or absolute. power put in execution, will preclude all our designs, and. set at defiance a nation superior to themselves. +
Sir John Barnard.
SIR,—I think myself obliged by my duty to my tanta and by my gratitude to those by whose industry we aré enriched, and by whose courage we are defended, to make once more a declaration, not against particular clauses, not. against single circumstances, but against the whole bill; @:
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 53
dill unjust and oppressive, absurd and ridiculous; a bill to harass the industrious, and distress the honest,. to puzzle the wise, and add power to the cruel;-a bill which cannot be read without astonishment, nor passed without the viola- tion of our constitution, and an equal disregard of policy, honesty, and humanity. _ All these’assertions will need to be proved only by a bare J of this hateful bill ; by which the meanest, the most ‘worthless reptile, exalted to a petty officer by serving a J ‘wretch only superior to him in fortune, is enabled to display is authority by tyrannizing over those who every hour de- serve the public acknowledgement of the community, to in- 4rude upon the retreats of brave men fatigued and exhausted by honest industry, to drag them out with all the wantonness of groveling authority, and chajn them to the oar without a moment’s respite, or perhaps oblige. them to purchase with the gains of a dangerous voyage, or the plunder of an enemy lately conquered, a. short interval to settle their affairs,. or _ bid their children-farewell.
_Let any gentleman in this House,—let those, Sir, who now sit at ease, projecting laws of oppression, and conferring upon their own slaves such licentious authority, pause a few moments, and imagine themselves exposed to the same hardships by a power superior to their own; let them con- ceive themselves torn from the tenderness and caresses of their families, by midnight irruptions, dragged in triumph through the streets by a despicable officer, and placed under the command of those by whom they have perhaps been already insulted. Why should we imagine that the race of men, for whom these cruelties are preparing, have less sen- sibility than ourselves? Why should we believe that they _ will suffer without complaint, and be injured without resent- ment ? Why should we conceive that they will not at once deliver themselves and punish their oppressors, by deserting
54 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
that country, where they are considered as felons, and laying — hold on those rewards and privileges which no other oa ment will deny them?
Mr. Pitt.
SIR,—It is common for those, who have the greatest re= | gard to their own interest, to discover the least for that of others. Ido not, therefore, despair of recalling the advoe. cates of this bill from the prosecution of their favourite mea- sures, by arguments of greater efficacy than those which are founded on reason and justice.
Nothing, Sir, is more evident, than that some degree of : reputation is absolutely necessary to men who haye any con-— cern in the administration of a government like ours ; they must either secure the fidelity of their adherents by the as- sistance of wisdom, or of virtue; their enemies must either be awed by their honesty, or ‘teriBed by their cunning. Mere artless bribery willnever gain a sufficient majority to” set them entirely free from apprehensions of censure. To different tempers different motives must be applied: some, who place their attachment to a leader because he is account- ed wise, care but very little about his character for honesty. Others may be persuaded to join in measures, which they easily discover to be weak and ill-concerted, because they are convinced that the authors of them are not corrupt, but mistaken ; and are unwilling that any man should be punish- ed for natural defects, or casual ignorance.
I cannot say, Sir, which of these motives influence the advocates of the bill before us; a bill, in which such cruel- ties are proposed as are yet unknown amongst the most sa- vage nations, such as slavery has not yet borne, or tyranny invented, such as cannot be heard without resentment, nor thought of without horror.
-PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. BB It is, Sir, perhaps not unfortunate, that one more expe- dient has been added, rather ridiculous than shocking; and that these tyrants of the administration,—who amuse them- selves with oppressing their fellow-subjects, who add with- “out reluctance one hardship to another, invade the liberty of those whom they have already overborne with taxes, first plunder, then imprison, who take all opportunities of heightening the public distresses, and make the miseries of -war the instruments of new oppressions,—are too ignorant to *be formidable, and owe their power, not to their abilities, but to casual prosperity, or to the influence of money.
The other clauses of this bill, complicated at once with cruelty and folly, have been treated with becoming indig- nation ; but this may be considered with less ardour and re- ‘sentment, and fewer emotions of zeal, because, though per- haps equally iniquitous, it will do no harm; for a law that never can be executed, can never be felt.
- That it will consume the manufacture of paper, ‘and swell the books of statutes, is all the good or hurt that can be hoped or feared from a law like this; a law which fixes what is in its own nature mutable, which prescribes rules to the seasons, and limits to the wind.
T am too well acquainted, Sir, with the disposition of its two chief supporters, to mention the contempt with which this law will be treated by posterity; for they have already shown abundantly their disregard of succeeding generations : but I will remind them, that they are now venturing their — whole interest at once; and hope they will recollect, before it is too late, that those who believe them to intend the hap- piness of their country, will never be confirmed in their opinion by open cruelty and notorious oppression ; and that those who have only their own interest in view, will be afraid of adhering to those leaders, however old, and practised in expedients, however strengthened by corruption, or elated
aati
86 - PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
with power, who have shown so small a portion either of " virtue or abilities. —
: Sir Robert Walpole.
. SIR,—Every law which extends its influence to great numbers, in various relations and circumstances, must pro- _duce some consequences that were never foreseen or in- tended, and is to be censured or applauded as the general advantages or inconveniences are found to preponderate. Of this kind is the law before us; a law, enforced by the ne- cessity of our affairs, and drawn up with no other intention than to secure the public happiness, and produce that suc- cess which every man’s interest must prompt him to desire.
Tf i in the execution of this law, Sir, some inconveniences should arise, they are to be remedied as. fast as they are dis- covered; or, if not capable of a remedy, to be patiently borne in consideration of the general advantage.
That some temporary disturbances may be produced is not Ampossible ; the discontent of the sailors may for a short time rise high, and our trade be suspended by their obstinacy ; but obstinacy, however determined, must yield to hunger ; ‘and when no higher wages can be obtained, they will cheer- fully accept of those which are allowed them. Short voy- ages, indeed, are not comprehended in the clause ; and there= fore the sailors will engage in them upon their own terms; but this objection can be of no weight with those who op- pose the clause, because, if it is unjust to limit the wages of the sailors, it is just to leave those voyages without restric- tion ; and those that think the expedient here proposed equi- table and rational, may, perhaps, be willing to make some concessions to those who are of a different opinion.
That the bill will not remove every obstacle to success, nor add weight to one part of the balance without making the other figher, that it will not supply the navy without
- .
' PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 57 ‘incommoding the merchants in some degree, that it may sometimes be evaded by cunning, and sometimes abused by malice, and that at last it will be less efficacious than is desired, may perhaps be proved; but it has not. yet been : proved that any other measures are more eligible, or that we are not to promote the public service as far as we are able, though our endeavaurs may not produce effects equal, to our wishes, F Sir John Barnard. : »SIR,—I know not by what fatality it is that nothing can: be urged in defence of the clause before us, which does not tend to discover its weakness and inefficacy.. The warmest patrons of this expedient are impelled, by the mere force of conviction, to such concessions as invalidate all their argu- ments, and leaye their opponents no necessity of replying.
If short voyages are not comprehended in this provision, what are we now controverting? What but the expedience of a law, that will never be executed? The sailors, however they are contemned by those who only think them worthy to be treated like beasts of burden, are not yet so stupid, but that they can easily find out, that to serve a fortnight for. greater wages is more eligible than to toil a month for less, and as the numerous equipments that have lately been made have not left many more sailors in the service of the merchants than may be employed in the coasting trade, those who traffic to remoter parts must shut up their books, and wait till the expiration of this act for an opportunity of renewing their commerce.
To regulate the wages for one voyage, and to leave another without limitation in time of scarcity for seamen, is. absolutely to prohibit that trade, which is so restrained, and. is doubtless a more effectual embargo than has yet been in-
vented. d3
58 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
Let any man but suppose, that the East India Company — were obliged to give only half the wages that other traders — allow, and consider how that part of our commerce could be carried on. Would not their goods rot in their warehouses, | and their ships lie for ever in their harbour? Would not the ~ sailors refuse to contract with them ; or desert them after a — contract, upon the first prospect of: more enegcocs em= | ployment ? ~ a
But it is not necessary to multiply arguments in a question i which perhaps may not be decided without long examination, : but in which we may determiné our conclusions by the ex- — perience of our ancestors. Scarcely any wrong or right are — without a precedent, and often discover what the most en-— Dgbtened reason failed to foresee. . 1
Let us therefore improve the errors of our ancestors to — our own advantage; and whilst we neglect to imitaté their | virtues, let us at least forbear to repeat their follies. : Mr. Horace Walpole.
SIR,—I was unwilling to interrupt the course of this de- ; bate, while it was carried on with calmness and decency, by men who do not suffer the ardour of opposition to cloud — their reason, or transport them to such expressions as the dignity of this Assembly does not admit. I have hitherto deferred to answer the gentleman who declaimed against — the bill with such fluency and rhetoric, and such vehemence of gesture; who charged the advocates for the expedients now proposed, with having no regard to any interest but their own, and with making laws only to consume paper; and threatened them with the defection of their adherents, and the loss of their influence, upon this new discovery of their folly and their ignorance.
Nor, Sir, do I now answer him for any other purpose, than to remind him how little the clamour of rage, and
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 59 petulancy of invective, contribute to the purpose for which this ‘assembly i is called together; how little the discovery of truth is promoted, and the security of the nation cotati’ eer mpets diction and theatrical emotion. pains
- Formidable sounds, and furious declamation, confident assertion, and lofty periods, may affect the young and un- experienced; and perhaps the gentleman may have con- tracted his habits of oratory by conversing more with those
of his own age, than with such as have had more opportu- nities of acquiring knowledge, and more successful egos of communicating their sentiments.
If the heat of his temper, Sir, would suffer him to attend to those, whose age and long acquaintance with business give them an indisputable right to deference and superiority, he would learn in time to reason rather than declaim, and to prefer justness of argument, and an accurate knowledge of facts, to sounding epithets and splendid superlatives, which may disturb the imagination for a moment, but leave no lasting impression on the mind.
’ He will learn, Sir, that to accuse and prove are very dif- ferent; and that reproaches, unsupported by evidence, af- fect only the character of him that utters them. Excursions of fancy and flights of oratory are indeed pardonable in young men, but in no other; and it would surely contribute More, even to the purpose for which some gentlemen*ap- pear to speak, (that of depreciating the conduct of admi- nistration,) to prove the inconveniences and injustice of this bill, than barely to assert them, with whatever maynificence of language, or appearance of zeal, honesty, or compassion.
Mr. Pitt.
SIR,—The atrocious crime of being a young man, which the honourable gentleman has with such spirit and
60 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
decency charged upon me, I shall neither attempt to’ pal- liate nor deny; but content myself with wishing that I may~ be one of those whose follies may cease with their youth,
and not of that number who are ignorant in spite a expe=t rience. : . ‘ ame '
Whether soet can be attributed to any man as a.re-” proach, I will not, Sir, assume the province of determin-— ing; but surely age may become justly contemptible, if the opportunities which it brings have passed away without improvement, and vice appear to prevail when the passions” have subsided. The wretch that, after having seen the consequences of a thousand errors, continues still to blunder, — and whose age has only added obstinacy to stupidity, is” surely the object-either of abhorrence or contempt, and. deserves not that his grey head should secure him from insults. ie ; Much more, Sir, is he to be abhorred, who, as he hasf advanced in age, has receded from virtue, and become more wicked with less temptation; who prostitutes himself for mo-— ney which he cannot enjoy, and spends the remains off his life in the ruin of his country.
But youth, Sir, is not my only crime; I have been ac- cused of acting a theatrical part. A theatrical part may either imply some peculiarities of gesture, or a dissimulation” of my real sentiments, and the adoption of the Ppaons and language of another man. ‘
In the first sense, Sir, the charge is too trifling to be confuted, and deserves only to be mentioned that it may be despised. I am at liberty, like every other man, to use my own language; and though I may perhaps have some ambition to please this gentleman, I shall not lay myself under any restraint, nor very solicitously copy his diction or his mien, however matured by age, or modelled by experi= ence. .
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 61 But, if any man shall, by charging me with theatrical - behaviour, imply that I utter any sentiments but my own, I shall treat him as a calumniator and a villain; nor shall any protection shelter him from the treatment which he deserves, T shall on such an occasion, without scruple, trample upon all those forms with which wealth and dignity intrench themselyes, nor shall any thing but age restrain my resent- meat 5 3 age, which always brings one privilege, that of being kent and supercilious without punishment. _
But with regard, Sir, to those whom I have offended, I am of opinion that if I had acted a borrowed part, I should have avoided their censure: the heat that offended them is the ardour of conviction, and that zeal for the service of my country which neither hope nor fear shall influence me to suppress. I will not sit unconcerned while my liberty is invaded, nor look in silence upon public robbery.—I will exert my endeavours, at whatever hazard, to repel the aggressor, and drag the thief to justice, whoever may pro- tect him in his villainy, and whoever may partake of his plunder. And if the honourable gentleman————--=
Mr. Winnington, (Calling to order.)
SIR,—It is necessary that the order of this Assembly be Observed, and that the debate be resumed without personal altercations. Such expressions as have been vented on this occasion become not a House intrusted with the liberty and welfare of the country. To interrupt the debate, a debate on a subject so important as that before us, is, in some measure, to obstruct the public business, and violate our trust; but much more heinous is the crime of exposing our determinations to contempt, and inciting the people to suspicion or mutiny by indecent reflections, or unjust insi- nuations.
ae PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
I do not, Sir, undertake to decide the controversy be- tween the two gentlemen, but must be allowed to observe, — that no diversity of opinion can justify the violation of F decency, and the use of rude and violent expressions,— expressions dictated ony by resentment, and uttered without 7 regard to——
Mr. Pitt.
SIR,—If this is to observe order, there is no danger of indecency from the most licentious tongue ; for what ca~— lumny can be more atrocious, or what reproach more — severe, than that of speaking with regard to any thing but — truth? Order may sometimes be broken by passion or inad- : yertency, but will hardly be re-established by a monitor like this, who, whilst he is restraining the impetuosity of others, cannot govern his own. -
Happy, Sir, would it be for mankind, if cae one knew — his own province; we should not then see the same man. at once a criminal and a judge; nor would this gentleman. assume the right of dictating to others, what he has not learnt himself. .
That I may return in some degree the favour which he. intends me, I will advise him never hereafter to exert ‘anol : self on the subject of order ; but whenever he finds him- self inclined to speak on such occasions, to remember how he has now succeeded, and condemn in silence what his. censures will never reform.
Mr. Winnington,.
' SIR,—As.I was hindered by the gentleman’s ardour and impetuosity from concluding my sentence, none but myself” can know the equity or partiality of my intentions; and therefore, as I cannot justly be condemned, I ought to
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. 63 be supposed innocent; nor ought he to censure a fault, of which he cannot be certain that ‘it Went ‘have been committed.
He has indeed exalted himself to a saRGiae of aithbritg hever yet assumed by any Member of this House, that of condemning others to silence. I am henceforward, by his inviolable decree, to sit and hear his harangues without daring to oppose him. How wide he may extend his autho- rity I shall not determine, having not yet arrived at the same degree of sagacity with himself, not being able to foreknow what another is going to pronounce.
If I had given offence by any improper sallies of passion, I ought to have been censured by the concurrent voices of the House, or have received a reprimand, Sir, from you, to whom I should have submitted without opposition ; but I will not ~be doomed to silence by one who has no pretensions to authority, or whose arbitrary decisions can only tend to introduce uproar, discord, and con- fusion.
Mr. Lyttelton.
SIR,—No man can be more zealous for decency than myself, or more convinced of the necessity of a methodical prosecution of the question before us. I am well con- vinced how near indecency and faction are to one another and how inevitably confusion produces obscurity; but I hope it will always be remembered, that he who first in- fringes decency, or deviates from method, is to answer for all the consequences that may arise from the neglect of parliamentary customs. For it is not to be ex- pected, that any man will bear reproaches without reply, or that he, who wanders from the question, will not be followed in his digressions, and hunted through his
labyrinths,
64 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. :
It cannot, Sir, be denied, that some insinuations were :
uttered injurious to those whose zeal may sometimes happen — t them to warm declarations, or to incite them to —
to promp am of importance enough —
passionate emotions. Whether I to be included in the censure, I despise it too much to- inquire or consider, but cannot forbear to observe that zeal — for the right can never be reproachful, and that no man can_ justly fall into contempt but he who deserves it. ‘ . 4
?
,
ao PART IL.
DECLAMATION.
I. The Speech of Brutus on the Death of Cesar.
Romans, countrymen, and lovers! hear me for my Cause ; and be silent, that you may hear. Believe me for my honour, and have respect to my honour, that you may believe. Censure me in your wisdom, and awake your senses, that you may the better judge. If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Cesar’s, to him I say, that Brutus’s love to Casar was no less than his. If then that friend demand, why Brutus arose against Cesar, this is my answer: Not that I loved Cesar less, but that I loved Rome more. Had you rather Cesar were living, and die all slaves; than that Caesar were dead, to live all freemen? As -Czsar loved me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was valiant, I honour him; but as he was ambitious, I slew him. There are tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honour for his valour, and death for his ambition. Who is here so base, that would be a bondman? If any, speak; for him have I offended. Who is here so rude, that would not be a Roman? If any, speak ; for him have I offended. Who is heresso vile, that will not love his country? If any, speak; for him have I offended.——I pause for a reply. —— _
oe.
66 DECLAMATION.
None ?——then none have I offended.——I have done no more to Cesar than you should, do to Brutus. The que: tion of his death is enrolled in the capitol; his glory extenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor his offences ins forced, for which he suffered death —— :
Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Autom 3 who, _ though he had no hand in his death, shall receive the bene fit of his dying, a place in the commonwealth ; as which of you shall not? With this I depart, that as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I have the same dagger for myself, when it shall please my ges to need my death.
II. Douglas to Lord Randolph.
My name is Norval: on the Grampian hills __
My father feeds his flock ;—a frugal swain,
Whose constant cares were to increase his store,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long’d
To follow to the field some warlike lord ;
And Heaven soon granted what my sire denied.
This moon, which rose last night, round as my shield, Had not yet filled her horns, when by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rush’d like a torrent down upon the vale, Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled For safety and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover’d about the enemy, and mark’d ; The road he took ; then hasted to my friends, } Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men, 7 I met advancing. The pursuit I led, i Till-we o’ertook the spoil-encumber’d nee
We fought, and conquer’d. Ere a sword was drawn,
ee ee ee ee ee ae ae
on ae ey ee
DECLAMATION. 67 An arrow from my bow had piere’d their chief, ) Who wore that day the arms which now I wear. Returning home in triumph, I disdain’d -
I'he shepherd’s slothful life ; and having heatd
Phat our good King had Se his bold peers
Po lead their warriors to the Carron side,
[ left my father’s house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my steps :——
Yon trembling coward, who forsook his master. fourneying with this intent, I pass’d these towers, And, Heaven-directed, came this day, to do
[he happy deed that gilds my humble name.
~ TI. Othello’s Apology.
Most potent, grave, and reverend Signors,
My very noble and approv’d good masters,
That I have ta’en away this old man’s daughter,
t is most true: true, I have married her,
The very head and front of my offending
dath this extent; no more. Rude am I in speech,
ind little bless’d with the set phrase of peace ;
‘or, since these arms of mine had seven years’ pith,
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have us’d
Their dearest action in the tented field ;
And little of this great world can-I speak,
More than pertains to feats of broils and battle 5
And therefore little shall I grace my cause,
n speaking for myself. Yet, by your patience,
will a round unvarnish’d tale deliver,
If my whole course of love; what drugs, what charms,
Vhat conjuration, and what mighty magic,
For such proceeding I am charg’d withal)
-won his daughter with. Her father lov’d me, oft invited me ;
~ 68 DECLAMATION.
Still question’d me the story of my life
From year to year; the are sieges, fortunes,
That I have past.
I ran it through, ev’n oth my boyish aay
To th’ very moment that he bade me tell it.
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous »
Of moving accidents by flood and field ;
Of hair-breadth ’scapes in the imminent deadly breach ; Of being taken by the insolent foe,
And sold to slavery; of my redemption thence,
And with it all my travel’s history : ; ‘ /, bes Dp Wherein of antres vast, and deserts idle,
Rough quarries, rocks and hills whose g hcadd touch heav’: ny It was my hint to speak.—All these to hear Would Desdemona seriously incline.
But still the house affairs would draw her thence 5 Which ever as she could with haste dispatch, She’d come again, and witha greedy ear Devour up my discourse: which I observing, Took once a pliant hour, and found good means To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart, That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard, But not distinctively. I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffer’d. My story being done, She gave me for my pains a world of sighs.
She said, in truth, *twas strange, ’twas passing strange ; °>Twas pitiful, “twas wondrous pitiful— She wish’d she had not heard it
yet she wish’d ’
dentition er ete Mer ae vee ee ee —
> eer
That Heav’n had made her such a man :—she thank’d me. |
And bade me, if I had a friend that lov’d her, I should but teach him how to tell my story,
‘DECLAMATION, 69°
And that would woo her. On this hint I spake. the lov’d me for the dangers I had past ; And I lov’d her, that she dia pity them.
This only is the witcheraft that I have us’d.
v. The Bishop of Carlisle's Speech é in Defence of K. Rich, IE.
V orst in this royal presence may I speak,
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Would Heav’n, that any in this noble presence Were enough noble to be upright judge
If noble Hechard ; then true nobleness would Teach him forbearance from so foul a wrong. What subject can give sentence on a king?
And who sits here, that is not Richard’s subject ? 3 Thieves are not judg’d, but they are by to hear, \ithough apparent guilt be seen in them:
And shall the figure of God’s majesty,
dis captain, steward, deputy elect,
({nointed, crowned, planted many years,
3e judg’d by subject and inferior breath,
ind he himself not present? O, forbid it, Heav’n, That in a Christian climate, souls refin’d
should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed ! speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
tirr’d up by Heaven thus boldly for his king.
iy lord of Hereford here, whom you call kings s a foul traitor to proud Hereford’s king:
And if you crown him, let me prophesy-—~
The blood of English shall manure the ground, ind future ages groan for this foul act ;
eace shall go sleep with Turks and Infidels,
ind, in this seat of peace, tumultuous wars shall kin with’kin, and kind with kind confound ; Yisorder, horror, fear, and mutiny,
70 DECLAMATION.
Shall here inhabit, and this land be call’d The field of Golgotha and dead men’s skulls. Oh! if you rear this house against this house, It will the woefullest division prove
That ever fell upon this cursed earth.
Prevent, resist it, let it not be so,
Lest children’s children ery against you—wo!
V. Lord Clifford’s Speech in Henry Vi.
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beasts that would usurp their den.’ Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick ?
Not his that spoils her young before her face. Who ’scapes the lurking serpent’s mortal sting? _ Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn, being trodden on ; And doves will peck in safeguard to their brood. Ambitious York did level at thy crown;
Thou smiling, while he knit his angry brows: He, but a duke, would have his son a king,
And raise his issue like a loving sire ;
Thou, being a king, blessed with a goodly son, Didst yield consent to disinherit him ;
Which argu’d thee a most unloving father. Unreasonable creatures feed their young : And though man’s face be fearful to their eyes, Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them (even with those wings
_ Which sometimes they have us’d in fearful flight) Make war with them that climb’d unto their nest, Offering their own lives in their -young’s defence ?
For shame, my liege; make them your precedent.
a ee ee ee, ee a ee
ma
DECLAMATION.
Were it not pity that this goodly boy Should lose his birth-right by his father’s fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child——
What my great-grand grandfather and grandsire got, My careless father fondly gave away ? -
\h! what a shame were this! Look on the boy ; And let his manly face, which promiseth
successful fortune, steel thy melting heart,
fo hold thy own, and leave thy own to him.
VI. Greatness and Sublimity of the Imagination.
JAY, why was man so eminently rais’d
imid the vast creation; why ordain’d
‘hrough life and death to dart his piercing eye, Vith thoughts beyond the limits of his frame ; Sut that the Omnipotent might send him forth
n sight of mortal and immortal pow’rs, ©
is on a boundless theatre, to run
he great career of justice; to exalt
lis gen’rous aim to all diviner deeds ;
‘o chase each partial purpose from his breast ; ind through the mists of passion and of sense, ind through the tossing tide of chance and pain, ‘o hold his course unfalt’ring, while the voice
)f truth and virtue, up the steep ascent
)f nature, calls him to his high reward,
‘h’ applauding smile of Heav’n? Else wherefore burns n mortal bosoms this unquenched hope,
‘hat breathes from day to day sublimer things, ‘nd mocks possession? Wherefore darts the mind, Vith such resistless ardour to embrace
fajestic forms ; impatient to be free,
purning the gross controul of wilful might ; roud of the strong contention of her toils;
72 DECLAMATION.
Proud to be daring? Who but rather turns
To Heav’n’s broad fire his unconstrained view Than to the glimmering of a waxen flame? Who that, from Alpine heights, his lab’ring eye Shoots round the wide horizon to survey
The Nile or Ganges roll his wasteful tide
Thro’ mountains, plains, thro’ empires black with shade, ©
And continents of sand, will turn his gaze
‘To mark the windings of a scanty rill
That murmurs at his feet? The high-born soul Disdains to rest her heav’n-aspiring wing Beneath its native quarry. ‘Tir’d of earth
And this diurnal scene, she springs aloft
Through fields of air; pursues the flying storm ; ‘Rides on the volley’d lightning through the heav’ns ; Or, yok’d with whirlwinds and the northern blast, Sweeps the long tract of day. Then high she soars. The blue profound, and hovering round the sun,. Beholds him pouring the redundant stream
Of light ; beholds his unrelenting sway
Bend the reluctant planets to absolve .
The fated rounds of time. Thence, far effus’d, She darts her swiftness up the long career _
Of devious comets ; through its burning signs Exulting measures the perennial wheel
Of nature, and looks back on all the stars,
Whose blended light, as with a milky zone, “Invests the orient. Now amaz’d she views
Th’ empyreal waste, where happy spirits hold, Beyond this cencave heav’n, their calm abode ; And fields of radiance, whose unfading light
Has travell’d the profound six thousand years, _ Nor yet arrives in sight of mortal things.
Ey’n on the barriers of the world untir’d,
aS” Vere
DECLAMATION. She meditates th’ eternal depth below ;. Till, half recoiling, down thé headlong steep _ She plunges; soon: o’erwhelm’d and swallow’d up In that immense of being. There her hopes ‘Rest at the fatal goal. For, from the birth Of mortal man, the sovereign Maker said, That not in humble nor in brief delight, . , Not in the fading echoes of renown, © . Pow’r’s purple robes, nor pleasure’s flow’ry lap, The soul should find enjoyment: but from these Turning disdainful to an equal good,
Through all th’ ascent of things enlarge her view,
Till every bound at length should disappear, And infinite perfection close the scene.
VII. The Pleasures arising from Novelty.
Caxt now to mind what high capacious powers Lie folded up in man ; how far beyond
_ The praise of mortals eas th’ eternal growth “Of nature, to perfection half divine,
Expand the blooming soul. What pity then Should sloth’s unkindly fogs depress to earth Her tender blossom ; choak the streams of life, And blast her spring! Far otherwise design’d Almighty wisdom ; nature’s happy cares
Th’ obedient heart far otherwise incline. Witness the sprightly joy when aught unknown -
Strikes the quick sense, and wakes each active pow’r
To brisker measures: witness the neglect
Of all familiar prospects, though beheld With transport once ; the fond attentive gaze Of young astonishment ; the sober zeal
Of age, commenting on prodigious things.
; E
73
Se a
4 DECLAMATION.
For such the bounteous providence of Heav’n, é | ;
In every breast ixtphanting this desire Of objects new and strange, to urge us on With unremitted labour to pursue ae Those sacred stores that wake the ripening soul, In truth’s exhaustless bosom. What need words To paint its pow’r? For this, the daring youth Breaks from his weeping mother’s anxious arms, In foreign climes to rove; the pensive sage, Heedless of sleep, or midnight’s hartaful damp, Hangs o’er the sickly taper ; and untir’d ~ The virgin follows, with enchanted step,
( The mazes of some wild and wondrous tale,
(, From morn to eve ; unmindful of her form,
/ Unmindful of the sige; dress that stole — The wishes of the youth, when every maid
_' With envy pin’d. Hence finally by night The village-matron, round the blazing hearth, Suspends the infant-audience with her tales, Breathing astonishment! of witching rhimes, And evil spirits; of the death-bed call To him who robb’d the widow, and devour’d The orphan’s portion ; of unquiet souls © Ris’n from the grave to ease the heavy guilt Of deeds in life conceal’d ; of shapes that walk At dead of night, and clank their chains, and wave The torch of hell around the murd’rer’s bed. At every solemn pause, the crowd recoil Gazing each other speechless, and congeal’d With shiv’ring sighs: till eager for th’ event, Around the beldame all erect they hang, Each trembling heart with grateful terrors quell’d,
hn peg a =
DECLAMATION.
75
: VII. The Scale of Animal Existence, aoe Insects to Man.
Far as ereation’s ample range extends, —
The scale of sensual, mental, pow’rs ascends : Mark how it mounts to man’s imperial race From the green myriads in the peopled. grass 5 What modes of sight betwixt each wide extreme,
The mole’s dim curtain, and the lynx’s beam;
Of smell, the headlong lioness between,
And hound sagacious on the tainted green ;
Of hearing, from the life that fills the flood,
To that which warbles through the vernal wood ; The spider’s touch how exquisitely fine,
Feels at each thread, and lives along the line ; In the nice bee what sense, so subtly true, From pois’nous herbs extracts the healing“dew 5 How instinct varies in the grov’ling swine, Compar’d half-reas’ning elephant with thine ; *Twixt that and reason what a nice barrier ; For ever sep’rate, yet for ever near 5 Remembrance and reflection how ally’d ; What thin partitions thought from sense divide, And middle natures, how they long to join, Yet never pass th’ insuperable line.
Without this just gradation could they be. Subjected, these to those, or all to thee?
The pow’rs of all subdu’d by thee alone,
Is not thy Reason all these pow’rs in one?
ts nS)
76 DECLAMATION.
IX. Social Duties arising from the Nature of Man.
Gop, in the nature of each being, founds:
Its proper bliss, and sets its proper bounds :
But as he fram’d a Whole, the Whole to bless, On mutual Wants built mutual Happiness :
So from the first, eternal OrpEr ran,
And creature link’d to creature, man to man. Whate’er of life all-quick’ning ether keeps, Or breathes through air, or shoots beneath the deeps, Or pours profuse on earth, one nature feeds
The vital flame, and swells the genial seeds.
Not man alone, but all that roam the wood, ~
Or wing the sky, or roll along the flood,
Each loves itself, but not itself alone,
Another’s happiness becomes its own.
Nor does this happiness with time decrease, They love themselves a third time in their race, Thus beast and bird their common charge attend, The mothers nurse it, and the sires defend ;
The young dismiss’d to wander earth or air, There stops the instinct, and there ends the care ; The link dissolves, each seeks a fresh embrace, Another love succeeds, another race.
A longer care man’s helpless kind demands ; That longer care contracts more lasting bands : Reflection, reason, still the ties improve,
At once extend the int’rest, and the love ;
With choice we fix, with sympathy we burn ; Each virtue in each passion takes its turn ;
And still new needs, new helps, new habits rise, That graft benevolence on charities.
~~ eee eS ew a ee
a an tee *
_DECLAMATION.
Sul as one brood, and as another:rose, _
‘These nat “ral love maintain’d, habitual those ; ‘The last, scarce ripen’d into perfect man,
Saw helpless him from whom their life began: Mem’ry and forecast just returns engage,
That pointed back to youth, this on to age ; While pleasure, gratitude, and hope combin’d, Still spread the int’rest, and. preservy’d-the kind.
Sa tats PA
X. On Taste. Its Universality and Diversity.
Say, what is taste, but the internal pow’rs ~~ Active, and strong, and feelingly alive
To each fine impulse? a discerning sense
Of decent and sublime, with quick disgust From things deform’d,. or disarrang’d, or gross In species! This nor gems, nor stores of gold, Nor purple state, nor culture can bestow ; — But Gop alone, when first his active hand Imprints the sacred bias of the soul.
He, mighty Parent! wise and just in all, Free as the vital breeze or light of heav’n, Reveals the charms of nature. Ask the swain, Who journeys homeward from a summer-day’s ° Long labour, why forgetful of his toils
And due repose, he loiters to behold
The sunshine gleaming, as through amber clouds, O’er all the western sky! Full soon, I ween, His rude expression and untutor’d airs,
Beyond the pow’r of language, will unfold
The form of beauty smiling at his heart,—
How lovely! how commanding! But though heav’n In every breast hath sown these early seeds
Of love and admiration, yet in vain,
77
78 _ DECLAMATION.
. Without fair culture’s kind parental aid,
Without enlivening suns, and genial show’rs, And shelter from the blast, in vain we hepe
The tender plant should rear its blooming head, Or yield the harvest promis’d in its spring.
Nor yet will every soil with equal stores
Repay the tiller’s labour, or attend
His will, obsequious, whether to produce
The olive or the laurel: diff’rent minds
Incline to diff’rent objects: one pursues
The vast alone, the wonderful, the wild ; Another sighs for harmony, and grace, _
And gentlest beauty. Hence when lightning fires The arch of Heav’n, and thunders rock the ground ; When furious whirlwinds rend the howling air, And ocean, groaning from his lowest bed, Heaves his tempestuous billows to the sky ;
Amid the mighty uproar, while below
The nations tremble, Shakspeare looks abroad From some high cliff, superior, and enjoys
The elemental war. But Waller longs,
All on the margin of some flow’ry stream,
To spread his careless limbs amid the cool
Of plantain shades, and to the list’ning deer
The tale of slighted vows and love’s disdain Resounds, soft-warbling, all the live-long day : Consenting Zephyr sighs ; the weeping rill
Joins in his plaint, melodious ; mute the groves ; And hill and dale with all their echoes mourn. Such and so various are the tastes of men.
a. Fo eee
oe a Te
wie
\ a an ————_-
Odes Tee
DECLAMATION,
XI. Chorus to ibs — Act of Henry V.
© For a muse of fires al eieult ascend The brightest heaven of invention, A kingdom for a stage, princes to act, And monarchs to behold.the swelling scene! Then should the warlike Harry, like himself, Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels,- Leash’d in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire, Crouch for employment. But, pardon, Gentles all, The flat unraised spirit that hath dar’d | On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth | ° So great an object. Can this Cock-pit hold The vasty field of France? or may we cram
_ Within this wooden O, the very casques’ That did affright the air at Agincourt ? © pardon, since a crooked figure may Attest, in little place, a million ; And let us, cyphers to this great accompt, On your imaginary forces work. Suppose within the girdle of these walls Are now confin’d two mighty monarchies ; Whose high upreared and abutting fronts The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder. Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts : Into a thousand parts divide one man, And make imaginary puissance : Think, when we talk of horses, that you see “thera Printing their proud hoofs, i’ th’ receiving earth. For, ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our Kings, Carry them here and there, jumping o’er times, Turning th’ accomplishment of many years
79
80 DECLAMATION.
- Into an hour-glass ; for the which supply
Admit me Chorus to this history ; Who, prologue-like, your humble-patience pray, Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our Play.
XII. Chorws to the Second Act of Henry V.
Now all the youth of England are on fire,
And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies : -
Now thrive the armourers, and honour’s thought Reigns solely in the breast of every man.
They sell the pasture:now to buy the horse, Following the mirror of all Christian Kings
With winged heels, as English Mercuries.
For now sits expectation in the air,
And hides a sword from hilt unto the point
With crowns imperial, crowns and coronets, Promis’d to Harry and his followers.
The French, advis’d by good intelligence
Of this most dreadful preparation,
Shake in their fear, and with pale policy
Seek to divert the English purposes.
O England! model to thy inward greatness,
Like little body with a mighty heart,
What might’st thou do, that honour would thee da, » Were all thy children kind and natural !
But see thy fault: France hath in thee found out A nest of hollow bosoms, which she fills
With treacherous crowns: and three corrupted men, One Richard Earl of Cambridge ; and the second, Henry Lord Scroop of Marsham ; and the third, Sir Thomas Grey, Knight of Northumberland ;
en eee a ee
it. ells. att)
aS ee nee
DECLA MATION. 81, ‘Have for the gilt of France (0, guilt: indeed !) Confirm’d conspiracy with fearful France: And by their hands this grace of Kings must die, Tf hell and treason hold-their promises, : Ere he take ship for France. Then in Southarhpten: Linger your patience on, and well digest Th’ abuse of distance, while we force a play. The sum is paid, the traitors are agreed, = The king is set from London, and the scene — Ts now transported, Gentles, to Southampton Boke There is the play-house now, there must you sit, And thence to France shall weconvey you safe, And bring you back: charming the narrow seas To give you gentle pass ; for if we may, - We'll not offend one stomach with our play. But till the King come forth, and not till then, Unto Southampton do we shift-our scene. -
XIII. Henry the Fifth’s Detection and Condemnation of Treason.
Tur mercy that was quick in us but late,
By your own counsel is suppress’d and kill’d : You must not dare for shame to talk of mercy, For your own reasons turn upon your bosoms, As dogs upon their masters, worrying you. See you, my Princes and my noble Peers, These English monsters! My Lord Cambridge here, You know how apt our love was to accord
To furnish him with all appertinents Belonging to his honour ; and this man
Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspir’d, And sworn unto the practices of France
Jo kill us here in Hampton. To the which,
|; ES
; i HH
i
82 DECLAMATION.
This Knight, no less for bounty bound to us Than Cambridge i is, hath likewise sworn. But, O! What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop! thou cruel, Ungrateful, savage, and inhuman creature ! Thou that didst bear the key of all my councils, That knew’st the very bottom of my soul,
That almost might’st have coin’d me into gold, Wouldst thou have practis’d on me for thy use ? May it be possible that foreign hire
Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
That might annoy my finger? Tis so strange, That though the truth of it stand off as gross
As black and white, my eye will searcely see it. Oh how hast thou with jealousy infected
The sweetness of affiance! I will weep for thee, For this revolt of thine methinks is like
Another fall of man But hear your sentence ; You have conspir’d against our royal person ; Join’d with an enemy; and from his coffers Receiy’d the golden earnest of our death: Wherein you would have sold your King to slaughter ; His princes and his Peers to servitude;  ~
His subjects to oppression and contempt,
And his whole kingdom into desolation. Touching our person, seek we no revenge;
But we our kingdom’s safety must so tender, Whose ruin you three sought, that to her laws We do deliver you. Go therefore hence,
Poor miserable wretches, to your death ;
The taste whereof God of his mercy give
You patience to endure, and true repentance Of all your dire offences. Bear them hence.
Ae. 0
~
Pe ea ae ee
Po) a? or
diss «Mlle nate, « jalgite dual pet the
—— a ae 7
DECLAMATION. 83
XIV. Rumour painted full of Tongues.
Open your ears: for which of you will stop -The vent of hearing, when loud Rumour speaks? I, from the Orient-to the drooping West,
Making the wind my post-horse, still-unfold
The acts commenced on this ball of earth. Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,
The which in ev’ry language I pronounce, ~ Stuffing the ears of men with false reports:
I speak of peace, while covert enmity,
Under the smile of safety, wounds the world : And who but Rumour, who but only I,
Make fearful musters and prepar’d defence, While the big ear, swollen with some other griefs, Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war, And no such matter? Rumour is a pipe, ~ ‘Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures ;
And of so easy and so plain a stop,
‘That the blunt monster with uncounted heads, The still-discordant, wav’ring multitude
Can play upon it. The posts come tiring on, And not a man of them brings other news
Than they have learn’d of me. From Rumour’s tongues They bring smooth comforts false, worse than true wrongs.
-
XV. Chorus to the Third Act of Henry V.
Tuus, with imagin’d wing, our swift scene flies, In motion of no less celerity
Than that of thought. Suppose that you hare seen The well-appointed King at Hampton pier Embark his royalty ; and his brave fleet
84 DECLAMATION.
With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning, Play with your fancies: and in them behold, Upon the hempen tackle, ship-boys climbing ; Hear the shrill whistle which doth order give -
To sounds conftis’d ; behold the threaden sails, — Borne with th’ invisible and creeping wind,
Draw the huge bottoms through the furrow’d sea, Breasting the lofty surge. O! do but think
You stand upon the rivage, and behold
A city on th’ inconstant billows dancing ;
For so appears this fleet majestical, Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow ; ; Grapple your minds to sternage of thts navy,
' And leave your England, as dead midnight still,
Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women,
Or past or not arriv’d to pith and puissance : "2
For who is he, whose chin is but enrich’d With one appearing hair, that will not follow These cull’d and choice-drawn cavaliers to France ?
Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege:
Behold the ordnance on their carriages
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur. Suppose th’ embassador from France comes back, Tells Harry, that the King doth offer him Katharine, his daughter, and with her to dowry Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms : -
The offer likes not : and the nimble gunner With lynstock now the devilish cannon touches, And down goes all before him. Still be kind, And eke out our performance with your mind.
rae nes eis:
‘ oe penal dy 28
sit
eo 5 Dia it pa ep AP ii» th Al ti
rd
Wi) | as
_ DECLAMATION. 85. ees
XVI. Virtue, not only our Duty, but our highest Interest. Exrremes in Nature equal ends produce, In man they join to some mysterious use ;__ Though each by turns the other’s bound invade, As, in some well-wrought picture, light and Pade And oft so mix, the diff’rence is too nice bar Where ends the Virtue, or begins the Vice. Fools! who from hence into the notion fall, ‘That Vice or Virtue there is none at all, ~ If white and black blend; soften and unite A thousand ways, is there no black or white ? Ask your own heart, and nothing is so plain ; *Tis to mistake them, costs the time and pain. . Know, all the good that individuals find, Or God and Nature meant to mere Mankind, Reason’s whole pleasure; all the joys of Sense, Lie in three words, Health, Peace, and Competence. iis 8 But Health consists with Temperance alone ; : And Peace, oh Virtue! Peace is all thy own. - The good or bad the gifts of Fortune gain ; ~ But these less taste them, as they worse obtain: Say, iv pursuit of profit or delight, Who risk the most, that take wrong means or right; Of Vice or Virtue, whether blest or curst Which meets contempt, or which compassion first ? Count all th’ advantage prosp’rous Vice attains, Tis but what Virtue flies from and disdains : And grant the bad what happiness they would, One they must want, which is, to pass for good. Oh, blind to truth, and God’s whole scheme below, Who fancy Bliss to Vice, to Virtue Woe !
86 DECLAMATION.
Who sees and follows that great scheme the best, Best knows the blessing, and will most be blest. But fools alone, the Good unhappy call,
For ills or accidents that chance to all.
See FatKtanp dies, the virtuous and the just! — See god-like TuRENNE prostrate on the dust !
See Sipney bleeds amid the martial strife!
Was this their Virtue, or contempt of Life ? Say, was it Virtue, Heav’n so largely gave, Lamented Dicsy ! sunk thee to the grave ?
Tell me, if Virtue made the Son expire,
Why, full of days and honour, lives the Sire? Why drew Marseilles’ good Bishop purer breath, When Nature sicken’d, and each gale was death ? Or why so long (in life if long can be) ~
Lent Heav’n a parent to the poor and me?
XVII. The Miseries of Royalty.
O Hard condition, and twin-born with greatness, Subject to breath of ev’ry fool, whose sense
No more can feel but his own wringing.
What infinite heart-ease must Kings neglect, That private men enjoy? and what have Kings That privates have not too, save ceremony?
And what art thou, thou idle ceremony ?
What kind of God art thou? that suffer’st more Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers;
What are thy rents? what are thy comings-in? O ceremony, show me but thy worth:
What is thy soul of adoration ;
Art thou aught else but place, degree, and form, Creating awe and fear in other men? -
Wherein thou art less happy, being fear’d,
—
MS 4 02
DECLAMATION. 87
Than they in fearing ? What drink’st thou oft, instead of hommges sweet, But poison’d flattery? O, be sick, great grecGiess And bid thy ceremony give thee cure. _Think’st thou the fiery fever will go out With titles blown from adulation? Will it give place to flexure and low bending ? Canst thou, when thou command’st the beggar’s knee Command the health of it no, thou proud dream, That play’st so subtly with a King’s repose, I am a King that find thee: and I know Tis not the balm, the sceptre, and the ball, The sword, the mace, the crown imperial, The enter-tissued robe of gold and pearl, The farced title running ’fore the King, The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp That beats upon the high shore of this world ; No, not all these thrice-gorgeous ceremonies, Not all these, laid in bed majestical, Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave, Who, with a body filPd and vacant mind, Gets him to rest, cramm/’d with distressful bread : Never sees horrid night, the child of hell, But like a lacquey,, from the rise to set, Sweats in the eye of Phcebus ; and all night Sleeps in Elysium ; next day after dawn Doth rise, and help Hyperion to his horse 5 And follows so the ever-running year With profitable labour to his grave : And (but for ceremony) such a wretch, Winding up days with toil, and nights of sleep, Hath the fore-hand and vantage of a King: The slave, a member of the country’s peace, Enjoys it ; but in gross brain little wots
88 DECLAMATION.
What watch the King keeps to maintain the peace ; Whose hours the peasant best advantages.
XVIII. The Folly of Procrastination.
Be wise to-day ; tis madness to defer ; =
Next day the fatal. precedent will plead ; Thus on, till wisdom is push’d out of life. Procrastination is the thief of time ; Year after year it steals, till all are fled, And to the mercies of a moment leayes The vast concerns of an eternal scene.
Of man’s miraculous mistakes, this bears "The palm, “ That all men are about to live ;” For ever on the brink of being born. All pay themselves the compliment to think They, one day, shall not drivel ; and their pride, On this reversion, takes up ready praise : At least, their own, their future selves applaud ; How excellent that life they ne’er will lead ! Time lodg’d in their own hands is Folly’s yails ; That lodg’d in Fate’s, to Wisdom they consign ; The thing they can’t but purpose, they postpone: *Tis not in Folly, not to scorn a fool ; And scarce in human Wisdom to do more. - All Promise is poor dilatory man,
And that through every stage. When young, indeed,
In full content, we sometimes nobly rest, Un-anxious for ourselves ; and only wish,
As duteous sons, our fathers were more wise. At thirty, man suspects himself a fool ; Knows it at forty, and reforms his plan ;
At fifty, chides his infamous delay,
Pushes his prudent purpose to resolve
ta
a,
Awe Ae 4,
| DECLAMATION. 89 In all the magnanimity of thought, | : Resolves, and re-resolves : then dies the same, And why? Because he thinks himself immortal. All men think all men mortal but themselves: | Themselves, when some alarming shock of fate Strikes through their wounded hearts the sudden dread ; But their hearts wounded, like the wounded air, Soon close ; where, past the shaft, no trace is found. As from the wing no scar the sky retains, The parted wave no furrow from the keel, So dies in human hearts the thought of death. Ev’n with the tender tear which nature sheds O’er those we love, we drop it in their grave,
XIX. Glocester’s Speech to the Nobles.
Brave Peers of England, pillars of the State, To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief, Your grief, the common grief of all the land. What! did my brother Henry spend his youth, His valour, coin, and people, in the wars ; Did he so often lodge in open field,
[n winter’s cold, and summer’s parching heat, [o conquer France, his true inheritance ;
And did my brother Bedford toil his wits
lo keep by policy what Henry got?
Tave you yourselves, Somerset, Buckingham, Brave York, and Salisbury, victorious Warwick, teceiv’d deep scars in France and Normandy? yr hath my uncle Beaufort, and myself,
Vith all the learned council of the realm, tudied so long, sat in the council-house, _
-
90 DECLAMATION,
Early and late, debating to and fro, ~
How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe ? And was his Highness in his infancy
Crowned in Paris, in despite of foes?
And shall these labours and these honours die ? Shall Henry’s conquest, Bedford’s vigilance, Your deeds of war, and all our council, die? O, Peers of England! shameful is this league, Fatal this marriage ; cancelling your fame, Blotting your names from books of memory, Razing the characters of your renown, Defacing monuments of conquer’d France, Undoing all, as all had never been.
XX. Morning Hymn of Adam and Eve.
Turse are thy glorious works, Parent of good! Almighty ! thine this universal frame,
Thus wondrous fair! thyself how wondrous then! Unspeakable! who sitt’st above these heav’ns,
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works ; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and pow’r divine. Speak ye who best can tell, ye sons of light, Angels; for ye behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, day without night,
' Circle his throne rejoicing ; ye in heav’n,
On earth, join all ye creatures, to extol,
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end. Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crown’st the smiling morn
a — oe |
DECLAMATION.
_ With thy bright circlet, praise him in thy sphere, While day arises, that sweet hour of prime.. Thou sun, of this great world both eye and soul, Acknowledge him thy greater ; sound his praise Tn thy eternal course, both when thou climb’st, And when high noon hast gain’d, and when thou fall’st. Moon, that now meet’st the orient sun, now fly’st With the fix’d stars, fix’d in their orb that flies; And ye five other wand’ring fires that move “In mystic dance, not without song, resound His praise, who out of darkness call’d up light. Air, and ye elements, the eldest birth _ Of nature’s womb, that in quaternion run Perpetual circle, multiform, and mix And nourish all things ; let your ceaseless change Vary to our great Maker still new praise. Ye mists and exhalations that now rise From hill or steaming lake, dusky or grey, Till the sun paint your fleecy skirts with gold, In honour to the world’s great Author rise : Whether to deck with clouds th’ uncolour’d sky, Or wet the thirsty earth with falling showers, Rising or falling, still advance his praise. His praise, ye winds, that from four quarters blow, Breathe soft or loud ; and wave your tops, ye pines, With every plant, in sign of worship, wave. Fountains, and ye that warble, as ye flow, Melodious murmurs, warbling, tune his praise. Join voices, all ye living souls; ye birds, That singing up to heaven-gate ascend, Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise. Ye that in waters glide, and ye that walk The earth, and stately tread, or lowly creeps Witness if I be silent, morn or even,
91
92. DECLAMATION.
To hill or valley, fountain, or fresh shade, Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise. Hail, universal Lord! be bounteous still
To give us only good ; and if the night
Have gather’d aught of evil, or conceal’d, Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.
*
XXI. The Speech of Belial dissuading from War.
I sHoutp be much for open war, O peers, As not behind in hate, if what was urg’d Main reason to persuade immediate war Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast Ominous cobjecture on the whole success ; When he who most excels in fact of arms, In what he counsels, and in what excels,
- Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair,
And utter dissolution, as the scope Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what revenge? The tow’rs of Heav’n are filP’é
With armed watch, that render all access Impregnable: oft on the bord’ring deep Encamp their legions: or, with obscure wing, Scout far and wide into the realm of night, Scorning surprise : or could we break our way By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise With blackest insurrection, to confound Heav’n’s purest light ; yet our great enemy, All incorruptiblé, would on his throne
Sit unpolluted; and th’ ethereal mold, Incapable of stain, would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire, Victorious, Thus repuls’d, our final hope
DECLAMATION. Is flat despair ; we must exasperate Th’ almighty victor to spend all his rage, And that must end us; that must be our cure, To be no more. Sad cure! for who would lose, Though full of pain, this intellectual being, —- Those thoughts that wander through eternity, To perish rather, swallow’d up and lost In the wide womb of uncreated night, . - Devoid of sense and motion? And who knows (Let this be good) whether our angry foe _ Can give it, or will ever? how he can, Ts doubtful; that he never will, is sure. Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire, Belike through impotence, or unaware, To give his enemies their wish, and end Them in his anger, whom his anger saves .To punish endless? Wherefore cease we then ? Say they who counsel war; we are decreed, _ Reserv’d, and destin’d to eternal woe ; Whatever doing, what can we suffer more, What can we suffer worse? Is this then worst, Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in arms? _ What, when we fled amain, pursu’d and struck With Heav’n’s afflicting thunder, and besought The deep to shelter us? this Hell then seem’d A refuge from those wounds! or when we lay Chain’d on the burning lake? that sure was worse. What if the breath that kindled those grim fires, Awak’d, should blow them into sev’nfold rage, And plunge us in the flames? or, from above, Should intermitted vengeance arm again His red right hand to plague us? What if all Her stores were open’d, and this firmament ‘Of Hell should spout her cataracts of fire,
94 DECLAMATION.
Impending horrors, threat’ning hideous fall One day upon our heads; while we, perhaps, Designing or exhorting glorious war, ~ Caught in a fiery tempest, shall be hurl’d ~ Each on his-rock transfix’d, the sport and prey — Of racking whirlwinds; or for ever sunk Under yon boiling ocean, wrapt in chains ; There to converse with everlasting groans, Unrespited, unpitied, unrepriev’d,
Ages of hopeless end? this would be worse. War, therefore, open or conceal’d, alike © My voice dissuades.
XXII. The Youth and the Philosopher.
A Grecian Youth, of talents rare, Whom Plato’s philosophic care - Had form’d for virtue’s nobler view, By precept and example too, Would often boast his matchless skill To curb the steed, and guide the wheel ; And as he pass’d the gazing throng, With graceful ease, and smack’d the thong, The idiot wonder they express’d Was praise and transport to his breast. At length quite vain, he needs would show His master what his art could do; And bade his slaves the chariot lead To Academus’ sacred shade. The trembling grove confess’d its fright ; The wood-nymphs started at the sight ; The Muses dropp’d the learned lyre, And to their inmost shades retire.
Pee a ee ee
Og rm
“
DECLAMATION, 95 Howe’er, the youth, with forward air, Bows to the sage and mounts the car ; The lash resounds, the coursers spring, The chariot marks the rolling ring ; And gath’ring crowds, with eager eyes And shouts, pursue him as he flies. Triumphant to the goal return’d, With nobler thirst his bosom burn’d ;__ And now along th’ itidented plain, The self-same track he marks again, Pursues with care the nice design, Nor ever deviates from the line. Amazement seiz’d the circling crowd ; The youths with emulation glow’d: Evn bearded sages hail’d the boy, And all but Plato gaz’d with joy. For he, deep-judging sage, beheld With pain the triumphs of the field: And when the charioteer drew nigh, And, flush’d with hope, had caught his eye, Alas! unhappy youth, he cry’d, Expect no praise from me, (and sigh’d.) With indignation I survey Such skill and judgment thrown away ; The time profusely squander’d there, On vulgar arts beneath thy care, If well employ’d, at less expense, Had taught thee honour, virtue, sense, And rais’d thee from a coachman’s fate, To govern men and guide the state.
96 DECLAMATION.
XXIII. Prologue to Cato. To’ wake the soul by tender strokes of art,
To raise the genius and to mend the heart,
To make mankind, in conscious virtue bold,
Live o’er each scene, and be—what they behold, For this the tragic muse first trod the stage, Commanding tears to stream through every age : Tyrants no more their savage nature kept, — And (foes to virtue) wonder’d how they wept. ° Our author shuns by vulgar springs to move ; The hero’s glory, or the virgin’s love :
In pitying love, we but our weakness show; _ And wild ambition well deserves its woe. “Here tears shall flow from a more gen’rous cause, Such tears as patriots shed for dying laws:
He bids your breasts with ancient ardour rise, And calls forth Roman drops from British eyes. Virtue confess’d in human shape he draws, What Plato thought, and god-like Cato was :
No common object to your sight displays,
But what with pleasure Heav’n itself surveys,
A brave man struggling in the storms of ‘fate, And greatly falling with a falling state!
While Cato gives his little senate laws,
What bosom beats not in-his country’s cause? Who sees him act, but envies ev’ry deed ?
Who hears him groan, and does not wish to bleed ? Ev’n when proud Cesar, ’midst triumphal cars, The spoils of nations, and the pomp of wars, Ignobly vain, and impotently great,
Show’d Rome her Cato’s figure drawn in state ;
ee —- i
ee ea ee NY
fs all
DECLAMATION. 97 As her dead father’s rev’rend image past, The pomp was darken’d, and the day-o’ercast, The triumph ceas’d—tears.gush’d from ev’ry:eye, The world’s great victor past unheeded by ; Her last good man dejected Rome. ador’d, And honour’d Cesar’s less than Cato’s sword. Britons, attend: Be worth like this:approv’d, And show you have the virtue to be:mov'd.
XXIV. Cato’s Senate.
Cato. Farwenrs,: we-once again. are.met in- council. Cesar’s approach has summon’d us together, ‘And Rome attends her fate from our resolves, How shall we treat:this bold aspiring man ? Success still follows:him, and backs. his crimes : Pharsalia gave him Rome: Egypt has since Receiv’d his yoke, and the whole Nile is Cesar’s, Why should I mention Juba’s overthrow, And Scipio’s death? Numidia’s. burning sands Still smoke with blood. ’Tis time we should decree What course to take. Our foe advances on us, And envies us even Libya’s sultry: deserts. Fathers, pronounce your thoughts : are they still fix’d To hold it out:and fight it to'the last ? Or are your hearts subdu’d. at length, and.wrought By time and ill success to a submission ? Sempronius, speak.
Sempronius. © My voice is still for war. Gods! can a Roman senate long debate Which of the two to choose, slav’ry or death? No; let us rise at once, gird on our swords, And at the head of our remaining troops,
F
SCT TTI z as gt aR nm
nat
: 98 DECLAMATION. 2
Attack the foe, break through the thick array Of his throng’d legions, and charge home upon him. Perhaps some arm, more lucky than the rest,
May reach his heart, and free the world from bondage.
Rise, fathers, rise ; *tis Rome demands your help ; a: Rise, and revenge her slaughter’d citizens, oe Or share their fate ; the corpse of half her senate Manure the fields of Thessaly, while we
Sit here delib’rating in cold debates >
If we should sacrifice our lives to honour,
Or wear them out in servitude and chains.
Rouse up, for shame! Our brothers of Pharsalia ‘Point at their wounds, and cry aloud—To battle! Great Pompey’s shade complains that we are slow,
And Scipio’s ghost walks unreveng’d amongst us!
Cato. Let not a torrent of impetuous zeal Feckpot thee thus beyond the bounds of reason = True fortitude is seen in great exploits That justice warrants, and that wisdom guides : : All else is tow’ring- phrensy and distraction.
Are not the lives of those who draw the sword
In Rome’s defence entrusted to our care ?
Should we thus lead them to a field of slaughter, Might not th’ impartial world with reason say, We lavish’d at our deaths the blood of thousands, To grace our fall, and make our ruin glorious ? Lucius, we next would know what’s your opinion.
Ape Le ei.
;
Lucius. My thoughts, I must confess, are turn’d on peace.
Already have our quarrels fill’d the world
With widows, and with orphans; Scythia mourns Our guilty wars, and.earth’s remotest regions
Lie half-unpeopled by the feuds of Rome :
Tis time to sheathe the sword, and spare mankind.
Tt is not Cesar, but the gods, my fathers,
5
‘Arms have no further use: our Say 8 cause, That drew our swords, now wrests em from our hands, _
DECLAMATION. =o
The gods declare against us, and repel.
Our vain attempts. To urge the foe to battle, (Prompted by blind revenge, and wild despair,) Were to refuse th’ awards of Providence,
And not to rest in Heav’n’s determination.
Already have we shown our love to Rome ;
Now let us show submission to the gods. We took up arms, not to revenge ourselves, But free the commonwealth ; ~when this end fails,
And bids us not delight in Roman blood, UDnprofitably shed ; what men could do_ Is done already : heav'a and earth will witness, If Rome must fall, that we are innocent. ; Semp. This smooth discourse, and mild behaviour, oft Conceal a traitor —-Something whispers me All is not right——Cato, beware of Lucius. Cato, Let us appear nor rash nor diffident ; Immod’rate valour swells into a fault : And fear, admitted into public councils, Betrays like treason. Let us shun ’em both. Fathers, I cannot see that our affairs Are grown thus desp’rate: we have bulwarks round us:
Within our walls are troops inur’d to toil
In Afric’s heats, and season’d:to the sun ; Numidia’s spacious kingdom lies behind us, Ready to rise at its young Prince’s call. While there is hope, do not distrust the gods ; But wait at least till Casar’s near approach Force us to yield. ”Twill never be too late To sue for chains, and own a conqueror. Why should Rome fall a moment ere her time? No, let us draw her term of freedom out
F 2
ex os
100 DECLAMATION.
In its full length, and spin it to the last.
So shall we gain still one day’s liberty ;
And let me perish, but in Cato’s judgment, A day, an hour, of virtuous liberty,
is worth a whole eternity in bondage.
Enter Marcus.
Marc. Fathers, this moment, as I watch’d the gate, Lodg’d on my post, a herald is arriv’d From Cesar’s camp, and with him comes old Decius, The Roman knight: he carries in his looks Impatience, and demands to speak with Cato.
Cato: By your permission, fathers, bid him enter. ~ Decius was once my friend, but other prospects Have loos’d those ties, and bound him fast to Cesar. His message may determine our resolves.
“Enter Decius.
Dec. Cesar sends health to Cato————
Cato. Cou’d he send it To Cato’s slaughter’d friends, it would be welcome. Are not your orders to address the Senate?
Dec. My business is with Cato; Czsar'sées The straits to which you’re driven ; and, ‘as he knows Cato’s high worth, “is anxious for your life.
Cato. My life is grafted on the fate of Rome. Wou'd he save Cato, bid him spare his country.
Tell your dictator this : and tell him, Cato Disdains a life which he has power to offer.
Dec. Rome and her senators submit to Cesar 3 Her gen’rals and her consuls are no more,
Who check’d his conquests, and denied his triumphs. Why will not Cato be’ this Casar’s friend ?
eS ee
DECLAMATION. 101 Cato. Those very reasons thou hast urg’d forbid it. Dec. Cato, Pve orders to expostulate, © if And reason with you, as from friend to friend. Think on the storm that gathers o’er your head, And threatens ev’ry hour to burst upon it ; Still may you stand high in your country’s honours, — Do but comply, and make your peace with Cesar. — Rome will rejoice, and cast its eyes on Cato, As on the second,of mankind. Cato. No more: I must not think of life on such conditions. Dec. Cesar is well acquainted: with your. virtues, And therefore sets this value on your life : Let him but know the price of Cato’s friendship, And name your terms, Cato. Bid him disband his legions, Restore the commonwealth to liberty, Submit his actions to the public censure, And stand the judgment of a Roman senate. Bid him do this, and Cato is his friend. Dec. Cato, the world talks loudly of your wisdom— Cato. Nay more, though Cato’s voice was ne’er employ’d To clear the guilty, and to varnish crimes, Myself will mount the rostrum in his favour, And strive to gain his pardon from the people. Dec. A style like this becomes a conqueror. Cato. Decius, a style like this becomes a Roman. Dec. What is a Roman, that is Cesar’s foe ? Cato. Greater than Cesar: he’s a friend to virtue. Dec. Consider, Cato, you’re in Utica, And at the head of your own little senate 5. You don’t now thunder in the Capitol, With all the mouths of Rome to second. you, Cato. Let him consider that, who drives us hither.
102 | .  DECLAMATION
Tis Cesar’s sword has made Rome’s senate little; And ihinn’d its ranks. Alas! thy dazzled eye Beholds this man in a false glaring light,
Which conquest and success have thrown upon him :
Didst thou but view him right, thou’d’st see him mick
With murder, treason, sacrilege, and crimes, That strike my soul with horror but to name ’em._ I know thou look’st on me as on a wretch - Beset with ills, and cover’d with misfortunes ; But, as I love my country, millions of worlds - Shou’d never buy me to be like that Cesar! ~ Dec. Does Cato send this answer back to Cesar, For all his gen’rous cares, and proffer’d friendship ? Cato. His cares for me are insolent and vain : - Presumptuous man! the gods take care of Cato. Would Cesar show the greatness of his soul,
Bid him employ his care for these my friends,
And make good use of his ill-gotten power, By shelt’ring men much better than himself. © Dee. Your high unconquer’d heart makes you forget You area man. You rush on your destruction : But I have done. When I relate hereafter. The tale of this unhappy embassy, All Rome will be.in tears.
XXYV. Orestes delivering his Embassy to Pyfrhus.
Berrore I speak the message of the Greeks, Permit me, Sir, to glory in the title
Of their Embassador ; since I behold Troy’s vanquisher, and great Achilles’ son. Nor does the son rise short of such a father :
‘4 . 3 MOA ee ae ee
"DECLAMATION:
if Hector fell by him, Troy fell by you. peti But what your father never would have aPRE Sti You do. You cherish the remains of Troy ;
And, by an ill-timed pity, keep alive —
The dying embers of a ten-years’ war.
Have you so soon forgot the mighty Hector? gi
The Greeks remember his high-brandish’d sword, That fill'd their states with widows and with orphans ; For which they call for vengeance on hisson. 6 Who knows what he may one day prove? Who knows But he may brave us in our ports; and, fill’d
With Hector’s fury, set our fleets on blaze? —
You may yourself live to repent your mercy.
Comply, then, with the Grecians’ just demands: Satiate their vengeance, and preserve yourself.
Pyr. The Greeks are for my safety more concern’d-
Than I desire. I thought your kings were met —
On more important counsel. When I heard ~
The name of their embassador, I hop’d “Some glorious enterprise was taking birth.
Is Agamemnon’s son dispatch’d for this? ©
And do the Grecian chiefs, renown’d in war,
A race of heroes, join in close debate
To plot an infant’s death ?—What right has Greece To ask his life? Must I, must I alone,
Of all her sceptred warriors, be deny’d
To treat my captive as I please? Know, prince, — When Troy lay smoking on the ground, and each Proud victor shar’d the harvest of the war, Andromache, and this her son, weré mine 3
Were mine by lot; and who shall wrest them from me? Ulysses bore away old Priam’s queen ;
Cassandra was your own great father’s prize :
Did I concern myself in what they won?
103
104 DECLAMATION.
Did I send embassies to claim their captives ?
Orest. But, Sir, we fear for you and for ourselves: Troy may again revive, and anew Hector Rise in Astyanax. Then think betimes——
Pyr. Let dastard souls be timorously wise; But tell them, Pyrrhus knows not how to form Far fancy’d ills, and dangers out of sight:
Orest. Sir, call to mind the unrivall’d strength of Troy Her walls, her bulwarks, and her gates of brass, Her kings, her heroes; and-embattled armies !
Pyr. I call them all to mind; and see them: all Confus’d in dust ; all mix’d in one wide ruin; — All but a child, and he in bondage held. What vengeance can we fear from:such a Troy ? If they have sworn to extinguish Hector’s:race,. Why was their vow for twelve long months: deferr’a’? ; Why was he not in» Priam’s bosom slain; He should have fail’n among: the slaughter’d heaps: . Whelm’d under Troy: His'death had then: been just, When age and infancy alike in’ vain Pleaded their weakness ; when the heat of conquest. And horrors of the fight, rous’d all our rage, And blindly hurry’d us through scenes: of death. My fury then was without bounds: but now; My wrath appeas’d, must I be cruel still. And, deaf to all the tender calis of pity, Like a cool murderer, bathe my hands in blood— An infant’s blood ?—No, Prince—Go, bid the Greeks Mark out some other victim; my revenge: Has had its fill. What has eseap’d from Troy Shall not be sav’d to perish in Epirus.
Orest. I need not tell you, Sir, Astyanax Was doom’d to death in Troy ; ner mention how The crafty mother sav’d'her darling son :
gulsadtin Gann
Py
wo
— ee
ee
DECLAMA’ TION. . sles The — do now but urge their former sentence : Nor is’t the boy, but Hector they pursue 3 The father draws their vengeance on the son: -
The father, who so oft in Grecian blood
‘Has drench’d his sword: the father, whom the Grace
‘May seek even here.——Prevent them, Sir, in time. Pyr. No! let them come; since I was born to wage
Eternal wars. Let them‘now turn their arms
On him who conquer’d for them: let them come,
And in Epirus seek another Troy. Twas thus they recompens’d my godlike sire; __ Thus was Achilles thank’d, But, Prince, remember, - Their black ingratitude then cost them dear. Orest. Shall Greece then find a rebel son in Pyrrhus ? Pyr. Have I then conquer’d to depend on Greece ? Orest. Hermione will sway your soul to peace,
And mediate ’twixt her father and yourself :
Her beauty will enforce my embassy.
_ Pyr. Hermione may have her charms, and I oF love her still, tho’ not her father’s slang.
But never must forget that * am a king.
Meanwhile, Sir, you may see fair Helen’s daughter :
I know how near in blood you stand ally’d.
That done, you have my answer, prince. The Greeks, . No doubt, expect your quick return.
XXVI. King Henry and Lord Chief Justice.
Ch. Just. Iam assur’d, if 1 be measur’d rightly, Your Majesty hath no just cause to haté me. K. Henry. No! might a Prince of my great hopes forget So great indignities you laid upon me? F3
106 DECLAMATION.
What! rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison Th’ immediate heir of England! was this easy ? May this be wash’d in Lethe and forgotten?
Ch. Just. I then did use the person of your father ; The image of his power lay then in me: + ae And in th’ administration of his law, » : Pe: ’ While I was busy for the commonwealth, 2 ee Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the King whom I presented,
And aha’ me in the very seat of judgment : 8 Whereon, as an offender to your father, = = = I gave bold way to my authority,
And did commit you. « If the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the garland, -
To have a son set your decrees at nought ;
To pluck down justice from your awful bench ;
To trip the course of law, and blunt the sword That guards the peace and safety of your person: - Nay, more, to spurn at your most royal image, And mock your working in a second body. Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours ; Be now the father, and propose a son ;
Hear your own dignity so much profan’d ;
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted ; Behold yourself so by a son disdained,
And then imagine me taking your part,
And in your power so silencing your son.
After this cold consid’rance, sentence me 3.
And, as you are a King, speak in your state, What I have done that misbecame my place,.
My person, or my Liege’s sovereignty.
K. Henry. You are right, Justice, and you weigh this well; Therefore still bear the balance and the sword :
=,
eh, ee eee ep
oo ee
hh site nlite tated nid
“_DECLAMATION. 107
An I do wish your honours may increase, — a, Till you do live to see a son of mine MEd g: Offend you and obey you, as I did: ° T live, to speak my father’s words:
ppy am I, that have’a man so bold That dares do justice on my proper son ; And no less happy having such a son ; > That would deliver up his greatness so j Into the hand of Justice. —-You comimitted me; © For which I do commit into your hand The unstain’d sword that you have us’d to bear ; With this rememb’rance, that you use the same With a like bold, just, and impartial spirit, As you have done ’gainst me. There is my hand, You shall be as a father to my youth+ My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear; - And I will stoop, and humble my intents, To your well-practis’d wise directions.
XXVII. The Speech of Nicholaus, the Old Syracusan, against putting the Athenian Generals to Death. —
. You here behold: an unfortunate father, who has felt more than any other Syracusan the fatal effects of this war, by the death of two sons, who formed all his ‘con- solation, and were the only support of his old age. I cannot, indeed, forbear admiring their courage and fe- licity, in sacrificing to their country’s welfare a life of which they would one day have been deprived by the com- mon course of nature; but then I cannot but be strongly affected with the cruel wound which their death has made in my heart, nor forbear hating and detesting the Athe- nians, the authors of this unhappy war, as the murderers
108 DECLAMATION. a ;
of my children. I cannot, however, conceal one cen ‘stance, which is, that I am less sensible of my private affliction than of the honour of my country; and I see i exposed to eternal infamy by the barbarous advice whic is now given you. The Athenians, indeed, merit the wor treatment, and every kind of punishment that can be in- flicted on them, for so unjustly declaring war against us 5 but have not the gods, the just avengers of crimes, pu- nished them, and revenged us, sufficiently? When ei generals laid down their arms and surrendered, did they not do this in hopes of having their lives spared? And if. we put them to death, will it be possible for us to avoid the just reproach of our having violated the laws of nation and dishonoured our victory by an unheard-of cruelty? How! will you suffer your glory to be thus sullied in the face of the whole world, and have it said, that a nation, who first dedicated a temple in their city to Clemency, had not found any in yours? Surely victories and triumphs de not give immortal glory to a city; but the exercising of mercy towards a vanquished enemy, the using of modera- tion in the greatest prosperity, and fearing to offend the gods by haughty and insolent pride. You' doubtless have not forgot that this Nicias, whose fate you are going to pro- nounce, was the very man who pleaded your cause in the assembly of the Athenians, and employed all his credit, and the whole power of his eloquence, to dissuade his country from embarking in this war; should you therefore pronounce sentence of death on this worthy general, would it be a just reward for the zeal he showed for your interest ? With regard to myself, death would be less grievous to me than the sight of so horrid an injustice committed. by my — and fellow-citizens.
anne 109 oe | a t
-XXVIIL Demosthenes to the Athenians, sath Phitip
lan we been convened, Athenians, on some new subject ef debate, I had waited until most of the usual persons had declared their opinions. If I had approved of any thing proposed. by them, I should. have continued silent: if not, I had then attempted to speak. my sentiments, But since those very points, on. which these speakers have oftentimes been heard already, are at this time to-be considered; though I have risen first, I presume I may expect your ‘pardon; for if they on former occasions had advised the ‘necessary measures, you would not have found it needful to consult at present.
First then, Athenians! these our affairs must not be thought desperate ; no, though their situation seems en- tirely deplorable, For the most shocking circumstance of all our past conduct is really the most favourable to our fue ture expectations. And what is this? That our own total indolence hath been the cause of all our present difficulties, For were we thus distressed, in spite of every vigorous ef- fort which the honour of our state demanded, there were then no hope of a recovery.
In the next place, reflect (you who have been informed by others, and you who can yourselves remember) how great a power the Lacedemonians not long since possessed ; and with what resolution, with what dignity, you disdained to act unworthy of the state, but maintained the war against them for the rights of Greece. Why do I mention these things? That you may know, that you may see, Athenians, that, if duly vigilant, you can have nothing to fear; that, if once remiss, nothing can happen agreeable to your de- sizes: witness ihe then powerful arms of Lacedzmon, which a just attention to your interests enabled you to
Ob Atala
110 DECLAMATION.
vanquish ; and this man’s late insolent attempt, which a insensibility to all our great concerns scone made the cause this confusion.
If there is a man in this assembly who thinks chat must find a formidable enemy in Philip, while he views on one hand the numerous armies which surround him, an on the other the weakness of the State thus despoiled of its dominions, he thinks justly. Yet let him reflect on this: there was a time, Athenians! when we possessed Pydna, and Potidea, and Methone, and all that country a when many of the States now subjected to him were free and independent, and more inclined to our alliance than to” his. Had then Philip reasoned in the same manner, “ How) « shall I dare to attack the Athenians, whose. garrisons” “ command my territory, while I am destitute of all assist=— « ance!” he would not have engaged in those enterprises which are now crowned with success; nor could he have” raised himself to this pitch of greatness. No, Athenians he knew this well, that all these places are but prizes, laid” between the combatants, and ready for the conqueror: that. the dominions of the absent devolve naturally to those who. are in the field ;. the possessions of the supine to the active — and intrepid. Animated by those sentiments, he overturns whole nations; he holds all people in subjection: some, by the right of conquest ; others, under the title of allies and confederates: for all aré willing to confederate with those whom they see prepared and resolved to exert themselves. as they ought. 3
And if you, my countrymen! will now at length be per-— suaded to entertain the like sentiments: if each ‘of you, re- nouncing all evasions, will be ready to approve himself a useful citizen, to the utmost that his station and abilities demand: if the rich will be ready to contribute, and the young to take the field: in one word, if you will be your=
steibetabteeei. a lll
res, and banish those vain hopes which every single per- son entertains, that while so many others are engaged in public business, his service will not be required; you then (if, Heaven so pleases) will regain your dominions, recall those opportunities your supineness hath neglected, and_ chastise the insolence of this man. For you are not to ima- gine, that, like a God, he is to enjoy his present greatness for ever, fixed and unchangeable. - No, Athenians! there are, who hate him, who fear him, who envy him, even among these seemingly the most attached to his cause. [hese are passions ‘common to mankind: nor must we think that his friends only are exempted from them. It is true they lie concealed, at present, as our indolence de- prives them of all resource. But let us shake off this indo- lence! for you see how we are situated; you see the out rageous arrogance of this man, who does not leave it to your choice whether you shall act, or remain quiet; but braves you with his menaces; and talks (as we are in- formed) in a strain of the highest extravagance: and is not able to rest satisfied with his present acquisitions, but is ever in pursuit of farther conquests; and, while we sit jown, inactive and irresolute, incloses us on all sides with his toils.
‘When, therefore, O my countrymen! when will you exert your vigour? When roused by some event? When forced by some necessity? What then are we to think of our present condition? To freemen, the disgrace attending on misconduct, is, im my opinion, the most urgent necessity. Dr say, is it your sole ambition to wander through the public places, one enquiring of another, “ What news?’ Can any thing be more new, than that a man of Macedon jhould conquer the Athenians, and give law to Greece ?— ‘Is ‘Philip dead?—No, but in great danger.”—-How are you concerned in those rumours? Suppose he should meet
112 DECLAMATION. : =
some fatal stroke: you would soon raise up. another. Phi if your interests are thus disregarded. For it is not to own strength that he so much owes his elevation, as to supineness. And should some accident affect him, sho Fortune, who hath ever been more careful of the State than we ourselves, now repeat her favours; (and may she thus crown them !) be assured of this, that, by being on the spot, ready to take advantage of the confusion, you will eve: where be absolute masters: but in your present disposition, even if a favourable juncture should present you with Am phipolis, you could not take possession of it, while = suspense prevails in your designs and in your councils.
- Some wander about, crying, Philip hath joined with Lacedemonians, and they are concerting the destructi of Thebes, and the dissolution of some free States! Others assure us, he hath sent an embassy to the King ; others tha he is fortifying places in Illyria. Thus we all go about framing our several tales. I do. believe, indeed, Atl nians! he is intoxicated with his greatness, and does ente. tain his imagination with many such yisionary prospect as he sees no Power rising to oppose him, and is slat with his success. But I cannot be persuaded that he hath so taken his measures, that the weakest among us know what he is next to do; (for it is the weakest among us who spread these rumours.) —Let. us disregard them: let. us be persuaded of this; that he is our enemy, that he hath spoiled us of our dominions, that we have long been sub- ject to his insolence, that whatever we expected to be done for us by others hath proved against us, and that all. the resource left is in ourselves; that if we are not inclined te carry our arms abroad, we may be forced to engage him here—let us be persuaded of this, and then we shall come to a proper determination, then we shall be freed from these idle tales. For we are not to be solicitous to know what
fa ‘VEHEMENT PASSION. 113 particular events: will happen; we need but be convinced nothing good'can’ happen, unless you grant the due atten- tion to affairs, and be : pee to act as — sanimseseinin . eae MXIX. The Oration of Hischines against Demotheés on ‘the Crown.
‘ ssilinailide ir ithatiais oketiimaiaial in such disorders, as you yourselves. are: sensible: of, the only method. of saving the wrecks of government is, if I. mistake not, to allow. full liberty to accuse those who have invaded your laws. But if you shut them up, or suffer others to do this, I,prophesy that you will: fall: insensibly, and that. very soon, under a tyrannical power. For you know, Athenians, that govern: ment is divided into three kinds.; monarchy, oligarchy, and democracy. As to the two,former, they are governed at the will and. pleasure of those who. reign. in-either; whereas established laws only reign in a popular state, I> make these. observations, therefore, that none of you may be ig- norant, but on the-contrary, that every one may be entirely assured, that the day he ascends the seat. of justice, to ex- amine an accusation. upon the invasion of the laws, that very day he goes to give judgment. upon. his own indepen- dence. And. indeed; the legislator who.is convinced that. a free state can) support itself no, longer than the laws govern, takes particular care to prescribe this form of an oath to judges, “I will judge according to the laws.” The re- membrance, therefore, of this being deeply. implanted in your minds, must inspire you with a just abhorrence of any persons whatsoever who dare transgress them by rash, de- erees; and: that far from ever looking upon a transgression of this kind as a small fault, you always consider, if; as an enormous and capital crime. Do not suffer, then, any one to make you depart from: so wise a. principle,—But as, in
‘
114 VEHEMENT PASSION.
the army, every one of you would be ashamed to quit the post assigned him by the general ; so let every one of you be this day ashamed to abandon the post which the laws’ have given you in the commonwealth. What Peet ?—that of protectors of the government.
- Must we, in your persons, crown the author of the public calamities, or must we destroy him? And, indeed, what unexpected revolutions, what unthought of catastrophes, have we not seen in our days?—The king of Persia, that king who opened a passage through Mount Athos;. who bound the Hellespont in chains; who was so imperious as to command the Greeks to acknowledge him sovereign both © of sea and land; who in his letters and dispatches presumed to style himself the sovereign of the world from the rising
to the setting of the sun; and who fights now, not to rule
over the rest of mankind, but to save his own life. Do not
we see those very men who signalised their zeal in the re-
lief of Delphos, invested both with the glory, for which | that powerful king was once so conspicuous, and with the
title of the chief of the Greeks against him? As tq Thebes,
which borders upon Attica, have we not seen it disappear in
one day from the midst of Greece ?—And with regard to
the unhappy Lacedemonians, what calamities have not be- fallen them, only for taking but a small part of the spoils of
the temple! They who formerly assumed a superiority over
Greece, are they not now going to send embassadors to
Alexander’s court; to bear the name of hostages in his
train ; to: become a spectacle of misery; to bow the knee
before the monarch ; submit themselves and their country
to his mercy ; and receive such laws as a conqueror, a con-_ queror they attacked first, shall think fit to prescribe them ?
Athens itself, the common refuge of the Greeks; Athens
formerly peopled with embassadors, who flocked to claim
its almighty protection ; is not this city now obliged to fight,
v
VEHE MENT iceatene 115
“mot to obtain a superiority over the Greeks, but to preserve ‘itself from destruction? Such are the misfortunes which Demosthenes has brought upon us, since his intermeddling
with the administration. ———
, Imagine then, Athenians, when he shall invite the con-
-fidants and accomplices of his abject perfidy to range them- selves around him, towards the close of his harangue ; imagine then, Athenians, on your side, that you see the ancient benefactors of this commonwealth, drawn up in battle array, round this rostrum, where I am now speaking, in order to repulse that audacious band. Imagine you hear Solon, who strengthened the popular government by such excellent laws; that philosopher, that incomparable legisla- | tor, conjuring you with a gentleness and modesty becom- ing his character, not to set a higher value upon Demos- thenes’s oratorical flourishes than upon your oaths and your laws. Imagine you hear Aristides, who made so exact and just a division of the contributions imposed upon the Greeks for the common cause; that sage dispenser, who left no other inheritance to his daughters, but the public gratitude, which was their portion; imagine, I say, you hear him bitterly bewailing the outrageous. manner in which we trample upon justice, and speaking to you in these words: What! because Arthmius of Zelia, that Asiatic, who passed through Athens, where he even enjoyed the rights of hos- pitality, had brought gold from the Medes into Greece ; your ancestors were going to send him to the place of exe- cution, and banished him, not only from their city, but from all the countries dependant on them; and will not you blush to decree Demosthenes, who has not indeed brought gold from the Medes, but has received such, sums of money from all parts to betray you, and now enjoys the fruit of his treasures; will not you, I say, blush to decree aerown of gold to Demosthenes? Do you think that The-
116 VEHEMENT PASSION.
mistocles, and the heroes who were. killed in the battles of Marathon and Plateza—do you think the very tombs of "your ancestors will not send forth groans, if you crown @ man who, by his own confession, has been for ever con= spiring with barbarians to ruin Greece? Soe a As to myself, Oearth! O sun! O virtue! And you, who are the springs of true discernment, lights both na- tural and acquired, by which we distinguish good from evil, I call you to witness, that I have used all my endeae vours. to, relieve the state, and to plead her cause. I could have wished my speech had been equal to the greatness, and. importance of the subject; at least, I can flatter myself with having discharged my duty according to my abilities, if I have not done it according to my wishes. Do you, Athenians, from the reasons you have heard, and those. which, your wisdom will suggest ; do you pronounce such, ‘a judgment as is conformable to strict justice, and the com= mon good demands from you.
XXX. The Oration of Demosthenes on the Crown.
An the first place, ye men of Athens, I make my prayer to all the powers of Heaven, that such affection as I have ever invariably discovered to this state, and all its citizens, you, now, may entertain for me, upon this present trial. And, (what concerns you nearly, what essentially concerns your religion and your honour)—that the gods may so dispose. your minds, as to permit me to proceed in my defence, not as directed by my adversary, (that would be severe indeed !) but by the laws, and by your oath; in which, to all the other equitable clauses, we find this expressly added— «Each party shall have equal audience.’—This imports not merely that you shall not prejudge, not merely that the same impartiality shall be shown to both ; but still further,
VEHEMENT PASSION. _ wr
} that the contending parties shall each be left at full liberty to arrange, and to conduct his pleading, as his choice or - judgment may determine.
In many instances hath Aschines the entire advantages ‘in
| this cause. Two there are of more especial moment. First,
as to our interests in the contest, we are on terms utterly unequal ; for they are by no means points of equal import, for me to be deprived of your affections, and for him to be defeated in his’ prosecution. As to me—but, when J am entering on my defence, let me suppress every thing in- vidious, sensible as I must be of this the. -advantage of my adversary. —lIn the next place, such is the natural disposi- tion of mankind, that invective and accusation are heard with pleasure ; while they who speak their own praises are received with impatience. His, then, is the part which commands a favourable acceptance ; that which must prove- offensive to every single hearer is reserved for me. If, to guard against this disadvantage, I should decline all men- tion of my own actions, I know not by what means I could refute the charge, or establish my pretensions to this ho- nour. If, on the other hand, I enter into a detail of my whole conduct, private and political, I must be obliged to speak perpetually of myself. Here then I shall endeavour to preserve all possible moderation: and what the circum- stances of the case necessarily extort from me, must,ain. justice, be imputed to him who first moved a prosecution’so extraordinary.
But, since he hath insisted so much upon the event, I shall hazard a bold assertion. But I beseech you, Athenians! let jt not be deemed extravagant: let it be weighed with can- dour. I say then, that had weall known what fortune was to attend our efforts; had we all foreseen the-final issue ; had you foretold it, Hschines; had you bellowed out your terrible denunciations ; (you whose voice was never heard5)
118 VEHEMENT PASSION.
tide ‘yet even in such a case, must this city have pursued the : ‘very same conduct, if she had retained a thought of glory, of her ancestors, or of future times. For, thus, she could
- only have been deemed unfortunate in her attempts: and
misfortunes are the lot of all men, whenever it may please Heaven to inflict them. But if that state which once claim- ed the first rank in Greece, had resigned this rank in time of danger, she had incurred the censure of betraying the whole nation to the enemy. What part of Greece, what part of the barbarian world has not heard, that the The- bans in their periods of success,—that the Lacedemonians, whose power was older and more extensive,—that the king of Persia would have cheerfully and joyfully consented that this state should enjoy her own dominions, together with an accession of territory ample as her wishes, upon this condi- tion that she should receive law, and suffer another state to preside in Greece ? But to Athenians, this was a condition unbecoming their descent, intolerable to their spirit, repug- nant to their nature. Athens never was once known to live in a slavish, though a secure obedience to unjust and arbi- trary power.- No: our whole history is one series of no- ble contests for preeminence ; the whole period of out ‘existence hath been spent in braving dangers, for the sake o! glory and renown. And so highly do you esteem such con: duct, so consonant to the Athenian character, that those o your ancestors who were most distinguished in the pursuit o it, are ever the most favourite objects of your praise—anc with reason. For who can reflect without astonishment upo} the magnanimity of those men who resigned their lands gave up their city, and embarked in their ships, to avoid th odious state of subjection? who chose Themistocles, th adviser of this conduct, to command their forces 3; and, whe Lycidas proposed that they should yield to the terms pre scribed, stoned him to death. Nay, the public indignatio
VEHEMENT PASSION. 119
‘was not yet allayed. Your very wives inflicted the same ‘vengeance on his wife. For the Athenians. of that day looked out for no speaker, no general to procure them a -
‘state of prosperous slavery. They had the spirit to reject even life, unless they were allowed to enjoy that life in: free- dom. Should I then attempt to assert, that it was I who inspired you with sentiments worthy of your ancestors, I should meet the just resentment of every hearer., No; it is my point to show, that such sentiments are properly your own; that they were the sentiments of my country, long before my days. I claim but my share of merit, in-having acted on such principles, in every part of my administra- tion. He then who condemns every part of my administra- tion, he who directs you to treat me with severity, as one who hath involved the state in terrors and dangers, while he labours ‘to deprive me of present honour, robs you of the applause of all posterity. For if you now pronounce, that, as my public conduct hath not been right, Ctesiphon must stand condemned, it must be thought that you yourselves have acted wrong, not that: you owe your present state to the eaprice of fortune.—But it cannot be! No, my coun- trymen! it cannot be you have acted wrong, in encounter- ing danger bravely, for the liberty and the safety of all Greece. No! by those generous souls of ancient times, who were exposed at Marathon! By those who stood ar- rayed at Platea! By those who encountered the. Persian fleet at Salamis! who fought at Artemisium! By all those illustrious sons of Athens, whose remains lie deposited in the public monuments! all of whom received the same honour- able interment from their-country ; not those only who prevail- ed, not those only who were victorious, and with reason. What was the part of gallant men, they all performed ; their success wassuchasthe supreme Director of the world dispensed to each.
As to those public works so. much the object of your ridi-
120 VEHEMENT PASSION.
cule, they ‘undoubtedly demand a due share of honour and applause : but I rate them far’ beneath the great merits of my administration. It» is not with»stones nor bricks that have fortified the city. | It is not fromworks like these that I derive my reputation. Would: you. know my methods of - fortifying ; examine, and -you will find them, in the arms, the town, the territories, the harbours I have secured ; the navies, the troops, the armies I have raised. ‘These’ are the works by which I defended Attica, :as far as human foresight could defend it: These ‘are the fortifications “I _ drew round our whole ‘territory, and inot the circuit of our
harbour, or of our city only. ‘In these aets of policy, in these provisions for a war, I never yielded to Philip. No; it was our generals and our confederate forces who yielded to fortune. Would you know the proofs ‘of this; they are plain and evident. Consider: what was the part of afaith- ful citizen? of a prudent, an active, and an honest “mi- nister? ‘Was he not to‘secure Eubeea,-as our defence against all attacks by sea? Was he ‘not to make’ Beotia our bar- rier on the midland:side? the cities bordering on: Pelopon- mesus our bulwark on that quarter? Was he not to attend with due precaution to the importation of corn, that this trade might be protected, through all its progress, up'to our own harbour? Was he not to cover those districts whieh we commanded by seasonable -detachments,'.as the Pro- conesus, the Chersonesus, ‘and’ Tenedes? to exert ‘himselt in the assembly for this purpose ? while, ‘with equal zeal, he laboured ‘to gain others to our interest and alliance, as By- zantium, Abydos, and Euboea? Was he not:to cut off ‘the best and:most:important resources ‘of ‘our enemies, ‘and ‘tc supply those in'which our country was: defective ?—And al this you gained by my counsels. and my administration ;— such-counsels and such an administration, as must: appear, upon a:fair'and equitable view, the result of strict integrity;
VEHEMENT PASSION, 121
‘such as left no favourable juncture unimproved, through ignorance or treachery ; such as ever had their due effect, _as far as the judgment and abilities of one man could ‘prove effectual. But if some superior being, if the power of for- tune, if the misconduct of beeeyate) if the iniquity of you ‘traitors, or if all these together broke in upon us, and at length involved us in one general devastation, how is De- mosthenes to be blamed? Had there been a single man in — seach Grecian state to act the same part which I supported ‘in this city; nay, had but one such man been found in Thessaly, and one in Arcadia, actuated by my principles’; not a single Greek, either beyond or on this side Thermopy- le, could have experienced the misfortunes of this day. All then ‘had been free and independent, in perfect tran- quillity, security, and happiness; uncontrouled, in their several communities, by any foreign power, and filled with gratitude to you and to your state, the authors of these blessings so extensive and so precious—and all this by my tMeans. To convince you that I have spoken much. less than I could justify by facts; that, in this detail, I have studiously guarded against envy, take—read the list of our confederates, as they were procured by my decrees.
: ‘There are two distinguishing qualities (Athenians!) which the virtuous citizen should ever possess; (I speak in general terms, as the least invidious method of doing justice ~ to myself) a zeal for the honour and pre-eminence of the state, in his official conduct, on all occasions; and in all transactions, an affection for his country. This nature can bestow. Abilities and success depend upon another power. And in this affection you find me firm and invariable. Not the solemn demand of my person, not the vengeance of the Amphictyonic council, which they denounced against me, not the terror of their threatenings, not the flattery of their promises,;—no, nor the fury of those accursed wretches,
G
122 DECLAMATION.
whom they roused like wild beasts against me, could ever tear this affection from my breast. From first to last, I have uniformly pursued the just and virtuous course of conduct: asserter of the honours, of the prerogatives, of the glory of my country : studious to support them, zealous to advance them, my whole being is devoted to this glorious cause. I was never known to march through the city with a face of joy and exultation at the success of a foreign power; em= bracing, and announcing the joyful tidings to those who, I supposed, would transmit it to the proper place. I was never known to receive the successes of my own country with tremblings, with sighings, with eyes bending to the earth, like those impious men who are the defamers of the state, as if, by such conduct, they were not defamers of them= selves; who look abroad, and, when a foreign potentate hath established his power on the calamities of Greece, applaud the event ; and tell us we should take every means to perpetuate his power. +
Hear me, ye immortal Gods! and let not these their desires be ratified in Heaven! Infuse a better spirit into these men! Inspire even their minds with purer sentiments !— This is my first prayer. Or, if their natures are not to be reformed ; on them, on them only, discharge your vengeance! Pursue them both by land and sea! Pursue them even to destruction! But, to us display your goodness in a speedy deliverance from impending evils, and all the blessings of | protection and tranquillity !
XXXII. Hannibal to his Soldiers.
- J xnow not, soldiers, whether you or your prisoners be ; encompassed by fortune with the stricter bonds and neces- | sities. Two seas enclose you on the right and left:—not ai ship to flee to for escaping. Before you is the Po, a river: wroader and more rapid than the Rhéne; behind you are:
the Alps, over which, even when your numbers were un- diminished, you were hardly able to force a passage, Here then, soldiers, you must either conquer or die, the very first hour you meet the enemy. But the same fortune which has thus laid you under the necessity of fighting, has set before your eyes those rewards of victory, than which no men are ever wont to wish for greater from the immortal Gods. Should we by our valour recover only Sicily and Sardinia, which were ravished from our fathers, those would be no inconsiderable prizes. Yet what are these? The wealth of Rome, whatever-riches she has heaped together in the spoils of nations, all these, with the masters of them, will be yours. You ‘have been long enough employed in driving the cattle upon the vast mountains of Lusitania and Celti- beria; you have hitherto met with no reward worthy of the labours and dangers you have undergone. The time is now come to reap the full recompense of your toilsome marches over so many mountains and rivers, and through s@ many nations, all of them in arms. This is the place which fortune has appointed to be the limits of your labours; it is here that you will finish your glorious warfare, and receive an ample recompense of your completed service. For I‘ would not have you imagine, that victory will be as difficult as the name of a Roman war is great and sounding. It has often happened that a despised enemy has given a bloody battle, and the most renowned kings and nations have, by a small force, been overthrown. And if you but take away the glitter of the Roman name, what is there within that may stand in competition with you? For (to say nothing of your service in war for twenty years toge- ther with so much valour and success) from the very Pillars of Hercules, from the Ocean, from the utmost bounds of the earth, through so many warlike nations of Spain and Gaul, are you not come hither victorious? And with whom G2
124 DECLAMATION.
are you now to fight? With raw soldiers, an undies ape army, beaten, vanquished, besieged by the Gauls the very last summer, an army unknown to their eaics, a they ‘unacquainted with him.
Or shall I, who was born, I might alae say, ‘but cer= tainly brought up, in the tent of my father, that most excel-~ lent general, shall I, the conqueror of Spain and Gaul, and not only of the Alpine nations, but, which is greater yet, of the Alps themselves, shall I compare myself with this half-year captain? A captain before whom should one place the two armies without their ensigns, I am persuaded he would not know to which of them he was consul. I ésteem it no small advantage, soldiers, that there is not one among you who has not often been an eye-witness of my exploits in war; not one of whose valour I myself have not.been a spectator, so as to be able to name the times and places of | his noble achievements; that with soldiers, whom I have: a thousand times praised and rewarded, and whose pupil I! _was before I became their general, I shall march against.an army of men, strangers to one another.
On what side soever I turn my eyes I behold all full of courage and strength; a veteran infantry; a most gallant cavalry ; you, my allies, most faithful and valiant; you, Carthaginians, whom not only your country’s cause, but thee justest anger, impels to battle. The hope, the courage of assailants is always greater than of those who act upon theg defensive. With hostile banners displayed, you are comedq down upon Italy; you bring the war. Grief, injuries, in- dighities, fire your minds, and spur you forward to revenge! 3 —First they demanded me; that I, your general, should be¢ delivered up to them; next, all of you, who had fought at the¢ siege of Saguntum ; and we were to be put to death by thet extremest tortures. Proud and‘cruel nation! Every thingg must be yours, and at your disposal! You are to prescribof
DECLAMATION. 125 to us with whom we shall make war, with whom we shall make peace! you are to set us bounds; to shut us up with- in hills and rivers; but you—you are not to observe the limits which. yourselves have fixed! Pass not the Iberus. What next? Touch not the Saguntines; Saguntum is upon the Iberus, move not a step towards that city. Is it a small matter, then, that you have deprived us of our ancient pos- sessions, Sicily and Sardinia? You would have Spain too. Well, we shall yield Spain; and then—you will pass into Africa, Will pass, did I say ?—This very year they or- dered one of their consuls into Africa, the other into Spain. No, soldiers, there is nothing left for us but what we can vindicate with our swords. Come on then. Be men. The Romans may with more safety be cowards; they have their own country behind them, have places of refuge to flee to, and are secure from danger in the roads thither: but for you there is no middle fortune between death and victory. Let this be but well fixed in your minds, and once again I say, you are conquerors.
XXXII. T. Quintius’s Speech to the Roman People.
Tuovucu I am not conscious, O Romans! of any crime by me committed, it is yet with the utmost shame and con- fusion that I appear in your assembly, ‘ You have seen it— Posterity will know it—In the fourth consulship of Titus Quintius, the Aqui and Volsci (scarce a match for the Hernici alone) came in arms to the very gates of Rome, and went away again unchastised! The course of our manners indeed, and the state of our affairs, have long been such, that I had no reason to presage much good ; but, could I have imagined that so great ignominy would have befallen me this year, I would by death or banishment (if all othe means had failed) have avoided the station I am now in. What! might Rome then have been taken, if those men
126 . DECLAMATION. :
who were at our gates had not wanted courage for the at= tempt ?—Rome taken, while I was consul !—Of honours ¥ had sufficient—of life enough—more than enough—I should have died in my third consulate. But who are t that our dastardly enemies thus despise? the consuls? or you, Romans? If we are in fault, despose us, punish us yet more severely. If you are to blame—may neither gods nor men punish your faults, only may you repent! No, Ro- mans, the confidence of your enemies is not owing tot courage; or to their belief of your cowardice; they have been too often vanquished, not to know both ee and you. Discord, discord is the ruin of this city. ‘The eternal disputes between the senate and the people are the sole cause of our misfortunes. While we will set no bounds te our domination, nor you to your liberty + while you impa~ tiently endure patrician magistrates, and we plebeian ; ow enemies take heart, grow elated and presumptuous. . In the name of the immortal gods, what is it, Romans, you would have? You desired tribunes: for the sake of peace we granted them—You were eager to have decem- virs; we consented to their creation—You grew weary of these decemvirs: we obliged them to abdicate—Your hatred pursued them when reduced to be private men; and we suffered you to put to death, or banish, patricians of the first rank in the republic—You insisted upon the re- storation of the tribuneship; we yielded: we quietly saw consuls of your own faction elected—You have the protec- tion of your tribunes, and the privilege of appeal; the pa- tricians are subjected to the decrees of the commons. Under pretence of equal and impartial laws, you have in- vaded our rights; and we have suffered it; and we still suffer it. When shall we see an end of discord? Wher shall we have one interest and one common country? Vie: torious and triumphant, you show less temper than we
-DECLAMATION. — , 127 under our defeat. When you are to contend with us, you can seize the Aventine Hill, you can possess yourselves of the Mons: Sacer. The enemy is at our gates, the Aisquiline is near being taken, and nobody stirs to hinder it. But against us you are valiant, against us you can arm with all dili- gence. Come on then, besiege the Senate House, make a camp of the Forum, fill the jails with all our chief nobles ; and when you have achieved these glorious exploits, then, at the least, sally out at the Aisquiline gate with the same fierce spirits against the enemy. Does your resolution fail you for this? Go then, and behold from our walls your lands ra- -vaged, your houses plundered and in flames, the whole country laid waste with fire and sword! Have you any thing here to repair these damages? Will the tribunes make up your losses to you? They will give you words as many as you please ; bring impeachments in abundance against the prime men in the state; heap laws upon laws; assem- blies ‘you shall have without end: but will any of you re- turn the richer from those assemblies? Extinguish, O Ro- mans! these fatal divisions; generously break this cursed enchantment, which keeps you buried in a scandalous inac- tion. Open your eyes, and consider the management of those ambitious men, who, to make themselves powerful in their party, study nothing but how they may foment . divisions in the commonwealth. If you can but summon up your former courage, if you will now march out of Rome with your consuls, there is no punishment you can inflict which I will not submit to, if I do not in a few days drive those pillagers out of our territory. This terror of war (with which you seem so grievously struck) shall quickly be removed from Rome to their own cities.
123 DECLAMATION.
XXXIII. Cicero’s Oration against Verres. = Tue time is come, fathers, when that which has long been wished for, towards allaying the envy your order has” been subject to, and remoying the imputations against trials, is (not by human contrivance, but superior direction,) effectually put in our power. An opinion has long pre- vailed, not only here at home, but likewise in foreign coun- tries, both dangerous to you and pernicious to the state, name-— ly, that, in prosecutions, men of wealth are always safe, how-_ ever clearly convicted. There is now to be brought upon his trial, before you, to the confusion I hope of the propa- gators of this slanderous imputation, one whose life and ac- tions condemn him in the opinion of all impartial persons ; but who, according to his own reckoning, and declared dependence upon his riches, is already acquitted: I mean Caius Verres. I have undertaken this prosecution, fathers, at the general desire and with the great expectation of the Roman people; not that I might draw envy upon that illus- trious order of which the accused happens to be; but with — the direct design of clearing your justice and impartiality before the world. For I have brought upon his trial, one whose conduct has been such, that, in passing a just sen- tence upon him, you will have an opportunity of re-. establishing the credit of such trials; of recovering what- ever may be lost of the favour of the Roman people; and of satisfying foreign states and kingdoms in alliance with us, or tributary to us. I demand justice of you, fathers, upon the robber of the public treasury, the oppressor of Asia Minor and Pamphylia, the invader of the rights and _privi- leges of Romans, the scourge and curse of Sicily. If that sentence is passed upon him which his crimes deserve, your authority, fathers, will be venerable and sacred in the.
2 “a _DECLAMATION. 129
eyes of ‘the public. But if his great riches should bias you in his favour, I shall still gain one point, which is, to make it apparent to all the world, that what was wanting in this case was not a criminal nor a prosecutor ; but ne Se adequate punishment. ; » For, as those acts of violence, By which he faa got his exorbitant riches, were done openly, so have his attempts to prevent judgment, and escape due punishment, been: public, and in open defiance of decency. -He-has accord- ingly said, that the only time he ever was afraid, was when: he found the prosecution commenced against him by me,, Test he should not have time enough to dispose of a sufficient, number of presents in proper hands. Nor has he attempted. to secure himself by the legal way of defence upon his trial. And, indeed, where is the learning, the eloquence, or the art, which would be sufficient to qualify any one for the de- fence of him whose whole life has been a continued series of the most atrocious crimes? To pass over the shameful irre- gularities of his youth, what does his queestorship, the first public employment he held, what does it exhibit but one continued scene of villainies ; Cneius Carbo plundered of the public money by his own treasurer; a consul stripped and betrayed; an army deserted and reduced to want; @ province robbed ; the civil and religious rights of the people violated. The employment he held in Asia Minor and Pam- phylia, what did it produce, but the ruin of those coun- tries, in which houses, cities, and temples, were robbed by him? There he acted over again the scene of his quees- torship, bringing, by his bad practices, Cneius Dolabella, whose substitute he was, into disgrace with the people, and then deserting him ; not only deserting, but even accusing and betraying him. What was his conduct in his prextor- ship: here at home? Let the plundered temples, and public works neglected that he might embezzle the money 63
130 DECLAMATION.
intended for carrying them on, bear witness. How did he discharge the office of a judge? Let those, who suffered by his injustice, answer. But his pretorship| in Sicily crowns all his works of wickedness, and finishes a lasting” monument to his infamy. The mischiefs done by him in that unhappy country, during the three years of his iniqui-_ tous administration, are such, that many years under the wisest and best of pretors will not be sufficient to restore” things to the condition in which he found them: for it is notorious, that, during the time of his tyranny, the Sicilians, neither enjoyed the protection of their own original laws, of the Regulations made for their benefit by the Roman senate, — upon their coming under the protection of the common=-— wealth, nor of the natural and unalienable rights of men. No inhabitant of that ruined country has been able to keep — possession of any thing, but what has either escaped the ra- paciousness, or been neglected by the satiety, of that uni- versal plunderer. His nod has decided all causes in Sicily for these three years; and his decisions have broken all law, all precedent, all right. The sums he has, by arbitrary taxes, and unheard-of impositions, extorted from the in- dustrious poor, are not be computed, The most faithful allies. of the commonwealth have been treated as enemies.’ Roman citizens have, like slaves, been put to death with — tortures. The most atrocious criminals, for money, have been exempted from the deserved punishments ; and men of the most unexceptionable characters condemned and ba-— nished unheard. The harbours, though sufficiently forti- fied, and the gates of strong towns, opened to pirates and rayagers. The soldiery and sailors, belonging to a provinee under the protection of the commonwealth, starved to death, Whole fleets, to the great detriment of the pro- vince, suffered to perish, The ancient monuments 6f— either Sicilian or Roman greatness, the statues of heroes
_. DECLAMATION. | ae. and princes, earried off; and the temples stripped of their images. The infamy of his lewdness has been such as de- ceney forbids to describe. Nor will I, by mentioning par- ticulars, put those unfortunate persons to ‘fresh pain, who have not been able to save their wives and daughters from his impurity. And these, his atrocious crimes, have been
committed in so public a manner, that there is no one who has heard of his name, but could reckon up his ac- _ Now, Verres, I ask what you have to advance against this charge? Will you pretend'to deny it? Will you pre- tend, that any thing false, that even any thing aggravated, is alleged against you? Had any prince, or any state, com- mitted the same outrage against the privilege of Roman citizens, should we not think we had sufficient ground for declaring immediate war against them? What punishment ought, then, to be inflicted upon a tyrannical and wicked pretor, who dar’d, at no greater distance than Sicily, with- in sight of the Italian coast, to put to the infamous death of crucifixion that unfortunate and innocent citizen, Publius Gavius Cosanus, only for his having asserted his privilege - of citizenship, and declared his intention of appealing to the: justice of his country against a cruel oppressor, who had unjustly confined him in prison at Syracuse, from whence he had just made his escape? The unhappy man, arrested: as he was going to embark for his native country, is brought before the wicked pretor. With eyes darting fury, and a countenance distorted with cruelty, he orders the helpless victim of his rage to be stripped, and rods to be brought ; accusing him, but without the least shadow. of evidence, or even of suspicion, of having come to Sicily as a spy. It was in vain that the unhappy man cried out, “JT am a « Roman citizen: I have served under Lucius Pretius, who “ js now at Panormus, and will attest my innocence.” The
132 DECLAMATION.
blood-thirsty pretor, deaf to all he could urge in his own defence, ordered the infamous punishment to be inflicted. « Thus, fathers, was an innocent Roman citizen publickly” mangled with scourging ; whilst the only words he a amidst his cruel sufferings were, “1 am a Roman citizen.” With these he hoped to defend himself from violence and in-. famy. But of so little service was this privilege to him, that’ while he was thus asserting his citizenship, the order was” given for his execution—for his execution upon the cross! O liberty!—O sound onee delightful to every Roman > -ear!—O sacred privilege of Roman citizenship !—once sa-_ ‘cred! now trampled upon !—but what then? Is it come to this?’ Shall an inferior magistrate, a goveruor who holds — his whole power of the Roman people, in a Roman pro- vince, within sight of Italy, bind, scourge, torture with fire and red-hot plates of iron, and at the last put to the in- | famous death of the cross, a Roman citizen? Shall neither the cries of innocence expiring in agony, nor the tears of — pitying spectators, nor the majesty of the Roman common- — wealth, nor the fear of the justice of his country, restrain” ‘the licentious and wanton cruelty of a monster, who, in confidence of his riches, ‘strikes at the root of liberty, and» sets mankind at defiance ? : ~ I conclude with expressing my hopes that your wisdom and justice, fathers, will not, by suffering the atrocious and” unexampled insolence of Caius Verres to escape the due — ‘punishment, leave room to apprehend the danger of a total
subversion of authority, and introduction of general anarchy and confusion.
MENS TA Ati + gear tag" -) < Sale nest tedabge teens:
$3 ‘ yy. tS TS 3 lee
¥
_ PART IIL
VEHEMENT PASSION.
I. Richmond encouraging his Soldiers against Richard the Third. ”
Tuus far into the bowels of the land
Have we march’d on without impediment. Richard, the bloody and devouring boar,
Whose ravenous appetite has spoil’d your fields, Laid this rich country waste, and.rudely cropp’d Its ripen’d hopes of fair posterity,
Is now even in the centre of the isle.
Thrice is he arm’d that bas his quarrel just ;
And he but naked, though lock’d up in steel, Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted : The very weight of Richard’s guilt shall crush him, Then let us on, my friends, and boldly face him, Tn peace, there’s nothing so becomes a man
As mild behaviour and humility ;
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Let us be tigers in our fierce deportment.
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt Shall be this body on the earth’s cold face ; ; But if we thrive, the glory of the action
134 VEHEMENT PASSION.
The meanest soldier here shall share his part of.
Advance your standards, draw your willing swords,
Sound drums and trumpets, boldly and cheerfully, ' _ The words “ St. George, Richmond, and Victory!” _|
Il. Marullus’s Speech to the Mob in Julius Cesar.
Wuererore rejoice? That Cesar comes in triumph ? : What conquests brings he home? : What tributaries follow him to Rome, To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels? _ You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things! _ O you hard hearts! you cruel men of Rome!
Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
Have you climb’d up to walls and battlements,
To towers and windows ; yea, to chimney-tops,
Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
The live-long day with patient expectation,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome..
And when you saw his chariot but appear,
Have-you not made an universal shout,
That Tyber trembled underneath his banks
To hear the replication of your sounds,
Made in his concave shores?
And do you now put on your best attire ?
And do you now cull out a holiday ?
And do you now strew flowers in his way,.
That comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood ?
Be gone i Run to your houses, fall upon your knees, ; } Pray to the gods to intermit the plagues .
‘That needs must light on this ingratitude,
VEHEMENT PASSION. 135.
III. Antony’s Soliloquy over Casar’s Body.
Or PARDON me, thou bleeding piece of enrtli That I am meek and gentle with these butchers. Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
That ever lived in the tide of times.
Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood! Over thy wounds now do I prophesy,
(Which, like dumb mouths, do ope their ruby Lips To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue) A curse shall light upon the line of men ; Domestic fury, and fierce civil strife,
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy ;
Blood and destruction shall be so in use,
And dreadful objects so familiar, .
That mothers shall but smile, when they behold Their infants quarter’d by the hands of war: All pity chok’d with custom of fell deeds ;
And Cesar’s spirit ranging for revenge,
With Até by his side, come hot from hell,
Shall in these confines with a monarch’s voice Cry Havock, and let slip the dogs of war,
That this foul deed shall smell above the earth With carrion men groaning for burial.
IV. Alexander, on passing the Granicus.
Wirness, ye heav’nly powers, how Alexander
Honours and loves a soldier——Oh!_ my Clytus,
Was it not when we pass’d the Granicus
Thou didst preserve me from unequal force ?
It was, when Sprithridates and Rhesaces 2 4 Fell both upon me with two dreadful strokes,
136. VEHEMENT, PASSION.
And clove my ‘temper’d helmet quite asunder ; Then I remember, then thou didst me service < And I am prouder to have pass’d that stream
Than that I drove a million o’er the plain.
Can none remember? yes, I know all maust,
When glory, like the dazzling eagle, stood
Perch’d on my beaver in the Granie flood ;
When Fortune’s self my standard trembling bore, - And the pale Fates stood frighted on the shore 5. When the immortals on the billows rede,
And I myself appear’d the leading god. _ ,
V. Zanga, in the Tragedy of the Revenge.
O soy, thou welcome stranger! twice three years
I have not felt thy vital beam ; but now
It warms my veins, and plays around my heart:
A fiery instinct lifts me from the ground,
And I could mount—the spirits numberless.
Of my dear countrymen, which yesterday
Left their poor bleeding bodies on the field,
Are all assembled here, and o’er-inform me—
O bridegroom! great indeed thy present bliss ;
Yet ev’n by me unenvy’d: for be sure
It is thy last, thy last smile, that which now
Sits on thy cheek: enjoy it while thou may’st ; Anguish and groans, and death, bespeak to-morrow.. Thus far my deep-laid plots and dark designs
Go well
Ah! what is well? O pang to think ! O dire necessity ! Is this my province?
Whither, my soul, ah! whither art thou sunk - Beneath thy sphere? Ere while, far, far above Such little arts, dissemblings, falsehoods, frauds,, -
Arist 2008, Atala sagan healt NAS icing
MENT 1 PASSION. 137
The trash of ane itself, which falls
To cowards and poor wretches wanting bread..
Does this become a soldier? this become}
Whom armies follow’d, and a people lov’d?
‘My martial glory withers at the thought :
But great my end; and since there are no other,
These means are just : they shine with borrow’d light,
Illustrious from the purpose they pursue. And greater sure my merit, who, to gain ~
__ A point sublime, can such a task sustain ;
To wade through ways obscene, my honour bend, And shock my nature to attain my end. Late time shall wonder ; that my joys will raise ; For wonder is involuntary praise.
/
VI. Langa encouraging Alonzo to kill his Wife.
You have resolv’d your faithless bride shall die : That’s truly great. What think you ’twas set up The Greek and Roman name in such a lustre,. But doing right in stern despite to nature, Shutting their ears to all her little cries,
When great, august, and god-like justice call’d? At Aulis, one pour’d out a daughter’s life, ©
And gain’d more glory than by all his wars ; Another, in just rage, his sister slew ;
A third, the theme of all succeeding times,
Gave to the cruel axe a darling son :
Nay, more; for justice some devote themselves, As he at Carthage, an immortal name!
Yet there is one step left above ’em all,
Above their history, above their fable ;
A wife, bride, mistress of your heart do that, And tread upon the Greek and Roman glory.
138 VEHEMENT PASSION.
VII. Henry V. to his Soldiers at the Siege of Harfleur.
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more 3 Or close the wall up with our English dead.
In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man
As modest stillness and humility :
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the tiger ;
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favour’d rage 5
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect ;
Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like the brass cannon ; let the brow o’erwhelm it,
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
O’erhang and jutty his confounded base,
Swill’d with the wild and wasteful ocean.
Now set the teeth, and stretch the nostril wide
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To his full height. Now on, you noblest English, Whose blood is fetch’d from fathers of war-proof ; Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,
Have in these parts from morn till even fought,
And sheath’d their swords for lack of argument :
Be copy now to men of grosser blood,
And teach them how to war: and you, good yeomen, Whose limbs are made in England, show us here
The mettle of your pasture: let us swear
That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not : For there is none of you so mean and base
That hath not noble lustre in your eye ;
I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
Straining upon the start. The game’s afoot ;
ee ae at G4 yt or
VEHEMENT PASSION. 139 Follow your spirit ; and, upon this charge, Bye, Heav’n for Harry, England, and St. George!
-
— VUI. Henry ¥. encouraging his Soldiers.
Wuat’s he that wishes for more men from England? My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin,
If we are mark’d to die, we are enow
To do our country loss: and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honour. Heav’n’s will! I pray thee wish not one man more. In truth, I am not covetous of gold,
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost ;
It yearns me not if men my garments wear ;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires :
But if it be a sin to covet honour,
I am the most offending soul alive.
No, good my lord, wish not a man from England: Heay’n’s peace! I would not lose so great an honour,
As one man more methinks would share from me, For the best hopes I have. Wish not.one more: Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host, ‘That he who hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart, his passport shall be made, And crowns for convoy put into his purse :
We would not die in that man’s company
That fears his fellowship to die with us,
This day is called the Feast of Crispian ;
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home, Will stand on tip-toe when this day is nam’d, And rouse him at the name of Crispian ;
He that shall live this day, and see old age, Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
140 VEHEMENT PASSION. _
And say, To-morrow is Saint Crispian ;
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars : Old men forget; yet shall not all forget,
But they’ll remember with advantages
What feats they did that day. Then shall our names, Familiar in their mouths as household words, Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
_ Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Glo’ster,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remember’d. This story shall the good man teach his son ; And Crispine Crispian shall ne’er go by .
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be remembered !
We few, we happy few ; we band of brothers : For he to-day that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother ; ; be he ne’er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition.
And gentlemen in England, now in bed,
Shall think themselves accurs’d they were not here, And hold their manhoods cheap, while any speak That fought with us upon St. Crispian’s day.
TX. Moloch’s Oration for War.
My sentence is for open war : of wiles,
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those Contrive who need; or when they need, not now. For while they sit contriving, shall the rest, Millions that stand in arms, and longing wait The signal to ascend, sit ling’ring here,
Heav’n’s fugitives, and for their dwelling-place Accept this dark opprobrious den of shame,
The prison of his tyranny who reigns
By our delay? No, let us rather choose,
1
ag
epi eicnlelC mibel Ging
we ~ att
1 io AEM
* citar PASSION. 141
Arm’a with hell flames and fury, all at once O’er Heav’n’s high tow’ rs to force resistless way, Turning our tortures into horrid arms Against the torturer; when to meet the noise ‘Ofhis almighty engine he shallhear = Infernal thunder ; and, for light’ning, see Black fire and horror shot with equal rage Among his angels ; and his throne itself, Mix’d ‘with Tartarean sulphur, and strange fire, His own invented torments. But perhaps The way seems difficult and steep to scale With upright wing against a higher foe. Let such bethink fas if the sleepy drench Of that forgetful lake benumb not still, That in.our proper motion we ascend Up to our native seat; descent and fall To us is adverse. Who but felt of late, When the fierce foe hung on our broken rear Insulting and pursu’d us through the deep, With what compulsion and laborious flight We sunk thus low? Th’ ascent is easy then ; Th’ event is fear’d. Should we again provoke Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find To our destruction 5 if there be in hell Fear to be worse destroy. What can be worse Than to dwell here, driv’n out from bliss, condemn’d Tn this abhorred deep to utter woe ; A ; Where pain of unextinguishable fire Must exercise us without hope of end, The vassals of his anger, when the scourge Inexorable, and the torturing hour Calls us to penance! More destroy’d than thus, We should be quite abolish’d, and expire. What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
142 VEHEMENT PASSION.
His utmost ire ? which, to the height enrag’d, Will either quite consume us, and reduce To nothing this essential ; happier far, Than miserable to have eternal being ;
Or if our substance be indeed divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst On this side nothing ; and by proof we feel Our pow’r sufficient to disturb his heav’n, And with perpetual inroad to alarm, Though inaccessible, his fatal throne ; Which, if not victory, is yet revenge.
X. Portius and Marcus, on the Success of Cesar.
Portius. Tae dawn is over-cast, the morning lours, And heavily in clouds brings on the day, The great, th’ important day, big with the fate Of Cato and of Rome. Our father’s death Would fill up all the guilt of civil war, And close the scene of blood. Already Cesar Has ruin’d more than half the globe, and sees Mankind grown thin by his destructive sword : Should he go further, numbers would be wanting To form new battles, and support his crimes. Ye Gods, what havock does ambition make Among your works !
Marc. Thy steady temper, Portius, Can look on guilt, rebellion, fraud, and Cesar, In the calm lights of mild philosophy. Pm tortur’d, ev’n to madness, when I think On the proud victor: every time he’s nam’d Pharsalia rises to my view !—I see Th’ insulting tyrant prancing o’er the field
et eee eer <r
+ PEAR,
bi Bel
ae eg tS Nici. en
VEHEMENT PASSION, 143
Strow’d with Rome’s citizens, “aud drench’d in slaughter, His horse’s hoofs wet with patrician blood! Oh, Portius, is there not some chosen curse, | Some hidden thunder in the stores of Heav’n, Red with uncommon wrath, to blast the man Who owes his greatness to his country’s ruin ?
Por. Believe me, Marcus, ’tis an impious greatness, And mix’d with too much horror to be enyy’d: How does the lustre of our father’s actions, Through the dark cloud of ills that cover him, Break out, and burn with more triumphant brightness ! His suff’rings shine, and spread a glory round him ; Greatly unfortunate, he fights the cause Of honour, virtue, liberty, and Rome. His sword ne’er fell but on the guilty head ; Oppression, tyranny, and power usurp’d, Draw all the vengeance of his arm upon ’em.
Marc. Who knows not this? But what can Cato do Against a world, a base degen’rate world, That courts the yoke, and bows the neck to Cesar ? Pent up in Utica, he vainly forms A poor epitome of Roman greatness, And, cover’d with Numidian guards, directs A feeble army, -and an empty senate, Remnants of mighty battles fought in vain. By Heav’n, such virtues, join’d with such success, Distract my very soul! our father’s fortune Would almost tempt us to renounce his precepts.
Por. Remember what our father oft has told us ; The ways of Heav’n are dark and intricate : Puzzled in mazes, and perplex’d with errors, Our understanding traces *em in vain, Lost and bewilder’d in the fruitless search ;
144 VEHEMENT PASSION.
Nor sees with how much art the windings run, Nor where the regular confusion ends.
XI. Faulconbridge and King John.
Faulc. Aut Kent hath yielded ; nothing there holds out But Dover castle : London hath receiv’d, Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers. Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone To offer service to your enemy 3 And wild amazement hurries up and down The little number of your doubtful friends, K. John. Would not my lords return to me again, After they heard young Arthur was alive ?
- — - a2 uN
~~.
ROS A Sag TO ee '
Faulc. They found him dead, and cast into the streets ;
An empty casket, where the jewel life
By some curs’d hand was robb’d and ta’en away. K. John. That villain Hubert told me he did live! Faulc. So on my soul he did for aught he knew.
But wherefore do you droop? why look you sad?
Be great in act, as you have been in thought:
Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
Govern the motion of a kingly eye :
Be stirring as the time ; be fire with fire :
Threaten the threat’ner, and outface the brow
Of bragging horror: so shall inferior eyes,
That borrow their behaviours from the great,
‘Grow great by your example, and put on
The dauntless spirit of resolution. -
Away, and glitter like the god of war
When he intended to become the field ;
Show boldness and aspiring confidence.
What! shall they seek the lion in his den,
eg AP OA CE lone SN
5. Pe Sane
VEHEMENT PASSION. “145 And fright him there, and make him tremble there ? Oh, let it not be said! Forage, and run - To meet displeasure farther from the doors ; And grapple with him ere he comes so nigh. K. John. The Legate of the Pope hath been with mej? And I have made a happy peace with him ; And he hath promis’d to dismiss the powers Led by the Dauphin: so' yas Ie tspte 308 2s, Faulc. Oh, inglorious league!’ Shall we, upon the footing of our land, Send fair-play orders, and make compromise, Insinuation, parley, and base truce, To arms invasive? Shall a beardless boy, A cocker’d silken wanton, brave our fields, And flesh his spirit ina warlike soil, Mocking the air with colours idly spread, And find no check? Let us, my Liege, to arms: Perchance the Cardinal can’t make your peace ; Or if he do, Jet it at least be said, They sav we had a purpose of defence. K. Join. Have thou the ordering of this present time. Faule. Away then, with good courage ; yet I know Our party may well meet a prouder foe,
XVI. - Brutus and Cassius, in Julius Caesar.
Bru. Wuar means this shouting? I do fear the people Choose Cesar for their king.
Cas. Ah, do you fear it? — Then must I think you would not have it so.
' Bru. I would not, Cassius; yet I love him well.ad : But wherefore do you bring me to this place? What is it that you would impart to me? ~ H
146 VEHEMENT PASSION.
If it be aught to forward the general good,
Set Honour in one eye, and Death i’ th’ other, And I will look on death indifferently: = For let the gods so speed me, asI love
The name of Honour more than I fear Death, - 7
Cas. - 1 know that virtue to be in you, Brutus, As well as I do know your outward favour. Well, honour is the subject of my story. — T cannot tell what you and other men Think of this life ; but for my single self,
J had as lief not be, aslivetobe = © In awe of such a thing as I myself.
I was born free as Cesar ; so were you:
We both have fed as well; and we can both Endure the winter’s cold as well as he.
For once upon a raw and gusty day,
The troubled Tyber chafing with his shores, Cesar says to me, Dar’st thou, Cassius, now Leap in with me into this angry flood,
And swim to yonder point >—Upon the word, Accoutred as I was, I plunged in,
And bade him follow ; so indeed he did.
The torrent roar’d, and we did buffet it
With lusty sinews : throwing it aside,
And stemming it with hearts of controversy. But ere he could arrive at the point propos’d, Cesar cry’d, Help me, Cassius, or I sink !
I, -as Aneas, our great ancestor,
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
The old Anchises bear ; so from the waves of Tyber
Did I the tired Cesar: and this man.
Is now become a god; and Cassius is .
A wretched creature, and must bend his body, If Cesar carelessly but nod on him.
Mev cAitinn «jtisoi
ye
VEHEMENT PASSION. 147 He had a fever when he was in Spain,: Ww Pmeben: 85 oF And, when the fit was on him, I did mark) 0 How he did shake. ’Tis true, this god did sikes Meh His coward lips did from their colour fly, FUSE a And that same eye whose bend does awe’ the world, Did lose its lustre; I did hear him groan: jos Aye, and that tongue of his, that bade the’ sicpieas edi Mark him, and write his speeches in n their books, — Alas, it cry’d—Give'me some drink, Titinius——_ As a sick girl. Ye gods, it doth amaze me, A man of such a feeble temper should ‘ So get the start of the majestic ‘world, i Rte Og) 30x And bear the palm alone.
Bru. Another general shout!
T do believe, that these applauses are For some new honours that are heap’d on Cesar.
Cas. Why, man; he doth bestride the narrow world — Like a Colossus! and we petty men ats Walk under his huge legs, and peep about To find ourselves dishonourable graves.
Men at some times are masters of their fates : The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, But in ourselves, that we are underlings. Brutus—and Czsar—what should be in that Cesar ? Why should that name be sounded, more than yours? Write them together ; yours is as fair a name: Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well ; Weigh them, it is as heavy ; conjure with ’em, Brutus will start a spirit as'soon as Cesar.
‘Now, in the names of all the gods at once, Upon what meat does this our Cesar feed, That he is grown so great? Age, thou art 'sham’d + Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods. When went there by an age, since the great flood,
H 2
148 VEHEMENT PASSION.
But it was fam’d with more than with one man?’
When could they-say, till now, that talk’d of Rome,
That her wide walls encompass’d but one man ? Oh! you and I have heard our fathers say, There was a Brutus once that would have brook’d Th’ eternal devil, to keep his state in Rome,
As easily as a king.
Bru. ‘That you do love me, I am nothing jealous; What would you work me to, I have some aim: How I have thought of this, and of these times, I shall recount hereafter : for this present, —
I would not (so with love I might intreat you) Be any further mov’d. What you have said I will consider ; what you have to say I will with patience hear ; and find a time Both meet to hear, and answer such high things. Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this ; Brutus had rather be a villager Than to repute himself a son of Rome, Under such hard conditions as this time Is like to lay upon us.
Cas. Iam glad that my weak words
Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.
XVII. Gloster and Hastings.
-
Vee eee eS ae Ar thee
OT ae ae ll ily Oe es i Me ee ee!
Glos. My lord, y’ are well encounter’d: here has been | 3
A fair petitioner this morning with us :
Believe me, she has won me much to pity her: Alas! her gentle nature was not made
To buffet with adversity. I told her
How worthily her cause you had befriended ;
-VEHEMENT PASSION. ==" —s«WdAD
How much for your good sake we meant to do,
That you had spoke, and all things should be well. _ . Hast. Your highness’ binds me ever to your service. Glos. You know your friendship is most potent with us,
And shares our power. But of this enough, pris
For we have other matter for your ear.
The state is out of tune ; distracting fears,
And jealous doubts, jar in our public counsels ; 3
Amidst the wealthy city murmurs rise, .
Loud railings, and reproach on those that rule,
With open scorn of government: hence credit, Z
And public trust ’twixt man and man, are broke.
The golden streams of commerce are withheld -
Which fed the wants of needy hinds and artisans,
Who therefore curse the great, and threat rebellion.
Hast. The testy knaves are over-run with ease,
As plenty ever is the nurse of faction. |
If in good days, like these, the headstrong herd
Grow madly wanton, and repine, it is-
Because the reins of power are held too slack,
And reverend authority of late
Has worn a face of mercy more than justice.
Glos. Beshrew my heart! but you have well divin’d
The source of these disorders. Who can wonder
If riot and misrule o’erturn the realm,
When the crown sits upon a baby brow?
Plainly to speak; hence comes the gen’ral cry,
And sum of all complaint : ’twill ne’er be well
With England (thus they talk) while children govern.
Hast. ’Tis true, the king is young ; but what of that?
We feel no want of Edward’s riper years,
While Gloster’s valour and most princely wisdom
So well supply our infant sov’reign’s place,
His youth’s support, and guardian to his throne.
85a - VEHEMENT PASSION.
Glos, ‘The council (much I’m bound to thank ’em for}!
Have plac’d a pageant sceptre in my hand,
Barren of pow’r, and subject to control; —
Scorn’d by my foes, and useless to my friends. be
Oh, worthy lord! were mine the rule indeed, —
I think I should not suffer rank offence
At large to lord it in the commonweal; —
Nor would the realm be rent by discord thus,
Thus fear and doubt, betwixt disputed titles. Hast, Of this] am tolearn; as not supposing
A doubt like this——.. > > “=e opmacte« Glos. Ay, marry, but there is——_~
And that of much concern. Have you not bead
How, on alate occasion, Dr. Shaw Has mov’d the people much about the lawfulness — Of Edward’s issue? By right grave authority Of learning and religion, plainly proving A bastard scion never should be grafted Upon a royal stock: from thence, at full Discoursing on my brother’s former contract: ~~ To Lady Elizabeth Lucy, long before His inconsiderate match with that same widow, The queen he left behind hin—————.
Hast. Iii befall Such meddling priests, who kindle up confusion, And vex the quiet world with their vain scruples ! By Heaven, ’tis done in perfect spite to peace. Did not the king, Our royal master, Edward, in concurrenee | With his estates assembled, well determine
What course the sov’reign rule should take henceforward ?
When shall the deadly hate of faction cease, When shall our long- -divided land have rest, If every peevish, moody, malcontent
‘ae
Pe eae ee ee ee
heya had 2 Wr ™
VEHEMENT PASSION, 151
Shall set the senseless rabble in an uproar, Fright them with dangers, and perplex their brains, Each day, with some fantastic giddy change?
Glos. What if'some patriot, for the public good, Should vary from your scheme, new-mould the state?
Hast. Curse on the innovating hand attempts it! © Remember him, the villain, righteous Heavy’n, th In the great day of vengeance! Blast the traitor, And his pernicious counsels, who, for wealth, => —
For pow’r, the pride of greatness, or revenge, == Would plunge his native land in civil wars! ‘ é Glos. You go too far, my lord. © >
Hast. Your highness’ pardon Have we so soon forgot those days of ruin, When York and Lancaster drew forth their battles ; — When, like a matron butcher’d by her sons,
And cast beside some common way, a spectacle Of liorror and affright to sapisboit
Our groaning country bled at ev’ry vein ;
When murders, rapes, and massacres prevail’d ; When churches, palaces, and cities blaz’d ; When insolence and barbarism triumph’d ;
And swept away distinction? Peasants trod Upon the necks of nobles ; low were laid
The reverend crosier, and the holy mitre,
And desolation cover’d all the land :
Who can remember this, and not, like me,
Here vow to sheath a dagger in his heart
Whose curs’d ambition would renew those horrors, And set once more that scene of blood before us?
Glos. How now! so hot!
Hast. So brave, and so resolv’d.
Glos. Is then our friendship of so little moment, That you could arm your hand against my life?
re
152 VEHEMENT PASSION.
Hast. I hope your bighae does not think I mean it: — No, Heav’n forefend that e’er your princely person a
Should come within the scope of my resentment. Glos. Oh, noble Hastings! Nay, I must embrace you, By holy Paul, y’ are a right honest man! The time is full of danger and distrust, - oh sey And warns us to be wary. Hold me not — Too apt for jealousy and light surmise, If, when I mean to lodge you next my heart, I put your truth to trial. Keep your loyalty, And live, your king and country’s best support : For me, I ask no more than honour gives, To think me yours, and rank me with your friends. Hast, Accept what,thanks a grateful heart should pay. Oh, princely Gloster!) judge me not ungentle, Of manners rude and insolent of speech, If, when the public safety is in question, My zeal flows warm and eager from my tongue. Glos. Enough of this: to deal in wordy compliment Is much against the plainness of my nature: I judge you by myself, a clear true spirit, And, as such, once more join you to my bosom.
Farewell, and be my friend. [Evit.
Hast. I am not read Nor skill’d and practis’d in the arts of greatness, To kindle thus, and give a scope to passion. The duke is surely noble ; but he touch’d me Ev’n on the tend’rest point ; the master-string That makes most harmony or discord to me.’ I own the glorious subject fires my breast, And my soul’s daring passion stands confess’d ; Beyond or love’s or friendship’s sacred band, Beyond myself, I prize my native land:
- %
3
:
4 :
ee ee el
‘ | ete
ee ee eee ee
‘ye lhiias
| VEHEMENT PASSION. 153 On this foundation would I build my fame,
And emulate the Greek and Roman name ; 9
Think England’s peace bought cheaply with my said
And die with plchod for: ones sell s oni
XVIII. King Hewry 2 the Fourth, Northumberland, and ba
K. Henry, Mx blood hath been too cold ote temperate, Unapt to stir at these indignities ; _ And you have found me: for; rathare You tread upon my patience: but, be sure, I will from henceforth rather be myself, _ Mighty, and to be feared, than my condition, © Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down, _ And therefore lost that title of respect, Which the proud soul ne’er pays, but to the proud.
North. My good lord, Those prisoners in your highness’ name ‘euenial Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took, Were, as he says, not with such strength deny’d As was deliver’d to your majesty.
Hot. My liege, I did deny no prisoners. But I remember, when the fight was done, When I was dry with rage and extreme toil, Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword, Came there a certain lord, neat, trimly dress’d, “Fresh as a bridegroom ; and his chin, new reap’d, Show’d like a stubble-land at harvest-home. ‘He was perfumed like a millener: And ’twixt his finger and his thumb he held A pouncet-box, which ever and anon He gave his nose ; and stili he smil’d, and talk’d ; And, as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
H3
154 VEHEMENT PASSION.
He call’d them untaught knaves, unmannerly, 1 fie To bring a slovenly, unhandsome corse ~ Betwixt the wind and his nobility, = = ¥ With many holiday and lady terms = * : He question’d me: amongst the rest demanded Myprisoners, in your majesty’s behalf. _ “TEVIO-
I, then, all smarting, with my wounds being cold,'
To be so pester’d with a popinjay,
Out ‘of my grief and my impatience,
Answer’d, neglectingly, I know not what ;
He should, or should not; for he made me mad,
To see him shine so brisk, and smell so sweet, © = * And talk so like a waiting gentlewoman, oat, He ae Of guns, and drums, and wounds, (Heav’n save the mark!) ‘ And telling me the sovereign’st thing on earth —
Was spermaceti for an inward bruise ; Tah SOR And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villanous saltpetre should be digg’d
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
Which many a good tall fellow has destroy’d
So cowardly ; and but for these vile guns,
He would himself have been a soldier.
This bald, unjointed chat of his, my lord,
I answer’d, indirectly, as I said ;
And, I beseech you, let not this ‘report
Come current for an accusation, ,
Betwixt my love and your high majesty.
North. The circumstance consider’d, good my lord, Whatever Harry Percy then had said To such a person, and in such a place, At such a time, with all the rest re-told ; May reasonably die; and never rise To do him wrong, or any way impeach What then he said, so he unsay it now.
‘VEHEMENT PASSION. 155
K. Henry. Why yet he doth deny his sir sot 13 aa But with proviso and exception, bal sAT That we, at our own charge,’ shall sitaatioeTiges wa OX
His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer; Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray’d es Ieinh oH _ The lives of those that he did lead to fight Ste) GE
Against the great magician, old Glendower ; Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March | Hath lately. marry’d. Shall our coffersthen = Be empty’d, to redeem a traitor home ? Shall we buy treason, and indent with fears, When they have lost and forfeited themselves ? No ; on the barrem mountains let him starve 3 For I shall never hold that man my friend ba Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost To ransom home revolted Mortimer. » Hot. Revolted Mortimer! He never did fall off, my sovereign liege, But by the chance of war: to prove that true, Needs but one tongue ; for all those wounds, Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took, When on the gentle Severn’s sedgy bank, In single opposition, hand.to hand, He did confound the best part of an hour In changing hardiment with great Glendower : Three times they breath’d, and three times did they drink ’ Upon agreement, of sweet Severn’s flood ; Who then affrighted with their bloody Joel Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds, And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank, Blood-stained with these valiant combatants, Never did bare and rotten policy Colour her working with such deadly wounds 3 Nor ever could the noble Mortimer |
156 VEHEMENT PASSION.
Receive so many, and all willingly: = + May Then let him not be slander’d with revolt. : 4 K. Henry. Thou dost belie him, Perey ; thou bely’ st him 5 He never did encounter with Glendower ; He durst as well have met the devil alone,
As Owen Glendower for an enemy. — Art not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer. Send me your prisoners with the speediest means, , Or you shall hear in such a kind from me As will displease you.—My Lord Northumberland, We license your departure with your son. peu & —Send us your prisoners, or you'll hear of it. [Exit K. H. Hot. I will not send them—I will after straight, : And tell him so; for I will ease my heart, Although it be a8 hazard of my head. North. What, drunk with choler? Stay, and pause awhile. Hot. Not speak of Mortimer ? ¥es, I will speak of him ; and let my soul Want mercy, if I do not join with him: Yea, on his part, Pll empty all these veins, And shed my dear blood drop by drop i’ the dust, But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer As high?’ the air as this unthankful king, As this ingrate-and canker’d Bolingbroke. He said, he would not ransom Mortimer ; Forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer ; But I will find him when he lies asleep, And in his ear I'll hollow Mortimer! | Nay, ll have a starling shall be taught to speak Nothing but Mortimer, and give it him, To keep his anger still in motion, North. My son, farewel.—No further go in this Than I by letters shall direct your course. When time is ripe, (which will he suddenlv}
“7
VEHEMENT PASSION. 157 Pll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer ; Where you and Douglas, and our powers at once (As I will fashion it) shall happily meet, To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms, Which now we hold at much uncertainty. Hot. Father, adieu !—O let,the hours be short, Till fields, and blows, and groans, applaud our sport. XIX, King Henry, and the Prince-of Wales. K. Henry. Lorps, give us leave ; the prince of Wales and I “Must have some private conference: but be near At hand, for we shall presently have need of you, —— ‘ [Exeunt Lords. I know not whether Heav’ n will have it so, For some displeasing service I have done, That in his secret doom, out of my blood He’ll breed revengement and a scourge for me ; But thou dost, in thy passages of life, Make me believe,—That thou art only mark’d For the hot vengeance of the rod of heav’n, To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else, Could such inordinate and low desires, Such poor, such base, such lewd, such mean attempts, Such barren pleasures, rude society, As thou art match’d withal and grafted to, Accompany the greatness of thy blood, And hold their level with thy princely heart ? P. Henry. So please your majesty, I would I could Quit all offences with as clear excuse, As well as, I am doubtless, I can purge Myself of many I am charg’d withal: . Yet such extenuation let me beg, As in reproof of many tales devis’d, I may for some things true, wherein my youth
‘
158 VEHEMENT PASSION. Hath faulty wander’d and irregular, 2) ite
Find pardon on my true submission. ~~ 14 K. Henry. Heaven pardon thee !—yet let res Hayy At thy affections which do hold wing g Quite from the field of all thy ancestors. vom 3 Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost, * Anis Which by thy younger brother is supply’d 5 RUE And art almost an alien to the hearts :
- Of all the court and princes of my blood :
Had I so lavish of my presence been, a So common hackney’d in the eyes of men, 2 So stale and cheap to vulgar company, == aa Opinion, that did help me to the crown, Had still kept loyal to possession, © : i And left me in reputeless banishment, A fellow of no mark, nor likelihood. By being seldom seen, I could not stir, § But like a comet I was wonder’d at : 3 That men would tell their children, “ This is he ;” . Others would say, “ Where? Which is Bolingbroke >”
The skipping king, he ambled up and down
With shallow jesters, and rash bavin wits,
Soon kindled, and soon burnt ; ‘Grew a companion to the common streets,
That, being daily swallow’d by men’s eyes,
They surfeited with honey, and began © : To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More than a little is by much too much.
And in that very line, Harry, stand’st thou:
For thou hast lost thy princely privilege,
With vile participation ; now there’s not an eye:
But is a-weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desir’d to. see thee more ;.
Which now doth what I would not have it do,, BW, ah Meets Pd RAS 1 SP Oe VD TY es Ee nes, eee nee
VEHEMENT PASSION.
- P. Henry. T shall eames _— ——— joes. aes
“Be more myself. __K. Henry. For all the gil
159°
As thou art to this hour, was Richard then, lis casopairt
When I from France sét foot at Ravenspurg ; And even as I was then, is Percy now. Now by my sceptre, and my soul to boot; He hath more worthy interest to the'state, ~ Than thou, ‘the shadow of'succession : For, of no right; nor colour like to right, He doth fill fields. with harness in the realm; Turns head against'the lion’s'armed jaws; And, being no more in debt to years than thou, Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on To bloody battles, and to bruising arms. What never-dying honour hath he got _ Against renowned Douglas! Gatitt Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathing cloaths, This infant warrior, in his enterprises Discomfited great Douglas ; ta’en him once, _ Enlarged him, and made a‘friend of him, To fill the mouth of deep defiance up, And shake the peace and safety of our throne. And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland, The archbishop’s grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer, Capitulate against us, and are up. But wherefore do I tell this news to thee ? “Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes, Who art my near and dearest enemy? — Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear, Base inclination, and the start of spleen To fight against me under Percy’s pay, To dog his heels, and curt’sy at his frowns, To show how much thou art degenerate.
160 VEHEMENT PASSION.
P. Henry. Do not think so: you shall not find it so: And Heaven forgive them, that so much have sway’d Your majesty’s good thoughts away from me!
I will redeem all this on Percy’s head, ; And, in the closing of some glorious day,
Be bold to tell you that I am your son;
When I will wear a garment all of blood,
And stain my favours in a bloody mask,
Which, wash’d away, shall scour my shame with it: And that shall be the day, whene’er it lights, That this same child of honour and renown, This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight, And your unthought-of Harry, chance to meet: For every honour sitting on his helm,
’Would they were multitudes: and on my head My shames redoubled! for the time will come, That I shall make this northern youth exchange His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my lord,
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf ; And I will call him to a strict account,
That he shall render every glory up,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart. This, in the name of Heav’n, I promise here : The which if he be pleas’d I shall perform,
I do beseech your majesty, may salve
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance :
- If not, the end of life cancels all bonds ;
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths,
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
K. Henry. A hundred thousand rebels die in this. Thou shalt have charge and*sovereign trust therein ; Our hands are full of business; let’s away ; Advantage feeds him fat while we delay.
‘ PASSION. - ‘16r
KX. Fane and Yale, in the Tragedy of the Briton.
_ Van, Now, Taba i Val. Health to Vanoc. Van. Speak your business, Val. I come not as a herald, but a friend: And I rejoice that Didius chose out me To greet a prince in my esteem the foremost. Van. So much for words.—Now to your purpose, Tesbines Val. Sent by our new lieutenant, who in Rome And since from me has heard of your renown, I come to offer peace ; to reconcile Past enmities; to strike perpetual league With Vanoc ; whom our emperor invites ’ To terms of friendship ; strictest bonds of union. Van. We must not hold a friendship with the. Roman. Val. Why must you not? — Van. Virtue forbids it. Val. Once You thought our friendship was your greatest glory. Van. I thought you honest.—I have been deceiv’d,— Would you deceive me twice? No, Tribune; no! You sought for war,—maintain it as you may. Val. Believe me, prince, your vehemence of spirit, Prone ever to extremes, betrays your judgment. Would you once coolly reason on our conduct, Van. Oh, I have seann’d it thoroughly- I think it over, and I think it base; Most infamous! let who will judge—but Romans, Did not my wife, did not my menial servant, Seducing each the other, both conspire Against my crown, against my fame, my life?
Night and day .
162 VEHEMENT PASSION. Did they not levy war and wage rebellion ? And when I would assert my right and power"
As king and husband, when I would chastise — Two most abandon’d wretches—who but Romans
Oppos’d my justice and maintain’d their crimes? Str. 4
Val. At first the Romans did not interpose, But griev’d to see their best allies at variance. Indeed ee you turn’d justice into rigour, And ev’n that rigour was pursu’d with fury, We undertook to mediate for abe ac.
And hop’d to moderate si
Van. To moderate! ; What would you moderate ?—my indignation The just resentment of a virtuous mind ?
To mediate for the queen !—You undertook ?— Wherein concern’d it you? But as you love
To exercise your insolence! Are you
To arbitrate my-wrongs? Must I ask leave, Must I be taught, to govern my own household ? Am I then void of reason and of justice? -
When in my family offences rise,
Shall strangers, saucy intermeddlers, say,
Thus far, and thus you are allow’d to punish ? When I submit to such indignities ;
When I am tam’d to that degree of slavery: Make me a citizen, a senator of Rome,
To watch, to live upon the smile of Claudius ;
To give my wife and children to his pleasures,
To sell my country with my veice for bread.
Val. Prince, you insult upon this day’s success, You may provoke too far—but I am cool—
I give your answer scope.
Van. Who shall confine it 7
The Romans ?—Let them rule their slaves—I blush,
ore wri: om
VEHEMENT PASSION. f 163 That, ‘dazaled:in my youth with ostentation, — : The trappings of the men seduc’d my virtue. Val. Blush rather that you are a slave to seerortae alas ae Subservient to the wildness of your will ; Which, like a whirlwind, tears up all your virtues, And gives you not the leisure to consider, Did not the Romans civilize you? Os Van. No. They. beiuaieseeinaaiiall new vices overs Taught us more arts than honest men requife, = =. And gave us wants that nature never knew. $i ae Val. We found you naked-————— _f Van. And you found us free, Val. Would you be temperate once, Sind sits me out—. ~ Van. Speak things that honest men may hear with temper, ‘Speak the plain truth, and varnish not your crimes. Say that you once were virtuous—long ago A frugal hardy people, like the Britons, Before you grew thus elegant in vice, And gave your luxuries the name of virtues. The civilisers !—the disturbers, say ; The robbers, the corrupters of mankind, Proud vagabonds !—who make the world your home, And lord it where you have no right. What virtue have you taught? Val. Humanity. Van. Oh, patience ! Val. Can you disown a truth confessed by all? — A praise, a glory known in barbarous climes ? For as our legions march they carry knowledge, The arts, the laws, the discipline of life. Our conquests are indulgences, and we . Not masters, but protectors of mankind. Van. Prevaricating, false,—most courteous tyrants ; Romans! Rare patterns of humanity?
'
f, j
ry rs
164 VEHEMENT PASSION:
Came you then here, thus far through waves to conquer, — To waste, to plunder, out of ee eeeien ? ng Is it humanity that prompts you on ss To ravage the whole earth, to burn, destroy? —
To raise the cry of widows and of orphans?
To lead in bonds the generous free-born princes, Who spurn, who fight against your tyranny?
Happy for us, and happy for you spoilers, \
Had your humanity ne’er reach’d our world. It is a virtue—(so it seems you call it)
A Roman virtue that has cost you dear :—— And dearer shall it cost if Vanoc lives. Or if we die, we shall leave those behind us Who know the worth of British liberty.
Val. I mean not to reproach your ancestors. Untaught, uncultivated as they were, Inhospitable, fiery, and ferocious ;
Lions in spirit, cruel beyond men;
Your altars reeking oft with human blood : Nor will I urge you further on your merits.
I come instructed, Sir, to offer peace, The peace that Didius offers, Valens sues for ;
Propose your terms, and you will find me forward
To win the Roman general to compliance,
And to deserve once more the name of friend.
Van. Deliver up the queen, send back my daughter : This done we may be brought to treat of peace.
Val. Therein the dignity, the faith of Claudius, Would highly suffer.
Van. Is then the dignity,
The faith of Claudius, founded on injustice ? Is it his glory to protect a traitress,
A base, a profligate, adulterous woman ? Fit emperor indeed to govern Romans!
_—.- -
VEHEMENT PASSION. 165 _ Val. Yet after this you married Cartismand ! _ Van. I was ambitious,—that I learn’d from you. That I did wed with treachery, and was a friend — To Romans, is the whole reproach of Vanoc. But they and she combin’d have clear’d my honour, And when I stain it by forgiving either, + oe Let my.own subjects brand me for a coward. Val. Talk not. of honour, prince, an empty sound, The vaunting of a Briton in his choler ! To me at least you should have spar’d the boast : “You can renounce your word, we know, at pleasure, Forget past services, worn marks of kindness ; Then quarrel with your friends to free the debt, And sacrifice all faith to your resentments. Van. This accusation I can hear unmovy’d, It sullies not my soul, nor taints my fame. It is a slander——I expect no better. - Val. Do I ealumniate ? ungrateful Vanoc, Perfidious prince! Is it a calumny To say that Gwendolen, betroth’d to Yvor, Was by her father first assur’d to Valens? By solemn promises you made her mine. And I, by faithful services, desery’d her. What have I done to merit this injustice ? Van. My daughter !—No !— Were it to save her life, she should not wed A Roman. Val. Then hear me, proud Cornavian !—— Unthinking prince, I take you at your word ; Nor shall you forfeit it a second time. She shall not wed, she shall not be a wife, But she shall be a slave ;—and to a Roman! The wretched mother shall she be of slaves, And live to curse her offspring and her father!
166 VEHEMENT PASSION. . 3 I will not ask your leave to use my captive = et As I please:—She is my right; my property. ==
We thank you that there needs no further courtship. ol I can command her, and she must comply. = Fortune is just;—what you refuse, she gives, And Vanoc suffers for his breach of promise. = A Van. Hence, menacer!—nor tempt me-into rage— ~ at
This roof protects thy rashness ; but begone. } I cannot answer for my indignation. at If thou should’st dare to violate my. child, ¥
Or but pollute her cheek with one rade kiss, ’ What heavy vengeance shall I not require!—— — 7 Nor man nor woman, nor the new-born infant, 4 Nor any thing that’s Roman, will I spare; i But in the bitterness of wrath destroy. ; And for thy lewd ill-manner’d threats, remember, = That I henceforward do abjure all peace : ‘ Nor shall you buy my friendship with your empire. Away !—Alan, conduct the Tribune forth: ie And let him pass unquestion’d. [Exis. Val. The king is much ineens’d,—alas! he knows not a How far a lover’s tongue belies his heart ! f Mine are fond menaces ; the throes of love. ¢ O Gwendolen, amidst thy charms secure, : Still dost thou. reign, whatever I endure. Thy beauty and thy innocence combin’d, { At once inflame and overawe my mind. .
XXI. Brutus and Cassius.
Cas. Tat you have wrong’d me, doth appear in this: — You have condemn’d and noted ‘Lucius Pella: For taking bribes here of the Sardians; Wherein my letter.(praying on his side »
T-EHEMENT -PASSION. 167 Because I knew the man) was slighted of... Bru. You wrong’d yourself to write in such a case. — Cas. In such a time as this, it is not meet ; That every nice offence should bear its comment. _ Bru. Yet let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself - ‘Are much condemn’d to have an itching palm; ‘To sell and mart your offices for me To undeservers. Cas. Lan itching palm! You know that you are Brutus that speak this, ‘Or, be assur’d, this speech were else your last. Bru. The name of Cassius honours this corruption, And chastisement doth therefore hide its head. Cas. Chastisement ! Bru. Remember March, the Ides of March remember. Did not great Julius bleed for justice’ sake ? - What! shall one of us, That struck the foremost man of all this world, But for supporting robbers—shall we now Contaminate our.fingers with base bribes ? And sell the mighty space of our large honours For so much trash as may be grasped thus ?— I had rather be a dog and bay the moon, Than such a Roman. Cas. Brutus, bay not me: Pll not endure it. You forget yourself, To hedge me in: I am.a soldier Older in practice, abler than yourself To make conditions. Bru. Go to! you are not, Cassius. Cas. I am. Bru. I say you are not. Cas. Urge me no more ;-I shall forget myself’: Have mind upon your health: tempt me no farther.
165 ‘VEHEMENT PASSION.
Bru. Away, slight man ! Av = Cas. Is’t possible ?
_ Bru. Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to yoyr rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares? Cas. O gods! ye gods! must I endure all this? ~~ Bru. All this! aye, more. Fret till your proud
break :
Go, show your slaves how choleric you are,
And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
Under your testy humour? Never, Cassius!
You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
Though it do split you: for, from this day forth,
Pil use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
When you are waspish.
Cas. Is it come to this? Bru. You say, you are a better soldier :
Let it appear so; make your vaunting true, :
And it shall please me well. For mine own part, 7
T shall be glad to Jearn of noble men. - Cas. You wrong me every way—you wrong ie Brutus;
I said an elder soldier, not a better.
Did I say better? q Bru. If you did, I care not.
Cas. When Casar liv’d, he durst not thus have mov’d me Bru. Peace, peace; you durst not so have tempted 7 : Cas. I durst not ? Bru. No. b Cas. What! durst not tempt him? Bru. For your life you durst not. . Cas. Do not presume too much upon my love,
I may do that I shall be sorry for. Bru. You have done that you should be sorry for.
- e
1 2
ere nguyen oy rere
®.
VEHEMENT PASSION: 163 There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats; re For I am arm/’d so strong in'honesty, That they pass by me as the idle wind © Which I respect not.’ I did send'to ‘you © For certain sums: of gold, which you denied: mes ‘For I can raise wo money by vile means : No, Cassius, I had rather coin my heart, | And drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring” From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash, ses By any indirection. I did send ; ‘To you for gold to pay my legions, © . Which you denied me: » Was that done like: Cassius eas Should I have answered Caius Cassius so? When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous, To lock such rascal counters from his friends, Be ready, gods! with all your traniderbolts * Dash him in pieces. Cas. I denied you not. Bru. You did. Cas. I did not: he was a fool That brought my answer back.—Brutus hath riv’d my heart. -A friend should bear a friend’s infirmities ; But Brutus makes mine greater than hey’ are. Bru. donot. Still you practise them on me. _ Cas. You love me not. _ Bru. I do not like your faults. . Cas. A friendly eye could never see such faults, Bru. A flatterer’s would not, though they did appear As huge as high Olympus. Cas. Come, Antony! and young Octavius, come! . Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius: For Cassius is a-weary of the world— Hated by one he loves ; brav’d by his brother ; Check’d like a bondman ; all his faults observ’d ;
q
170 VEHEMENT PASSION. °
Set in a note book, learn’d and conn’d by rote, To cast into my teeth. Oh I could weep My spirit from mine eyes !—There is my dagger, And here my naked breast—within, a heart — Dearer than Plutus’ mine, richer than gold : If that thou need’st a Roman’s, take it forth ; I that deny’d thee gold, will give my heart. Strike as thou didst at Cesar, for I know, : When thou didst hate him worst, thou lov’dst him better Than ever thou lov’dst Cassius. —
Bru. Sheath your dagger. Be angry when you will, it shall have scope : $ Do what you will, dishonour shall be humour. O Cassius, you are yoked with a man, That carries anger as the flint bears fire; _ ’ Who, much inforced, shows a hasty spark, And straight is cold again.
Cas. Hath Cassius liv’d To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus, When grief and blood ill temper’d vexeth him? _
Bru, When I spoke that, I was ill-temper’d too.
Cas. Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
Bru. And my heart too. ts [Embracing, .
Cas. O Brutus!
Bru. What’s the matter? ;
Cas. Have you not love enough to bear with me, When that rash humour which my mother gave me Makes me forgetful ?
Bru. Yes, Cassius: and, from henceforth,
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus, He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
simaediadl criteria atte oki tas on. ae
Ce Abe ag ne
+ t
5 o a
é o
PART Iv.
_ REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
erer
I. Brutus’s Soliloquy upon killing Cesar.
Tr must be by his death: and, for my part,
I know no personal cause to spurn at him ;
But for the general. He would be crown’d-——— How that might change his nature, there’s the question. It is the bright day that brings forth the adder ;
And that craves wary walking: crown him—that—— And then I grant we put a sting in him, |
That at his will he may do danger with.
Th’ abuse of greatness is, when it disjoins
Remorse from pow’r: and, to speak truth of Cesar, I have not known when his affections sway’d
More than his reason. But ’tis a common proof, That lowliness is young ambition’s ladder, | Whereto the climber-upwards turns his face; ¢ But when he once attains the utmost round,
e then ‘upon the ladder turns his back,
oks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
'By which he did ascend: so Cesar may :
hen, lest he may, prevent. And since the quarrel. |Will bear no colour, for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus; that what he is, augmented,
12
172 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
Would run to these, and these extremities :
And therefore think him as a serpent’s egg,
Which hatch’d, would, as his kind, grow mischievous, And kill him in the shell. '
_ IL Hamlee’s Soliloquy on his own Conduct.
Ox, what a wretch and peasant slave am I! Is it not monstrous, that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit,
That, from her working, all his visage warm’d : Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing ! For Hecuba!
What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do, Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears, And cleave the general ear with horrid speech ; Make mad the guilty, and appal the free ; Confound the ignorant, and amaze, indeed,
The very sek of eyes and ears,
Yet I,
A dull and riuddy-mettled fellow, peak,
Like John-a-dreams ; unpregnant of my cause, And can say nothing ; no, not for a king,
Upon whose property, and most dear life, »
A base defeat was made. It cannot be
But I am pigeon-liver’d, and lack gall
To make oppression bitter ; or, ere this,
I should have fatted all the region-kites
With this slave’s offal !
no Peli ee. LP
-i-
iad
«dy
2 Age bigs BO AAP eae. Sie
Soi, tote
a
That guilty creatures, sitting at a play, - bis6@ orf Have, by the very cunning of the scene, Been struck so to the soul, that presently They have proclaim’d their malefactions :
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ. Pil have these players Play something like the murder of my father, — Before my uncle: V’ll observe hislooks; T'll tent him to the quick ; if he do blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen May be a devil; and the devil hath power’ To assume a pleasing shape ; yea, and, perhaps, Out of my weakness, and my melancholy, (As he is very potent with such spirits,) Abuses me to damn me: I'll have grounds More relative than this;. the play’s the thing Wherein I'l catch.the conscience of the king.
III. Hamlet’s Soliloquy on Life and Death.
To be, or not to be ?—that is the question.— Whether ’tis nobler in the mind, to suffer
The stings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, P And, by opposing, end them ?—To die—to sleep ; No more: and by a sleep, to say, we end
The heart-ache, and a thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to ;—’Tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d. To die—to sleep To sleep! perchance to dream ! ay, there’s the rub ; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come, When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, ©
Must give us pause.—There’s the respect
REFLEXION AND eeciy 198 About, my brains! Hum! I have heard mais IE
,
174 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. That makes calamity of so long life: nau For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, © The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despis’d love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office, and the spurns” That patient merit of the unworthy takes ;
When he himself might his guietus make -
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardles bear, To groan and sweat under a weary life ; i But that the dread of something after death
(That undiscover’d country, from whose bourne
No traveller returns) puzzles the will ;
And makes us rather bear those ills we have,
Than fly to others that we know not of? »
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all; And thus the native-hue of resolution
Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought;
And enterprises of great pith and moment,
With this regard, their currents turn awry,
And lose the name of action.
IV. Hamlet and Captain.
Ham. Goon Sir, whose powers are these?
Capt. They are of Norway, Sir.
Ham. How propos’d, Sir, I pray you?
Capt. Against some part of Poland.
Ham. Who commands them, Sir?
Capt. The nephew of old Norway, Fortinbras.
Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, Sir, Or for some frontier ?
Capt. Truly to speak, and with no addition, We go to gain a little patch of ground, That has in it no profit but the name.
ae
=~)
PAY” ee hil te, sprit tem
v
» Dye
_REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. 175 -T@ pay five ducats, five—I would not farm it. uf Nor will it yield to Norway, or the Pole, Agia? A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee. f Ham. Why, then the Polack never will defend it. — La aed Capt. Yes, ’tis already garrison’d. Fea Ham. Two thousand souls, and twenty thousand atone Will not debate the question of this straw : sa This is the imposthume of much wealth and peace, That inward breaks, and shews no cause without Why the man dies—I humbly thank you, Sir. is Capt. God be wi’ye, Sir. [Exit Captain. Ham. How all occasions do inform against me, And spur my dull revenge! What is a man, If his chief good, and market of his time, Be but to sleep and feed? a beast; no more.. Sure he that made us with such large discourse, Looking before and after, gave us not .\That capability and god-like reason To rust in us unus'd. Now, whether it be Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple Of thinking too precisely on the event, (A thought which, quarter’d, hath but one part wisdom, And ever, three parts coward)—I do not know, Why yet I live to say, “* This thing’s to do ;” Sith Ihave cause, and will, and strength, and means, To do’t. Examples, gross as earth, exhort me: Witness this army, of such mass and charge, Led by a delicate and tender prince ; Whose spirit with divine ambition puff’d, Makes mouths at the invisible event ; Exposing what is mortal, and unsure, — To all that fortune, death, and danger, dare, Even for an egg-shell. Rightly to be great, Is not to stir without great argument ;
176 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw, —
When honour’s at the stake. How stand I then,
That have a father kilPd, a mother stain’d, .
Excitements of my reason and my blood, And let all sleep? while, to my shame, I see
Th’ imminent death of twenty thousand men,
That, for a phantasy, and trick of fame, -
Go to their graves like beds! fight for a plot,
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause ;
Which is not tomb enough, and continent,
To hide the slain—O, from this time forth, |
My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!
V. Cato’s Soliloquy on the Immortality of the Soul.
Ir must be so—Plato, thou reason’st well—
Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire, This longing after immortality ?
Or whence this secret dread and inward horror Of falling into nought?) Why shrinks the soul Back on herself, and startles at destruction ?
*Tis the divinity that stirs within us; .
*Tis Heaven itself that. points out an hereafter, And intimates eternity to man. Eternity! thou pleasing, dreadful thought ! Through what variety of untry’d being,
Through what new scenes and changes must we pass? The wide, th’ unbounded prospect lies before me; But shadows, clouds, and darkness, rest upon it. Here willl hold. If there’s a Power above us, (And that there is, all Nature cries aloud Through all her works,) he must delight in virtue, And that which he delights in must be happy.
£ $
ee ee 2 at
177: But when, or ae ?—This world was made for Cesar. — I’m weary of conjectures—this must end ’em.
Thus am I doubly arm’d.—My death and life, My bane and antidote, are both before me. This, in a moment, brings me to an end;
But this informs me I shall never die.
The soul, secur’d in her existence, smiles
At the drawn dagger, and defies its point: The stars shall fade away, the sun himself ~ Grow dim with age, and nature sink in years; But thou shalt flourish in immortal youth,
‘Unhurt amidst the war of elements, The wreck of matter, and the crush of worlds.
VI. The Judgment of Hercules.
Now had the son of Jove, mature, attain’d The joyful prime, when youth, elate and gay,
Steps into life ; and follows, unrestrain’d, Where passion leads, or prudence points the way. |
In the pure mind, at those ambiguous years, Or vice, rank weed, first strikes her pois’nous root ;
Or haply virtue’s op’ning bud appears By just degree, fair bloom of fairest fruit : 2 se For, if on youth’s untainted thought. imprest, ae gore] The gen’rous purpose still shall warny the manly breast. .,
As on a day, reflecting on his age, For highest deeds now ripe, Alcides sought Retirement;’ nurse of contemplation sage ; Step following step, and thought succeeding thought : id on? 13
178. REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. Musing, with steady path the youth purswd = His walk, and, lost in meditation, stray’d - . a Far.in a lonely vale, with solitude, = 3 Conversing ; while intent his mind survey’d- ; The dubious path of life; before him lay, =~ 7
Here, Virtue’s rough Bes there, Pleasure’s flow’ry way. —
Much did the view divide his wavering mind ; Now glow’d his breast with gen’rous thirst of fame ; Now love of ease to softer thoughts inclin’d His yielding soul, and quench’d the rising flame. When, lo! far off, two female forms he spies ; bate Direct to him their steps they seem to bear ; Both large and tall, exceeding human size ; Both, far exceeding human beauty, fair. Graceful, yet each with different grace, they move; This, striking sacred awe; that, softer winning love.
a et ta, Ai Stead IP. deny
The first, in native dignity surpass’d ; Artless and unadorn’d, she pleas’d the more : a Health o’er her looks a genuine lustre cast 5 : A vest, more’ white than new-fall’n snow, she wore. August she trode, yet modest was her air ; : Serene her eye, yet darting heav’nly fire. - ] Still she drew near; and nearer still more fair, More mild appear’d: yet such as might inspire Pleasure corrected with an awful fear ; Majestically sweet, and amiably severe.
The other dame seem’d ev’n of fairer hue: But bold her mien; unguarded rov'd her eye ; And her flush’d cheeks confess’d at nearer view, The berrow’d blushes of an artful die.
REPLEXION AND ARGUMENT. 179.
_ All soft and delicate, with airy swim, Lightly she danc’d along ; her robe betray’d, Through the clear texture, every tender ae Height’ning the charms it only seem’d to shade ; And as it flow’d adown, so loose and thin, Her stature show’d more tall; more snowy-white her skin:
«« Dear Hercules (says she), whence this delay ? Dear youth, what doubts can thus distract thy mind? — ‘Securely follow where I lead the way, And range through wilds of pleasure unconfin’d. With me retire, from noise, and pain, and care ; Embath’d in bliss, and wrapt in endless ease : Rough is the road to fame, through blood and war ; Smooth is my way, and all my paths are peace. With me retire, from toils and perils free: Leave honour to the wretch; pleasures were made for thee.”
’ By this arriv’d the fair majestic maid : (She all the while, with the same modest pace,
Compos’d, advane’d.) “ Know, Hercules,” With manly tone, “ thy birth of heav’nly race.
Thy tender age, that lov’d instruction’s voice,
Promis’d thee gen’rous, patient, brave, and wise,
When manhood should confirm thy glorious choice ;. Now expectation waits to see thee rise. Rise, youth! exalt thyself, and me: approve — ' Thy high descent from Heav’n, and dare be worthy Jove.
she said,
« But what truth prompts, my tongue shall not disguise : The steep ascent must be with toil subdu’d ;
Watchings and cares must win the lofty prize Proposed by Heav’n :—true bliss, and real good,
180 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
Honour rewards the brave and bold alone ; She spurns the timorous, indolent, and base : Danger and toil stand stern before her throne, And guard (so Jove commands) the sacred place : ' Who seeks her must the mighty cost sustain, ‘ And pay the price of fame—labour, and care, and pain”;
« Hear’st thou what monsters then thou must engage ; What danger, gentle youth, she bids thee prove? (Abrupt, says Sloth.) Ill fit thy tender age, Tumult and wars; fit age for joy and love. |
-
Turn, gentle youth, to me, to love, and joy; To these I lead; no monsters here shall stay Thine easy course; no cares thy peace annoy : I lead to bliss, a nearer, smoother way. Short is my way; fair, easy, smooth, and plain: Turn, gentle youth; with me eternal pleasures reign.”
“ Vast happiness enjoy thy gay allies !” (Virtue with scorn reply’d:) « A youth, of follies: an old age, of cares; Young, yet enervate ; old, yet never wise: Vice wastes their vigour, and their mind impairs. Vain, idle, delicate, in thoughtless ease, Reserving woes for age, their prime they spend ; All wretched, hopeless, in the evil days, With sorrow, to the verge of life they tend. Griev’d-with the present, of the past asham’d ;
tee line, and are despis’d: they die, nor more are nam’d.
_* But with the gods, and godlike men, I dwell: -Me, his supreme delight, th’ Almighty Sire
Regards well pleas’d: whatever works excel, All, or divine or human, I inspire.
{ REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.  __181
Counsel with strength, and industry with art, In union meet conjoin’d, with me reside: My dictates arm, instruct, and mend the heart ; The surest policy, the wisest guide. With me true friendship dwells: she deigns to bind Those gen’rous souls ane whom I before have join’d.”
Het words breathe fire celestial, and impart New vigour to his soul, that sudden caught _ The gen’rous flame: with great intent his heart Swells fall, and labours with exalted thought : The mist of error from his eyes dispell’d, Through all her fraudful arts in clearest light, Sloth in her native form he now beheld ; Unveil’'d she stood, confess’d before his sight False Siren !— All her vaunted charms, that shone So fresh erewhile and fair, now wither’d, pale, and gone. -
\ VIL, Mr. PYM?s Speech at the Opening of the Charge of High Treason against Lord Strafford.
: MY LORDS,
Ws stand here by the command of the knights, citizens, and ‘burgesses, now assembled for the commons in_parlia- ment; and we are ready to make good that. impeachment whereby Thomas, earl of Strafford, stands charged in their name, and in the name of all the.commons of England, with high treason.
This, my lords, is a great cause ; and we might sink un- der the weight of it, and be astonished with the lustre of this noble assembly, if there were not in the cause strength and vigour to support itself and to encourage us.. It is the cause of the king: it concerns his majesty in the honour of his
182 _REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. | government, in tlre safety of his person, in the stability of his crown. It is the cause of the kingdom: it concerns not only the peace and prosperity, but even the being of the kingdom. We have that piercing eloquence, the cries, and groans, and tears, and prayers, of all the subjects, assisting us.” We have the three kingdoms, England, and Scotland, and’ Ireland, in travail and agitation with us, bowing themselves, like the hinds spoken of in Job, to cast out their sorrows. — : Truth and goodness, my lords, they are the beauty of the! soul ; they are the perfection of all created natures; they are the image and character of God upon the creatures. 3 This beauty evil spirits and evil men have lost; but yet there are none so wicked but they desire to march under thes show and shadow, though they hate the reality of it. ‘ This unhappy earl, now the object of your lordships’ jus-~ tice, has taken as much care, has used as much cunning, to set a face and countenance of honesty and justice upon had actions, as he has been negligent to observe the rules of honesty in the performance of all these actions. My lords, it is the greatest baseness of wickedness, that it dares not look in its own colours, nor be seen in its natural counte- nance; but virtue, as it is amiable in all respects, so the least is not this ; that it puts a nobleness, it puts a bravery, upon the mind, and lifts it above hopes and fears, above favour and displeasure; it‘ makes it always uniform and constant to itself. 3 The service commanded me, and my colleagues here, is’ to shake off those vizors of truth and uprightness which have been sought to be put upon this cause, and to show you his actions, and his intention, in their own natural black- ness and deformity. My lords, he has put on a vizor of truth in these words, wherein he says, that he should be in his defence more careful to observe truth than to gain ad- vantage to himself: he says, he would rather endure any
4
REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. 183
‘thing than be saved by falsehood; if it were really true, it was a brave and noble expression.
' My lords, he has likewise put on the vizor of goodness on his actions, when he desires to recite his services, in a great many particulars, as if they were beneficial to the com- monwealth and state; whereas we shall prove them mis- chievous and dangerous. It is left upon me, my lords, to take off these vizors and appearances of truth and goodness in that part of his answer which is the preamble, and that I shall do with as much faithfulness and brevity as I can.
VIII. Lord DIGBY’s Speech upon the Trial of Lord Strafford.
MR. SPEAKER,
We are now upon the point of giving {as much as in us lies) the final sentence upon death or life on a great minister of state, and peer of thiskingdom, Thomas, earl of Strafford, a name of hatred in the present age by his practices, and fit to be made a terror to future ages by his punishment.
I had the honour to be employed by the house in this great business from the first hour that it was taken into con- sideration: it was a matter of great trust, and I will say, with confidence, that I have served the house in it, both with industry according to my ability, and with most exact faithfulness and secrecy: and as I have hitherto discharged my duty to this house, and to my country, in the progress of
- this great cause, so J trust I shall do now to God, and to my conscience,
It is honest, it is noble, to be earnest, in order to the dis- eovery of truth; but when that hath been brought as far as at can to light, our judgment thereupon ought to be calm and cautious.
In prosecutions upon probable grounds, we are account-
eal
184 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. _ able only for our industry or remissness; but in judgment? we are deeply responsible to the Almighty for its rectit or obliquity. In cases of life and death, the judge is God’s” steward of the party’s blood, and must give a strict account for every drop: and this, Mr. Speaker, forms the true ae of difference in me now from what I was formerly, ==> ‘The truth of it is, Sir, the: same ground, whereupon. L with the rest of the five to whom you first committed the’ consideration of my Lord Strafford, brought down’ our opi=-" nion that it was'fit he should be accused of treason : upon the same ground I was engaged with earnestness upon his prose~ cution ; and had the same ground remained in that force of belief with me, which till very lately it did, T should not have been tender in his condemnation ; but truly, Sir, to deal plainly with you, that ground of our-accusation, that spur to our prosecution, and that which should be the basis: of my judgment of the Earl of Strafford as unto treason, is, to my understanding, quite vanished away, and this was, Mr. Speaker, his advising the king to employ the army of Ireland ‘to reduce England; this was that whereupon I ace cused him with a free heart, prosecuted him with earnest= ness, and, had it to my understanding been proved, should have condemned him with innocence; whereas I cannot now satisfy my conscience todoit. = a | I profess I can have no notion of any body’s intent * subvert the laws treasonably, or by force, without the ap-= pearance of force; and this design of force not appearing, all his other wicked practices cannot amount so high with me. I can find a more easy, and more natural spring, from whence to derive all his other crimes, than from an intent to bring to tyranny, and to make his own posterity, as well as us, slaves ; as from revenge, from pride, from avarice, from passion, and insolence of nature. I do not say but these may represent him a man worthy to die, perhaps worthier than
LEXION AND ARGUMENT. 185 many atraitor. Ido not say, but they may justly direct us to enact that they shall be treason for the future; but God keep me from giving judgment of death on any man, and of ruin to his innocent posterity, upon a law made d posteriori. Let the mark be set on the door where the pages is, and then let him that will enter die.
Let. me therefore conclude in saying that unto you ‘all, which I have ‘horen ake inculeated to my own conscience on this occasion; let every man lay his hand upon his ‘heart, and. siete consider what we are going to do with a breath ; either justice, or murder ; justice on one side, or murder, heightened and aggravated to its extremest extent, on, the other.
_, Let every man, therefore, purge ih heart clear of all pas: sions; (I know this great and wise body-politic can have none, but I speak to individuals, from the weakness which I find in myself ;) away with personal animosities, away with ali flatteries to the. people, in being the sharper against him, because he is odious to them; away with all fears, lest, by sparing his blood, they may be incensed; away with all such, considerations as, that it is not. fit for a parliament that one accused by it of treason should escape with life. Let not former yehemence of any against him, nor fear from thence that he cannot be safe while this.man lives, be an ingredient in the sentence of any one of us. ; _ Of all these corruptives of judgment, Mr. Speaker, I do, before God, discharge myself to the uttermost of my power ; and do, with a clear conscience, wash my hands of this man’s blood, by this solemn protestation, that my vote goes not to the taking of the Earl of Strafford’s life.
wee
186 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. TAR I Thos.
IX. Lord STRAFFORD’s Speech before Sentence passed upon him, by the Lords, for Treason.
My Lords, as this species of treason of which I am accused by the commons is entirely new and unknown to the laws, so is the species of proof by which they pretend a that guilt upon me. They have invented a kind of acc 1 mulative or constructive evidence; by which many actions, either totally innocent in themselves, or criminal in a much inferior degree, shall, when united, amount to treason, and subject the person to the highest penalties inflicted by the laws. A hasty and unguarded word, a rash and passionate action, assisted by the malevolent fancy of the accuser, and tortured by doubtful constructions, is transmuted into the deepest guilt; and the lives and fortunes of the whole nation, no longer protected by justice, are eal jerae— to ar- bitrary will and pleasure.
_ Where has this species of guilt lain so long concealed? Where has this fire been so long buried, during so many centuries, that no smoke should appear till it burst out at once to consume me and my children? Better it were to live under no law at all, and, by the maxims of a cautious prudence, to conform ourselves the best we can to the arbi- trary will of a master, than fancy we have a law on which we can rely, and which shall inflict a punishment, precedent to the promulgation, and try us by maxims unheard of till the very moment of the prosecution. If I sail on the Thames, and split my vessel on an anchor, in’ease there be no buoy to give me warning, the party shall pay the damages ;_ but
_if the anchor be marked out, then is the striking on it at my own peril. Where is the mark set upon this crime? It has
Jain concealed under water, and no human prudence, no
REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. _187
human innocence, could save me from the destruction with which I am at present threatened.
Te is now full two hundred and forty years since treasons were defined, and so long has it been since any man was touched to this extent, upon this crime, before myself. We hhave lived, my lords, happily to ourselves at home; we have lived gloriously abroad to the world: let us be con- tent with what our fathers have left us: let not our ambi- tion carry us to be more learned than they were in these killing and destructive arts. Great wisdom it will be in your lordships, and just providence for yourselves, for your posterities, for the whole kingdom, to cast: from you into. the fire these bloody and mysterious volumes of arbi- trary and constructive treasous, as the primitive christians did their books of curious arts, and betake yourselves to the plain letter of the statute, which tells you where the crime is, and points out the path by which you may avoid it. Let us not, to our own destruction, awake those sleeping lions, by rattling up a company of old records, which have for so many ages hung by the wall, forgotten and neglected. To all my afflictions add not this, my lords, (the most se- vere of any) that I, for my other sins, not for my treasons, be the means of introducing a precedent so pernicious to the laws and liberties of my native country. However these gentlemen at the bar say they speak for the commonwealth, and they believe so: yet, under favour, it is I who, in this particular, speak for the commonwealth. Precedents like those which are endeavoured to be established against me, must draw along such inconveniences and miseries, that in a few years the kingdom will be in a condition expressed in a.statute of Henry the fourth; and no man shall know by what rule to govern his words and actions. Impose not, my lords, difficulties insurmountable upon ministers of state; nor disable them from serving with cheerfulness their
*s 7 t 5
188 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
king and country. If you examine them, and under severe penalties, by every grain, by every little weight, 1 scrutiny will be intolerable ; the public affairs of the king dom must be left waste; and no wise man, who bas any honour or fortune to lose, will ever engage himself in suck dreadful, such unknown perils. F My Lords, I have now troubled’ your vical ge a sre deal longer than I should have done. Were it not for interest of these pledges, which a saint in heaven left me, should be loth—What I forfeit for myself is nothing—but I confess, that my indiscretion should forfeit for them, it wounds me very deeply. You will be pleased to pardon my infirmity: something I should have said, but I see” shall not be able, therefore I shall leave it. 4 And now, my lords, I thank God I have been, by hi blessing, sufficiently instructed in the extreme vanity of temporary enjoyments, compared to the importance of out eternal duration. And so, my lords, even so, with all humi- lity and with all tranquillity of mind, I submit clearly ane freely to your judgment. And whether that righteou! judgment be to life or death, I shall repose myself, full } gratitude and confidence, in the arms of the Great Ante of my existence. j
4
X. Lord MAN. SFIELD’s Speech upon reversing the Sentene 4
of Outlawry against Wilkes. ,
oo}
TaeEse are the errors which have been objected, and thi the manner and form in which they are assigned. For th reasons I have given, I cannot allow any of them. It wa _ our duty, as well as our inclination, sedulously to consider whether, upon any other ground, or in any other light
~~
_ REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. 189
we could find an informality which we might allow, with satisfaction to our minds, and avow tothe world, =.
But here let me pause-
tle is fit to take some a the various AE sm out 5 the numerous crowds which have attended, and now attend, in and about the hall, out of all reach of hearing what passes in court; and the tumults which, in other places, have shamefully insulted all order and government. Auda- cious addresses. i in print. dictate to us, from those they call the people, the judgment to be given new, and afterwards upon the conviction. Reasons of policy are urged, from danger to the kingdom, by commotions and general con- fusion.
Give me leave to take the opportunity of this ee and respectable audience, to let the world know, all such at- . tempts are vain. Unless we have been able to find an error, which will bear us out to reverse the outlawry, it must be affirmed. The constitution does not allow reasons of state, ‘to influence our judgments. God forbid it should! We must not regard political consequences, how formidable so- ever they might be ; if rebellion were the certain conse- quence, we are bound to say, fiat justitia ruat caelum.
I pass over many anonymous letters I have received. Those in print are public; and some of them have been brought judicially before the court. Whoever the writers are, they take the wrong way. Iwill do my duty unawed. What am I to fear? that mendar infamia from the press, which daily coins false facts and false motives? The lies of calumny carry no terror to me. I trust that the temper of my mind, and the colour and conduct of my life, have given me a suit of armour against these arrows. If, during this king’s reign, I have ever supported his government, and. assisted his measures, I have done it upon the points
190 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
themselves, without mixing in party or faction, and withot any collateral views. I honour the king, and respect : people ; but many things acquired by the favour of either are, in my account of objects, not worth ambition. I wish popularity ; but it is that popularity which follows, not that which is run after; it is that popularity, which, sooner or later, never fails to do justice to the pursuit of noble ends by noble means. I will not do ‘that which my conscie 4 _ tells me is wrong upon this occasion, to gain the huzzas of thousands, or the daily praise of all the papers which come from the press; I will not avoid doing what I think right, though it should draw on me the whole artillery of libels all that falsehood or malice can invent, or the credulity of a deluded populace can swallow. I can say with a great magistrate, upon an occasion and under circumstances not unlike, “ Ego hoc animo semper fui, ut invidiam virtute par= “tam, gloriam, non invidiam putarem.”
The threats go farther than abuse. Personal violence is denounced. I do not believe it. It is not the genius of the worst of men in this country, in the worst of times. But I have set my mind at rest. The last end that can happen t any man, never comes too soon if he falls in the support of the law and liberty of his country (for liberty is synonymou to law and government). Such a shock too might be pro : ductive of public good: it might awake the better part of the kingdom out of that lethargy which seems to hav benumbed them; and bring the mad part back to their senses, as men intoxicated are sometimes stunned into so- " briety. a
From the precedents we have seen, it appears that a series of judgments have required a technical form of words in the description of the county court at which an outlaw is exacted. If we were compelled by authority to
. J
_- RERLEXION AND ARGUMENT. 19t look upon this form of words as technically necessary, it is certain, upon this occasion, that it is wanting. ;
_ Therefore I am of opinion, that in a criminal case, highly : penal, technical terms ought not to be departed from; and
therefore I am bound to say, that, for want of these tech= nical words, the outlawry ought to be reversed.
ity @ gn : Mj Ppa tem PSL Pel aes Soe ; 4 XI. Lord Mansfeld’s Speech in the House of Lords, 1770, _.on the Bill for the further preventing the Delays of Justices . by reason of Privilege of Parliament.
My Lorps,
Wun I consider the importance of this bill to your lords ships, I am not surprised it hastaken up so much of your consideration. It is a bill, indeed, of no common magni- tude; it is no less than to take away from two-thirds of the legislative body of this great kingdom certain privileges and immunities of which they have been long possessed. Perhaps there is no situation the human mind can be placed in, that is so difficult and so trying, as when it is made a judge in its own cause. There is something im- planted in the breast of man, so attached to self, so tena- cious of privileges once obtained, that, in such a situation, . either to discuss with impartiality, or decide with justice, has ever been held as the summit of all human virtue. The bill now in question puts your lordships in this very pre- dlicament ; and I doubt not but the wisdom of your deci- sion will convince the world, that where self-interest and ustice are in opposite scales, the latter will ever preponde- ‘ate with your lordships.
This bill has been frequently proposed, and as frequently niscarried; but it was always lost. im the Lower House. Little did I think, when it had passed the Commons, that
192 © REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
it possibly could have met with such opposition here. | ‘Shall it be said, that you, my lords, the grand council of the tion, the highest judicial and legislative body of the rea endeavour to evade, by privilege, those very laws which you enforce on your fellow-subjects ?—Forbid it, Justice != I am sure, were the noble lords as well acquainted as I am with but half the difficulties and delays occasioned in the courts of justice under the pretence of ee they woul not, nay, they could not, oppose this bill.
I have waited with patience to hear what eal might be urged against the bill, but I have waited in vain: the truth is, there is no argument that can weigh against it. The justice and expediency of the bill are such as render it self-evident!’ It is a ' proposition | of that nature, that: can neither be weakened’ by ‘argument, nor entangled with so- phistry. Much, ‘indeed, has been said by some noble lords on the wisdom of our ancestors, and how differently the thought from us. They not only decreed, that privilege should prevent all civil ‘suits from proceeding during t sitting of parliament, but likewisé granted protection to t very servants of members. I shall say nothing on the wisdom of our “ancestors ; it might perhaps appear invidious; that is not necessary in the present case. I sliall only say that the noble lords who flatter themselves with the weight of that ‘reflection, should remember, that as circumstance: alter, things themselves should alter. Formerly it wai not so fashionable either for masters or servants to run if debt as it is at present. Formerly, we were not that greai commercial nation we are at present; nor, formerly, were merchants and manufacturers members of parliaments, as ai present. ‘The case now is very different: both merchant: and manufacturers are, with great propriety, elected’mem bers-of the Lower House. Commerce having thus got inte the legislative body of the kingdom, privilege must be don
REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. . 193 away. We all know, that the very soul and essence of trade are regular payments; and sad experience teaches us, that there are men, who will not make their regular payments without the compulsive power of the laws, The law then ought to be equally open to all: any exemption to particu- | lar men, or particular ranks of men, is, in a free and com- ‘mercial country, a solecism of the grossest nature,
I come now to speak upon what indeed I would have gladly avoided, had I not been particularly pointed at for the part I have taken in this bill. It has been said by a noble lord, on my left hand, that I likewise am running the race of popularity. Ifthe noble lord means, by popularity, ‘that applause bestowed by after-ages on good and virtuous actions, I have long been struggling in that race; to what purpose, all-trying time can alone determine: but if the noble lord means that mushroom popularity, that is raised without merit, and lost without a crime, he is much mistaken ‘in his opinion. I defy the noble lord to point out a single action of my life, where the popularity of the times ever had the smallest influence on my determinations. I thank God, I have a more permanent and steady rule for my con- duct,—the dictates of my own breast. Those that have forgone that pleasing adviser, and given up their mind to the slave of every popular impulse, I sincerely pity: I pity them still more, if their vanity leads them to mistake the shouts of a mob for the trumpet of fame. Experience might inform them, that many who have been saluted with the huzzas of a crowd one day, have received their execra- tions the next; and many, who, by the popularity of their times, have been held up as spotless patriots, have never- theless appeared upon the historian’s page, when truth has triumphed over delusion, the assassins of liberty.
True liberty, in my opinion, can only exist when justice is equally administered to all—to the king, and to the beg~ K
var WOR
194 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
gar. Where is the justice then, or where is the law, that protects a member of parliament, more than any other man, from the punishment due to his crimes? The laws of tl country allow of no place, nor no employment, to be~ sanctuary for crimes; and where I have the honour to sit as judge, neither royal favour, nor popular aPPIOURCS shall ever protect the guilty. » : I have now only to. beg bets es for having ate
much of your lordships’ time ; and-I am sorry a bill fraught
with so many good consequences has not met with an abler advocate: but I doubt not your lordships’ determination will convince the world, that a bill calculated to contribute so much to the equal distribution of justice as the present,
requires with your lordships but very little support. } XII, Douglas’s Account of the Hermit.
- . i
BenEATH a mountain’s brow, the most remote $ And inaccessible, by shepherds trod, — : In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand, } A hermit liv’d;—a melancholy man,» = Who was the wonder of our wand’ring swains. 025 } Austere and lonely, cruel to himself, ; ;
Did they report him ; the cold earth his bed, ! :
Water his drink, his food the shepherd’s alms. | - “*
I went to see him ; and my heart’ was touch’d i
With reverence and pity.. Mild he:spake, _- su) oallee
And, entering on discourse, such stories told, « © As made me oft revisit his sad. cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth; ‘And fought in famous battles, when the peers. .
Of Europe, by the:bold Godfredo led,
Against th’ usurping infidels display’'d
LEXION ‘AND ARGUMENT. 195 The pide cross, end won the Holy Land, . Pleas’d with my admiration, and the fire. His speech struck from me, the old man aa shake.
His years away, and act his young encounters: 09 <3 Then, having show’d his wounds, he’d sit him down, -
: And, all the live-long day, discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf __
He cut the figures of the marshal’d hosts ; ey Describ’d the motions, and explain’d the use, Of the deep column and the lengthen’d line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm: For all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war’s vast art, was to this hermit known.
- - 2 Retanie ) bil 7
XII. The different Degrees of Beauty in different Species of Objects.
Tuus with a faithful aim have we presum’d, Advent’rous, to delineate Nature’s form ; Whether in vast, majestic pomp array’d, Or drest for pleasing wonder, or serene In beauty’s rosy smile. It now remains, Through various being’s fair-proportion’d scale, To trace the rising lustre of her charms, From their first twilight, shining forth at length To full meridian splendour. Of degree The least and lowliest, in th’ effusive warmth Of colours, mingling with a random blaze, Doth beauty dwell. -Then higher in the line And variation of determined shape, Where truth’s eternal measures mark the bound Of circle, cube, or sphere. The third ascent Unites this various symmetry. of parts With colour’s bland allurement ; as the pearl Shines in the concave of its azure bed, |
kK 2
OS a a fe RS a ee ~
‘196 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. And painted shells indent their speckled wreaths. Then more attractive rise the blooming forms Through which the breath of nature has infus’d Her genial pow’r, to ‘draw with pregnant veins — Nutritious moisture from the bounteous earth, In fruit and seed prolific : thus the flow’rs Their purple honours with the spring resume, And such the stately tree which autumn bends ~ With blushing treasures. But more lovely still Is Nature’s charm, where to the full consent Of complicated members, to the bloom Of colour, and the vital change of growth, Life’s holy flame and piercing sense are giv’n, And active motion speaks the temper’d soul : So moves the bird of Juno:: so the steed With rival ardour beats the dusty plain, And faithful dogs, with eager airs of joy, Salute their fellows. Thus doth beauty dwell There most conspicuous, even in outward shape, Where dawns the high expression of a mind ; By steps conducting our enraptur’d search To that eternal Origin, whose pow’r Through all th’ unbounded symmetry of things, Like rays effulging from the parent sun, This endless mixture of her charms diffus’d. Mind, mind alone, bear witness earth and heav’n ! The living fountains in itself contains Of beauteous and sublime: here, hand in hand, Sit paramount the graces: here, enthron’d Celestial Venus, with divinest airs, Invites the soul to never-fading joy. Look then abroad through nature, to the range Of planets, suns, and adamantine spheres Wheeling, unshaken; through the void immense ;
ne OE . 2 Gerla tale: Fomtesctathnn beNbraghiCipa tain i rad Talent een eee a Sersiey
Hamas Pep bons REA
the ow
re all
-
REFLEXION AND. ARGUMENT. 197 find speak, O man! ! does this capacious scene With half that kindling majesty dilate —
Thy strong conception ; as when Brutus rose, bitao iy. Refulgent from the stroke of Czesar’s fate, Y Migr St Amid the crowd of patriots, and his arm. ‘hei Rt Aloft extending, like eternal Jove, ¢ ‘When guilt brings down the thunder, call’d aloud
On Tully’s name, and: shook his crimson: Saal
And bade the father of his country pigs Lee sh 085 Sige:
For lo! the tyrant prostrate on the dust,
And Rome again is free!—TIs aught so fair
Tn all the dewy landscapes of the spring,
In the bright eye of Hesper or the morn,
In Nature’s fairest forms, is aught so fair
As virtuous friendship ; as the candid blush
Of him who strives with fortune to be just ?
The graceful tear that streams for others’ woes?
Or the mild majesty of private life,
Where peace with ever-blooming olive crowns
The gate ; where honour’s liberal hands effuse.
Unenvy’d treasures, and the snowy wings
Of innocence and love protect the scene ?
XIV. Milton’s Lamentation for the Loss of his Sight.
Hatt, holy light! offspring of beav’n first born ! Or, of th’ Eternal, co-eternal beam,
May I express thee unblam’d! since God is light, And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from eternity : dwelt then in thee,
Bright effluence of bright essence increate !
Or hear’st thou, rather, pure ethereal stream, Whose fountain who shall tell? Before the sun,
198 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
Before the heav’ns thou wert, and at the voice
Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest.
The rising world of waters dark and ane :
Won from the void and formless infinite. === —
' Thee I revisit now with bolder wing,
Escap’d the Stygian pool, though long detntntl i
In that obscure sojourn ; while in my flight Through utter and through middle darkness borne, With other notes than to th’ Orphéan lyre,
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night ;
Taught by the heav’nly Muse to venture down The dark descent, and up te re-ascend Though hard and rare. Thee I revisit safe, And feel thy sov’reign vital lamp; but thou Revisit’st not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop serene hath quench’d their orbs, Or dim suffusion veil’d. Yet not the more Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt, Clear spring or shady grove, or sunny hill,
Smit with the love of sacred song ; but chief Thee, Sion, and the flow’ry pesos beneath That wash thy hallow’d feet and warbling flow, Nightly I visit: nor sometimes forget
Those other two equall’d with me in fate,
(So were I equall’d with them in renown !) Blind Thamyris, and blind Mzonides ;
And Tiresias, and Phineas, prophets old ; Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move Harmonious numbers ; as the wakeful bird Sings darkling, and, in shadiest covert hid, Tunes her nocturnal note. Thus with the year Seasons return ; but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of ev’n or morn,
Ah ay mt
i tc sey hance
| -EPERY + RERLEXION AND a “199 Or sight of vernal bleom, or summer’s rose, Or flocks, or herds, or. human face diyine’; But cloud instead, and ever-during dark Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men Cut off, and, for the book of knowledge fair, ‘Presented with an universal blank Of nature’s works, to me expung’d and ras’d, And wisdom, at one entrance, quite shut out.- Se much the rather, thou, celestial light, Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers ‘Irradiate ; there plant eyes: all mist from thence Purge and disperse ; that I may see and tell Of things invisible to mortal sight.
XV. The Drowning Fly.
In yonder vase, behold a drowning fly ! Tis little feet how vainly does it ply !
Its cries I understand not, yet it cries, And tender hearts can feel its agonies Poor helpless victim! and will no one save, Will no one snatch thee from the threat’ning grave? Is there no friendly hand, no helper nigh? And must thou, little struggler, must thou die? Thou shalt not, while this hand can set thee free, Thou shalt not die,—this hand shall rescue thee ; My finger’s tip shall prove a friendly shore ;— There, trembler, all thy dangers now are over ; Wipe thy wet wings, and banish all thy fear, - Go join thy buzzing brothers in the air. Away it flies—resumes its harmless play, | And sweetly gambols in the golden ray. Smile not, spectators, at this humble deed ; For you, perhaps, a nobler task’s decreed,—
200 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. A young and sinking famity to save, =
To raise the infant from destruction’s wave ;
To you for help the victims lift their eyes, —
Oh! hear, for pity’s sake, their plainliveenare Ere long, unless some guardian interpose, = O’er their devoted heads the flood may close.
XVI. Ode on Se Cecilia’s Day.
Descenp, ye Nine! dace sha sing; The breathing instruments inspire, Wake inte voice each silent string, And sweep the sounding lyre ! In a sadly-pleasing strain Let the warbling lute complain : Let the loud trumpet sound, Till the roofs all around The shrill echoes rebound : While in more lengthen’d notes and slow, The deep, majestic, solemn organs blow. Hark! the numbers soft and clear, _ Gently steal upon the ear ;
Now louder, and yet louder rise,
And fill with spreading sounds the skies ; Exulting in triumph now swell the bold notes, In broken air, trembling, the wild music floats ;
Till, by degrees, remote and small,
The strains decay, And melt away, In a dying, dying fall.
By Music, minds an equal temper biel Nor swell too high, nor sink too low.
Music her soft, assuasive voice applies; - Or, when the soul is press’d with cares, — Exalts her in enliv’ning airs ;
_ Warriors she fires with animated sounds;
_ Pours balm into the bleeding lover’s wounds:
Melancholy lifts her head,
Morpheus rouses from his'bed,
Sloth unfolds her arms and- wakes,
List’ning Envy drops her snakes ; Tntestine war no more our Passions wage, And giddy Factions hear away their rage.
But when our country’s cause provokes to arms, How martial music every bosom warms ! So when the first bold vessel dar’d the seas, High on the stern the Thracian rais’d his strain, While Argo saw her kindred trees Descend from Pelion to the main. Transported demi-gods stood round, And men grew heroes at the sound, Enflam’d with glory’s charms ; Each chief his sevenfold shield display’d, And half unsheath’d the shining blade ; And seas, and rocks, and skies rebound, To arms, to arms, to arms!
But when, through all th’ infernal bounds, Which flaming Phlegeton surrounds,
Love, strong as Death, the Poet led
To the pale nations of the dead, — What sounds were heard, What scenes appear’d,
O’er all the dreary coasts ! kK 3
an
202 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
’ Dreadful gleams, . tea
Dismal screams,
Fires that glow, 2 Shrieks of woe, Sullen moans,
Hoilow groans,
And cries of tortur’d ghosts ! aie
But hark! he strikes the golden lyre ; ’ And see! the tortur’d ghosts respire, See, shady forms advance! Thy stone, O Sisyphus, stands still, Ixion rests upon his wheel, And the pale spectres dance ! The. furies sink upon their iron beds, And snakes uncurl’d hang list’ning round their heads.
= By the streams that ever flow, _ By the fragrant winds that blow O’er th’ Elysian flow’rs ; By those happy souls who dwell In yellow meads of asphodel, Or amaranthine bow’rs ; By the heroes’ armed shades, Glittering through the gloomy glades ; By the youths that died for love, Wand’ring in the myrtle grove, Restore, restore Eurydice to life ; Oh take the husband, or return the wife ! He sung, and hell consented To hear the Poet’s prayer : Stern Proserpine relented, And gave him back the fair. Thus song could prevail O’er death, and o’er hell
a
i. i ss a insane arlene ennnenciintbtsiara
ante
3FLEXION AND ARGUMENT. 203
A conquest a hard, Fuad how glorious ! . Though fate bad fast bound her, With Styx nine times round her, _
Yet music and love were victorious.
; But soon, too soon, the lover turns his eyes : - Again she falls, again she dies, she dies ! How wilt thou now the fatal sisters move? No crime was thine, if’ ‘tis no crime to love. Now, under hanging mountains, Beside the falls of fountains, Or where Hebrus wanders, Rolling in mzanders, All alone, Unheard, unknown, He makes his moan ; And calls her ghost, For ever, ever, ever lost ! Now with furies surrounded, Despairing, confounded, He trembles, he glows, Amidst Rhodope’s snows : ‘See, wild as the winds, o’er the desert he flies S Hark ! Hemus resounds with the Bacchanals’ cries— Ah see, he dies ! Yet evn in death Eurydice he sung, Eurydice still trembled on his tongue, Eurydice the woods, Eurydice the floods, Eurydice the rocks, and hollow mountains, rung.
Music the fiercest grief can charm, And fate’s severest rage disarm : . Music can soften pain to ease,
And make despair and madness please :
204 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
Our joys below it can improve, And antedate the bliss above, | _ This the divine Cecilia found, And to her Maker’s praise confin’d the sound, When the full organ joins the tuneful quire, Th’ immortal pow’rs incline their ear : Borne on the swelling notes our souls aspire, While solemn airs improve the sacred fire ; And Angels lean from Heav’n to hear. Of Orpheus now no more let poets tell, _ To bright Cecilia greater power is giv’n 5 His numbers rais’d a shade from hell, Hers lift the soul to heav’n.——Pore.
ie
XVII. Ode to Truth.
Say, will no white-rob’d Son of Light, Swift darting from his heav’nly height, Here deign to take his hallow’d stand ; Here wave his amber locks, unfold His pinions, cloth’d with downy gold ; Here smiling stretch his tutelary wand ; And you, ye host of Saints, for ye have known Fach dreary path in life’s perplexing maze, Though now ye circle yon eternal throne, With harpings high of inexpressive praise ; Will not your train descend in radiant state,
To break with mercy’s: beara this gathering cloud of Fate ?
*Tis silence all. No con of light | Darts swiftly from his heav’nly height :
REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT. 205° No train of radiant saints descend. “* Mortals, in vain ye hope to find, - Tf guilt, if fraud, have stain’d your mind, «Or saint to hear, or angel to defend.” So Truth proclaims. I hear the sacred sound: _ Burst from the centre of her burning throne, Where aye she sits with star-wreath’d asin crown’d ; A bright sun clasps her adamantine zone. So Truth proclaims: her awfal voice Thear; With many a solemn pause it slowly meets my ear. “ Attend, ye sons of Men; attend, and say, Does not enough of my scfalgtnt ray Break through the veil of your mortality ? Say, does not reason in this form descry Unnumber’d, nameless glories, that surpass The Angel’s floating pomp, the Seraph’s glowing grace? Shall then your earth-born daughters vie With me? Shall she whose brightest eye But emulates the diamond’s blaze, Whose cheek but mocks the peach’s bloom, Whose breath the hyacinth’s perfume, Whose melting voice the warbling woodlark’s lays, Shall she be deem’d my rival? Shall a form Of elemental dross, of mould’ring clay, Vie with these charms imperial? The poor worm Shall prove her contest vain. Life’s little day Shall pass, and she is gone: while I appear Flush’d with the bloom of youth through Heaven’s eternal year. 7 Know, Mortals, know, ere first ye sprung, Ere first these orbs in ether hung, I shone amid the heav’nly throng ; ’ These eyes beheld Creation’s day, This voice began the choral lay, And taught Archangels their triumphant song.
206 REFLEXION AND ARGUMENT.
Pleas’d I survey’d bright Nature’s gradual birth, Saw infant light with kindling lustre spread, Soft vernal fragrance clothe the flow’ring otal And Ocean heave on its extended bed ; Saw the tall pine aspiring pierce the aby The eo pee stalk, the penises eagle fly. % wi Last, Man arose, erect in youthful grace, ’ Heav’n’s hallow’d image stampt upon his face ; And, as he rose, the high behest was giv’n, “ That I, alone of all the host of heav’n, “Should reign protectress of the godlike. youth. rm Thus the Almighty spake; he spake, and call’d me Truth.
ey sO et an tache tnRrt - Went Laan cage
rar
ABBE, ap
GRIEE AND TENDERNESS.
I, Hamlet’s Soliloquy on his Mother’s Marriage.
On that this too—too solid flesh, would melt, . Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew !
Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d.
His canon ’gainst self-slaughter !
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable,
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on’t! oh fie! ’tis an unweeded garden,
That grows to seed ; things rank, and gross in nature, Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
But two months dead! nay, not so much; not two ;——
So excellent a king, that was, to this,
Hyperion to a satyr ; so loving to my mother, That he permitted not the winds of Heav’n
Visit her face too roughly. Heav’n and earth! Must I remember? why, she would hang on him, As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on; yet within a. month,——
Let me not think Frailty, thy name is Woman! A little month! or ere those shoes were old,
With which she follow’d my poor father’s body,
208 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
Like Niobe, all tears——Why she, even she (O Heav’n ! a beast that wants discourse of reason Would have mourn’d longer—) married with my uncle ; My father’s brother ; but no more like my father, - Than I to Hercules. Within a month!
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married Oh, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
Tl. Buckingham. going to Execution. Aut good people, You that thus far have come to pity me, Hear what I say, and then go. home and lose me. I have this day receiv’d a traitor’s judgment, And by that name must die; yet, Heav’n bear witness! And if I have a conscience, let it sink me, Even as the axe falls, if I be not faithful ! You few that lov’d me, And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham, His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave Is only bitter to him, only dying ; Go with me, like good angels, to my end: And as the long divorce of steel falls on me, — Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice, And lift my soul to Heav’n. When I came hither, I was Lord High Corgi’ And Duke of Buckingham; now poor Edward Bohun. Yet Iam richer than my base accusers, That never knew what truth meant; I now seal it ; And with that blood will make ’em one day groan for’t. My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,
; : ‘ % z ; : 4 f .
Who first rais’d head against usurping Richard,
Flying for succour to his servant Banister,
Being distress’d, was by that wretch betray’d,
And without trial fell: Heav’n’s peace be with him!
Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying
My father’s loss, like a most royal prince,
Restor’d to me my honours, and,. from ruins,
Made my name once more noble. Now his son — : Henry the. Eighth, life, honour, name, and all — Wiis i ‘That made me happy, at one stroke has taken
For ever from the world. I had my trial,
And, must needs say, a noble one; which makes me
A little happier than my wretched father.
Yet thus far we are one in fortune—both
Fell by our servants, by those men we lov’d:
A most unnatural and faithless service !
Heav’n has an end in all. Yet you that hear me,
This from a dying man receive as certain Where you are lib’ral of your loves and counsels, Be sure you are not loose: those you make friends And give your hearts to, when they once perceive The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
Like water from ye, never found again
But where they mean to sink ye. All good people, Pray for me! I[ must leave ye; the last hour
Of my long weary life is come upon me.
Farewell! and, when you would say something sad, Speak how I fell—Remember Buckingham !
II. Henry IV.’s Soliloquy on Sleep.
How many thousands of my poorest subjects Are at this hour asleep! O gentle Sleep! Nature’s soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
210 | GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
That thou no more wilt weigh my eye-lids down, And steep my senses in forgetfulness ?-
Why rather, Sleep, ly’st thou in smoky cribs, — Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
And hush’d with buzzing night-flies to thy ae
Than inthe perfum’d chambers of the great, Under the canopies of costly state,
And lull’d with sounds of sweetest melody ? 2
O thou dull god, why ly’st thou with the vile, In loathsome jalan and leav’st the kingly couch A watch-case to a common “Jarum bell?
Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast,
Seal up the ship-boy’s eyes, and rock his brains In cradle of the rude imperious surge ;
And in the visitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them With deaf’ning clamours in the slipp’ry shrouds, That, with the hurly, Death itself awakes ? Canst thou, oh partial Sleep, give thy repose To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude ;
And in the calmest and the stillest night,
With all appliances and means to boot,
Deny it to a king? Then, happy lowly clown! Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown! -
IV. Soliloquy of the King in Hamlet.
O, my offence is rank, it smells to Heav’n! It hath the primal, eldest curse upon’t—
A brother’s murder! Pray I cannot ; Though inclination be as sharp as ’twill,
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent ; And, like a man to double business bound,
Py 4 a a a mi
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. 211. [ stand in pause where I shall first begin, And both neglect. What if this cursed hand Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood? = s_— [s there not rain enough in the sweet heav’ns To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy; But to confront the visage of offence ? And what’s in prayer but this two-fold force ; To be forestalled ere we come to fall, . — Or pardon’d being down? Then I'll look up. My fault is past.—But oh! what form of pray’r Can serve my turn! Forgive me my foul murder ! That cannot be, since J am still possess’d Of those effects for which I did the murder, My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen. May one be pardon’d and retain th’ offence? ? in the corrupted currents of this world Offence’s gilded hand may shove by justice ; And oft *tis seen the wicked prize itself Z Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above: ( There is no shuffling ; there the action lies " In its true nature, and we ourselves compell’d, Ev’n to the teeth and forehead of our faults, To give in evidence. What then? what rests? Try what repentance can: what can it not? Yet what can it when one cannot repent ? Oh wretched state! oh bosom black as death ! Oh limed soul, that, struggling to be free, Art more engag’d! Help, angels! make assay! Bow, stubborn knees! and heart, with strings of steel, Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe ! All, all may yet be well.
az _- GRIEF AND TENDERNESS:
Vv. Cato’s Speech on tatial of his Son.
Tanks to the gods,—my boy has done his duty ! Welcome, my son! Here lay him down, my friends, Full in my sight, that I may view at leisure The bloody corse, and count those glorious wounds. —How beautiful is death when earn’d by virtue! ' Who would not be that youth ? What pity is it, That we can die but once to serve our country? af Alas! my friends, Why mourn you thus? Let not a private loss Afflict your hearts: ’tis Rome requires our tears, The mistress of the world, the seat of empire, The nurse of heroes, the delight of gods, That humbled the proud tyrants of the earth, — And set the nations free—Rome is no more! O liberty! O virtue! O my country! Whate’er the Roman virtue has subdu’d, The sun’s whole course, the day and year, are Cesar’s! For him the self-devoted Decii dy’d, The Fabii fell, and the great Scipios conquer’d ; Ev’n Pompey fought for Cesar. Oh, my friends, How is the toil of fate, the work of ages, The Roman empire, fall’n! O curst ambition ! - FalPn into Cesar’s hands! Our great forefathers Had left him nought to conquer but his country. Farewell, my friends! If there’be any of you Who dare not trust the victor’s clemency, Know there are ships prepar’d by my command, Their sails already opening to the winds, That shall convey you to the wish’d-for port. Is there aught else, my friends, I can do for you? The conqueror draws near ;—once more farewell | If e’er we meet hereafter, we shall meet
tte she
4 . 4 ; : }
In happier climes, and on a safer shore,
‘Where Cesar never shall approach us more. —
There the brave youth, with love of virtue fir'd,
Who greatly in his country’s cause expir’d,
Shall know he conquer’d. The firm patriot there,
Who made the welfare of mankind his care,
Though still by faction, vice, and fortune crost,
Shall find the gen’rous labour was not lost. _
VI. Hymn to Adversity.
Davcuter of Jove, relentless power,
Thou tamer of the human breast,
Whose iron scourge and tort’ring hour
The bad affright, afflict the best !
Bound in thy adamantine chain,
The proud are taught to taste of pain,
And purple tyrants vainly groan
With pangs unfelt before, unpitied and alone. When first thy sire to send on earth
Virtue, his darling child, design’d,
To thee he gave the heavenly birth,
And bade thee form her infant mind.
Stern rugged nurse! thy rigid lore
With patience many a year she bore:
What sorrow was thou bad’st her know,
And from her own, she learn’d to melt at others’ woe.
Scar’d at thy frown terrific, fly Self-pleasing Folly’s idle brood, Wild Laughter, Noise, and thoughtless Joy, And leave us leisure to be good. © Light they disperse, and with them go The summer friend, the flatt’ring foe; © By vain prosperity receiv’d,
To her they vow their truth, and are again believ’d.
a13
214 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
Wisdom, in sable garb array’d, Immers’d in rapt’rous thought pipiens And Melancholy, silent maid, e-9 With leaden eye, that loves bs oa ad as 7 Still on thy solemn steps attend ; Ad Warm Charity, the gen’ral Ginn, wa With Justice to herself severe, And Pity, dropping soft the sadly pleasing tear.
Oh, gently on thy suppliant’s head, Dread goddess, lay thy chast’ning eid!
Not in thy Gorgon terrors clad, Sh teeta
Nor circled with the vengeful band,
(As by the impious thou art seen)
With thund’ring voice and threat’ning mien, With screaming Horror’s funeral cry,
Despair, and fell Disease, with ghastly Poverty.
Thy form benign, oh Goddess, wear, Thy milder influence impart, " Thy philosophic train be there, To soften, not to wound, my heart! The gen’rous spark extinct revive, Teach me to love and to forgive, « Exact my own defects to scan, What others are, to feel, and know myself a man !
VII. Ode on a distant Prospect of Eton Collate
Ye distant spires, ye antique towers, That crown the watery glade, Where grateful Science still adores Her Henry’s holy shade ; "9 And, ye, that from the stately brow Of Winvsor’s heights th’ expanse below
a
‘—s
ee a ee
a
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. —_ 18 of grove, of lawn, of mead, survey, Whose turf, whose shade, whose flow’rs among Wanders the hoary Tuames along His silver-winding way.
Ah happy hills, ah pleasing shades,
Ah fields beloy’d in‘ vain,
Where once my careless childhood stoned
A stranger yet to pain!
‘feel the gales that from you blow \ momentary bliss bestow,
As, waving fresh their gladsome wing, My weary soul they seem to sooth, And, redolent of joy and youth,
To breathe a second spring.
say, Father Tuames, (for thou hast seen Full many a sprightly race, _ Disporting on thy margent green, The paths of pleasure trace,) Who foremost now delight to cleave With pliant arm thy glassy wave ? The captive linnet which enthral ? What idle progeny succeed, lo chase the rolling circle’s speed, Or urge the flying ball ?
Whilst some, on earnest bus’néss bent, Their murmuring labours ply
Gainst graver hours, that bring constraint, e To sweeten liberty :
Some bold adventurers disdain
Phe limits of their little reign, And unknown regions dare descry :
Still as they run they look behind,
They hear a voice in every wind, fe And snatch a fearful joy. yc?
216 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
Gay hope is theirs, by fancy fed,
Less pleasing when possest :
The tear forgot as soon as shed,
The sunshine of the breast : Theirs buxom health of rosy hue, Wild wit, invention ever new,
And lively cheer of vigour born > The thoughtless day, the easy night, The spirits pure, the slumbers light
That fly th’ approach of morn.
Alas, regardless of their doom,
The little victims play ;
No sense have they of ills to come,
No care beyond to-day !
Yet see how all around them wait The ministers of human fate,
And black Misfortune’s baleful train ; Ah, show them where in ambush stand To seize their prey the murd’rous band !
Ah, tell them, they are men !
These shall the fury Passions tear,
The vultures of the mind ; Disdainful Anger, pallid Fear,
And shame that skulks behind ;
Or pining Love shall waste their youth, Or Jealousy with rankling tooth,
That inly gnaws the secret heart, And Envy wan, and faded Care, Grim-visag’d, comfortless Despair,
And Sorrow’s piercing dart.
Ambition this shall tempt to rise, Then whirl the wretch from high, bitter Scorn a sacrifice, And grinning Infamy.
- ier ce
2 mee Pe er -
OR eae sey’ enh
_  -
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
The stings of Falsehood those shall try, —
And hard Unkindness’ alter’d eye, ial That mocks the tear it fore’d to flow ;
And keen Remorse, with blood defil’d ;
And moody Madness, laughing wild
_ Amid severest woe.
Lo! in the vale of years beneath, A grisly troop is seen, ae, : ; The painful family of Death, 2 More hideous than their queen: This racks the joints, this fires the veins, That ev’ry !ab’ring sinew strains, Those in the deeper vitals rage : Lo! Poverty, to fill the band, That numbs the soul with icy hand, And slow-consuming Age.
To each his sufferings: all are men, Condemn’d alike to groan ; The tender for another’s pain, _ Th’ unfeeling for his own. Yet ah; why should they know their fate? Since sorrow never comes too late, ’ And happiness too swiftly flies ; Thought would destroy their paradise. No more: where ignorance is bliss, °Tis folly to be wise.
VII. Satan’s Address io the Sun.
© ruov that, with surpassing glory crown’d, Look’st, from thy sole dominion, like the god Of this new world ; at whose sight all the stars Hide their diminish’d heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name,
© Sun! to tell thee how I hate thy beams, L
ai
g
- Would set me high’st, and in a moment quit $ q
218 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
That bring to my remembrance from what state’
I fell; how glorious once above thy sphere,
Till pride, and worse ambition, threw me down, Warring in heav’n against heaven’s matchless King. Ah, wherefore? He desery’d no such return From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with lis good Upbraided none ; nor was his service hard.
What could be less than to afford him praise,
The easiest recompense: and pay him thanks, How due! yet all his good prov’d ill in me,
And wrought but malice: lifted up sohigh, __
I ’sdained subjection, and thought one step higher
aes
% :
- a
,
The debt immense of endless gratitude,
So burthensome, still paying, still to ewe ; Forgetful what from him I still receiv’d ;
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once Indebted and discharged : what burthen then ? O had his pow’rful destiny ordain’d
Me some inferior angel, I had stood
Then happy ; no unbounded hope had rais’d Ambition. Yet why not? some other pow’r As great might have aspir’d, and me, though mean, ; Drawn to his part: but other pow’rs as great Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within
Or from without, to all temptations arm’d.
Hadst thou the same free will and pow’r to stand ? Thou hadst. Whom’hast thou then, or what, t’accuse, But Heav’n’s free love, dealt equally to all? * * « Be then his love accurs’d, since love or hate, :
Thave often thought cursing the love of God, though in the moutl atan, too harsh even for the narrative style ; but when Satan is pes
r GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. - 9i9
©To me alike, it deals eternal woe. nS « Nay, curs’d be thou: since, against his, thy will oF * Chose freely what it now so justly rues.”
Me miserable! which way shall I fly
infinite wrath and infinite despair ?-
Which way I fly is hell ; myself am hell;
And, in the lowest diene a lower deep,
Still threat’ning to devour me, opens wide,
To which the hell I suffer seems a heaven.
O then, at last, relent! Is there no place
Left for repentance, none for pardon left ?
None left but by submission; and that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Adlng the spirits beneath, whom I seduc’d
With other promises and other vaunts
Than to submit, boasting I could subdue
Th’ Omnipotent. Ah me! they little know
How dearly I abide that boast so vain, Under what torments inwardly I groan,
While they adore me on the throne of hell ;
With diadem and sceptre high advane’d,
The lower still I fall, only supreme
In misery: such joy ambition finds.
But say I could repent, and could obtain.
y act of grace my former state, how soon
ould height recall high thoughts! how soon unsay
hat feign’d submission swore! Ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void:
or never can true reconcilement grow
onified by a boy at school, and urged to pronounce this curse with
e greatest energy, it becomes too grating to Christian ears to be
orne. I would advise therefore, that this and the three subsequent
ines should be omitted, as I am much mistaken if the speech be
enerally found too long and tiresome hoth to the speaker and hea jee
220 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierc’d so deep ; Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear
Short intermission, bought with double smart. This knows my punisher ; therefore as far
From granting he as I from begging peace :
All hope excluded thus, behold, instead —
Of us, outcast, exil’d, his new delight,
Mankind created ; and for him this world.
So farewell, hope! and, with hope, farewell fear ! Farewell remorse! All good to me is lost: — ' Evil, be thou my good! By thee, at least Divided empire with heav’n’s King I hold ;
By thee—and more than half perhaps will reign ; As man, ere long, and this new world, shall know.
TX. Antony’s Funeral Oration over Casar’s Body.
Friznps, Romans, Countrymen, lend me your ears! ~
I come to bury Cesar, not to praise him. The evil that men do, lives after them,
The good is oft interred with their bones; - So let it be with Cesar. Noble Brutus Hath told you Caesar was ambitious ;
If it were so it was a grievous fault,
And grievously hath Cesar answer’d it. Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest, (For Brutus is an honourable man ;
So are they all, all honourable men,)
Come I to speak in Cesar’s funeral.—
He was my friend, faithful and just to me: But Brutus says, he was ambitious,
Brutus is an honourable man.
lath brought many captives home to Rome,
: iy af ° se an DA A ee aR ah A il ietapenapelliasite a ee aT
ne Ewen
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. aa1
Whose ransoms did the gen’ral coffers fill ; as i Did this in Cesar seem ambitious ? When that the poor have cry’d, Cesar hath wept ; Ambition should be made of sterner stuff :. Yet Brutus says, he was ambitious, - And Brutus is an honourable man. You all did see, that on the Lupercal I thrice presented him a kingly crown, —__ Which he did thrice refuse: Was this ambition? Yet Brutus says, he was ambitious ; And, sure, he is an honourable man. I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke, But here I am.to speak what I do know. You all did love him once,. not without cause: What cause withholds you then to mourn for him? O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts, And men have lost their reason.—Bear with me— My heart is in the coffin there with Cesar, | And I must pause, till it come back to me. If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.— You all do know this mantle; .I. remember The first time ever Cesar put it on, "Twas on a summer’s evening in his tent, That day he overcame the Nervii Look! in this place ran Cassius’ dagger through ;— See what a rent the envious Casca made ; Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb’d, And, as he pluck’d his cursed steel away, Mark how the blood of Cesar follow’d it ! As rushing out of doors, to be resolv’d, If Brutus so unkindly knock’d, or no: For Brutus, as you know, was Czsar’s angel. Judge, oh ye gods! how dearly Cesar loy’d him ; This, this was the unkindest cut of all ; #
E E
222 _ GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
For when the noble Czsar saw him stab, Ingratitude, more strong than traitor’s arms,
Quite vanquish’d him ; then burst his mighty heart ;
And, in his mantle muffling up his face,
Even at the base of Pompey’s statue,
Which all the while ran blood, great Cesar fell. Oh what a fall was there, my countrymen! Then I and you, and all of us, fell down, Whilst bloody treason flourish’d over us.—
O, now you weep and I perceive you feel
The dint of pity ; theseare gracious drops.
Kind souls; what? weep you when you but behold Kase
Our Cesar’s vesture wounded? Look you here! Here is himself, marr’d, as you see, by traitors.—
Good friends, sweet friends, Jet me not stir you up
To any sudden flood of mutiny. They that have done this deed are honourable. What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
That made them doit; they are wise and honourable ;
And will, no doubt, with reason answer you.
I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts ; Tam no orator, as Brutus is:
But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
That love my friend: and that they know full well That gave me public leave to speak of him :
For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth, Action nor utt’rance, nor the power of speech,
To stir men’s blood ; I only speak right on :
I tell you that which you yourselves do know ;
inthe shale SP i nea) nA yee tjhah mica Pi lady BOOB PI ory goign ats» .
;
Show you sweet Czsar’s wounds, poor, poor dumb mouths,
And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus, And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Id ruffle up your spirits, and put a tongue In"€very wound of Cesar, that should move The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.
ts GRIEF AND TENDERNESS, 223
X. Samson deploring his Captivity, and Loss of Sight.
A witrte onward lend thy guiding hand
To these dark steps ; a little farther on ;
For yonder bank has choice of sun or shade : There I am wont to sit when any chance Relieves me from my task of servile toil,
Daily in the common prison else enjoin’d me ; Where I, a pris’ner chain’d, scarce freely draw The air imprison’d also, close and damp, Unwholesome draught. But here I feel amends ; The breath of Heav’n fresh blowing pure and sweet With day-spring born : here leave me to respire. This day a solemn feast the people hold To Dagon their sea-idol, and forbid
Laborious works : unwillingly this rest
Their superstition leaves me ; hence, with leave, Retiring from the popular noise, I seek
This unfrequented place, to find some ease— Ease to the body some, none to the mind
From restless thoughts, that like a deadly swarm Of hornets arm’d, no sooner found alone,
But rush upon me thronging, and present
Times past, what once I was, and what am now. Oh, wherefore was my birth from heav’n foretold *Twice by an angel, who, at last, in sight
Of both my parents, all in flames ascended
From off the altar, where an offering burn’d, As ina fiery column charioting
His god-like presence, and from some ee act Or beneBé reveal’d to Abraham’s race ?
Why was my breeding order’d, and prescrib’d, “4
294 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
As of a person separate to God,
Design’d for great exploits, if I must die,
Betray’d, captiv’d, and both my eyes put out ;
Made of my enemies the scorn and gaze,
To grind in brazen fetters under task, With this Heav’n-gifted strength? O glorious strength, Put to the labour of a beast, debas’d
Lower than bond-slave. Promise was, that I Should Israel from Philistian yoke deliver ; Ask for this great deliverer now, and find him Eyeless in Gaza, at the mill with slaves, - Himself in bonds under Philistian yoke:
Yet stay, let me not rashly call in doubt Divine prediction ; what if all foretold
Had been fulfill’d but through my own default ? Whom have I to complain of but myself? Who, this high gift of strength committed to me, In what part lodg’d, how easily bereft me, Under the seal of silence could not keep,
But weakly to a woman must reveal it, O’ercome with importunity and tears.
O impotence of mind, in body strong!
But what is strength without a double share
Of Wisdom? Vast, unwieldy, burdensome, Proudly secure, yet liable to fall
By weakest subtleties ; not made to rule,
But to subserve, where wisdom bears command! God, when he gave me strength, to shew withal How slight the gift was, hung it in my hair.— But, peace, I must not quarrel with the will
Of highest dispensation, which herein
Haply had ends above my reach to know: Suffices that, to me, strength is my bane,
And- proves the source of all my miseries ;
_ 4 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. 225 So many and so huge, that each apart Would ask a life to wail; but chief of all,
Oh loss of sight, of thee I most complain ! Blind among enemies! Oh 1 worse than chains, Dungeon, or beggary, or decrepit age ! Light, the prime work of God, to me’s extinct, And all her various objects of delight | Annull’d, which might in part my grief have eas'd; Inferior to the vilest now become, Of man or worm; the vilest here excel me; They creep, yet see: I dark, in light expos’d To daily fraud, contempt, abuse, and wrong ; Within doors or without, still as a fool In pow’r of others, never in my own; Scarce half I seem to live ; dead more than half. Oh dark, dark, dark, amid the blaze of noon; Irrecoverably dark; totat eclipse, Without all hope-of day ! Oh first great beam, and thou great word, * Let there be light,” and light was over all! Why am I thus bereav’d thy prime decree ; The sun to me is dark, And silent as the moon, When she deserts the night, lid in her vacant interlunar cave. Since light so necessary is to life, And almost life itself, if it be true That light is in the soul, she all in every part ; why was the sight [o such a tender ball as th’ eye confin’d, 30 obvious and so easy to be quench’d? ° And not, as feeling, through all parts diffus’d, [hat she might look at will through every pore? Phen bad I not been thus exil’d from light,
t3
226 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
As in the land of darkness, yet in light,
To live a life half dead, a living death,
‘And bury’d ; but ob, yet more miserable! _ Myself my sepulchre, a moving grave: Bury’d, yet not exempt,
By privilege of death and burial,
From worst of other evils, pains, and wrongs, ‘But made hereby obnoxious more
To all the miseries of life,
Life in captivity =
Among inhuman foes.
Bante, tte? gl
XI. The Bard.
* Ruin seize thee, ruthless King ! “ Confusion on thy banners wait ; “ Though, fann’d by Conquest’s crimson wing, ~ “ They mock the air with idle state! “ Helm, nor hauberk’s twisted mail, “ Nor even thy virtues, Tyrant, shall avail *«« To save thy secret soul from nightly fears, “ From Cambria’s curse, from Cambria’s tears !” } Such were the sounds that o’er the crested pride Of the first Edward scatter’d wild dismay, As down the steep of Snowdon’s shaggy side He wound with toilsome march his long array. Stout Glo’ster stood aghast in speechless trance. To arms! cried Mortimer, and couch’d his quivring lance.
3 i ; : t .
Dn An seep
On a rock, whose haughty brow | Frowns o’er old Conway’s foamy flood,
Rob’d in the sable garb of woe, With haggard eyes the Poet stood ;
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. 227
(Loose his beard, and hoary hair Stream’d, like a meteor, to the troubled air ;) And with a master’s hand, and prophet’s fire, Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre. “ Hark, how each giant-oak, and desert cave, _ * Sighs to the torrent’s awful voice beneath ! * O’er thee, O king! their hundred arms they wave,
« Revenge on thee in hoarser murmurs breathe ; * Vocal no more, since Cambria’s fatal day, * To high-born Hoel’s harp or soft Llewellyn’s lay.
* Cold is Cadwallo’s tongue, « That hush’d the stormy main :
« Brave Urien sleeps upon his craggy bed: _- Mountains, ye mourn in vain
«© Modred, whose magic song « Made huge Piinlimmon bow his cloud-topt head. «“ On dreary Arvon’s shore they lie Smear’d with gore, and ghastly pale ; “ Far, far aloof, th’ affrighted ravens sail ;
«« The famish’d eagle screams, and passes by. « Dear lost companions of my tuneful art,
** Dear as the light that visits these sad eyes, «« Dear as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,
« Ye died amidst your dying country’s cries.
“ No more I weep. They do not sleep.
« On yonder cliffs, a grisly band, « T see them sit, they linger yet,
«« Avengers of their native land: «: With me in dreadful harmony they join, «« And weave with bloody hands the tissue of thy line.
”
« Weave the warp, and weave the woof, “« The winding-sheet of Edward’s race ;
228. GRIEF AND TENDERNESS, ~ “ Give ample room, and verge enough, «The characters of hell to'trace; « Mark the year, and mark the night, «« When Severn shall re-echo with ‘affright & The shrieks of death, through Berkley’s roof that so8 “ Shrieks of an agonizing king! ** She-wolf of France, with unrelenting fangs « That tear’st the bowels of thy mangled mate, * From thee be born, who o’er thy country hangs
« The scourge of heav’n. What terrors round him wait!
« Amagement in his van, with Flight combin’d, « And Sorrow’s faded form, and Solitude, behind.
« Mighty victor, mighty lord, « Low on his fun’ral couch he lies ! «No pitying heart, no eye, afford « A tear to grace his obsequies. «Ts the sable warrior fled ? « Thy son is gone; he rests among the dead. «The swarm that in thy noon-tide beam were born, «« Gone to salute the rising morn. “ Fair laughs the morn, and soft the zephyr blows, « While, proudly riding o’er the azure realm, « Tn gallant trim the gilded vessel goes ; « Youth on the prow, and pleasure at the helm ; “« Regardless of the sweeping whirlwind’s sway, ‘«¢ That, hush’d in grim repose, expects his ev’ning prey.
« Fill high the sparkling bowl, “The rich repast prepare :
« Reft of a crown, he yet may share the feast : « Close by the regal chair,
«« Fell Thirst and Famine scowl
‘«« A baleful smile upon their baffled guest.
= . : mae «) anemia icant ieee CROs
OP OO OLED A EALOE LD bE
onad
se
ee
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. _—Ss_-99°
_ * Heard ye the din of battle bray, * Lance to lance, and horse to horse? ~ « Long years of havoc urge their destin’d course, “ And through the kindred squadrons mow their way. i Ye tow’rs of Julius, London’s lasting shame, ~ With many a foul and midnight murder fed, *« Revere his consort’s faith, his father’s fame, «« And spare the meek usurper’s holy head. « Above, below, the rose of snow ~ “ Twin'd with her blushing foe we spread: ; The bristled boar, in infant gore, «« Wallows beneath the thorny shade: Now, Brothers, bending o’er th’ accursed’ loom, Stamp we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom!
f
¢
n
a n
a ”
« Edward, lo! to sudden fate «« (Weave we the woof. The thread is spun.) Half of thy heart we consecrate. _ (The web is wove. The work is done.)—— « Stay, oh stay ! nor thus forlorn “« Leave me unbless’d, unpity’d, here to mourn: “In yon bright track, that fires the western skies “« They melt, they vanish from my eyes. “« But, oh! what solemn scenes on Snowdon’s height “ Descending slow their glitt’ring skirts unroll ?, * Visions of glory! spare my aching sight : « Ye unborn ages, crowd not on my soul! « No more our long-lost Arthur we bewail : « All hail, ye genuine Kings! Britannia’s issue, hail! “ Girt with many a baron bold, «« Sublime their starry fronts they rear ; « And gorgeous dames, and statesmen old, «In bearded majesty appear. ‘In the midst a form divine ! “ Her eye proclaims her of the Briton line! 7
€
x
n
230 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
« Her lion-port, her awe commanding face, « Attemper’d sweet to virgin grace. «« What strings symphonious tremble in the air !
«« What strains of vocal transport round her play! —
« Hear from the grave, great Taliessin, hear, « They breathe a soul to animate thy clay. « Bright Rapture calls, and, soaring as she sings, « Waves in the eye of Heav’n her many-coloured wings.
«« The verse adorn again
“ Fierce War, and faithful Love, « And Truth severe, by fairy Fiction drest:
«In buskin’d measures move
« Pale Grief, and pleasing Pain,
«“ With Horror, tyrant of the throbbing breast.
«« A voice, as of the cherub-choir, « Gales from bleoming Eden bear ; « And distant warblings lessen on my ear,
« That lost in long futurity expire. «Fond impious man, think’st thou yon sanguine cloud,
« Rais’d by thy breath, has quench’d the orb of day ? “« 'To-morrow-he repairs the golden flood,
«« And warms the nations with redoubled ray. « Enough for me, with joy I see
« The different doom our fates assign. “ Be thine Despair, and sceptred Care ;
“To triumph, and to die, are mine.” He spoke ; and headlong, from the mountain’s height, Deep in the roaring tide he plung’d to endless night.
1p pialeaiamalae Cans —seitttsaensi nadine aT
ae ee Oe
is GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. = 931._
&$ Lhave often hesitated at inserting Dryden’s Ode on Music in the present collection, from motives of delicacy respecting the morals of pupils of a tender age, who are taught to pronounce it. No one can be more alive to the beauties of poetry than I am; but when these
_ beauties are prostituted to the decoration of impiety, intemperance, "and debauchery, they become a very serious evil in the education of ~ ~ youth. Mature age will distinguish between the composition and the subject; but wrong associations are not so easily separated by boys at school. If therefore I am thought too nice, I hope it will be granted _to be an error on the right side; and that the collection may suffer as little as possible from the omission of this Ode, I have inserted an ori- _ Binal one in its place, little inferior in composition, but greatly supe- Tior in every other point of view; and this, to those parents and teachers who have the morals of their pupils a at heart, will be thought to be no bad exchange.
XII. A Pindaric Ode, prefixed to Mrs. Carter’s Transla- tion of Epictetus, on the Superiority of the Christian to the Stoic Philosophy.
Come, Epictetus! arm my breast With thy impenetrable steel, No more the wounds of grief to feel, Nor mourn, by others’ woes deprest. Oh! teach my trembling heart To scorn affliction’s dart ; Teach me to mock the tyrant Pain! For see, around me stand A dreadful murd’rous band ; I fly their cruel power in vain! - Here lurks Distemper’s horrid train, And there the Passions lift their flaming brands; Those, with fell rage, my helpless body tear, While these, with daring hands, Against the immortal soul their impious weapons rear.
'
- 932° GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
Where’er I turn, fresh evils meet my eyes ;. Sin, Sorrow, and Disgrace, Pursue the human race !
There, on the bed of sickness, Virtue lies
See Friendship bleeding by the sword
Of base ingratitude ! Sée baleful Jealousy intrude, And poison all the bliss that Love had stor’d-:- Oh! seal my ears against the piteous cry Of Innocence distrest ;. Nor let me shrink, when Fancy’s eye - Beholds the guilty wretch’s breast Beneath the tort’ring pincers heave: Nor for. the num’rous wants of Mis’ry grieve; . Which all-disposing Heav’n denies me to relieve! "No longer let .my fleeting joys depend . ‘ On social or domestic ties ! Superior let my spirit rise, .
Nor in the gentle counsels of a friend,
Nor in the smiles of love, expect delight : But teach me in myself to find Whate’er can please or fill my mind.
Let inward beauty charm the mental sight ; Let god-like Reason, beaming bright, Chase far away each gloomy shade,
Till Virtue’s heav’nly form display’d Alone shall captivate my soul, .
' And her divinest love possess me whole !
But, ah! what means this impious pride, Which heav’nly hosts deride ! Within myself does virtue dwell? Is all serene and beauteous there ? What mean these chilling damps of fear ? Tell me, Philosophy ! thou boaster, tell !
™ GRIEF AND D TENDERNESS, 233 This god-like all-sufficient mind, Which, in its own perfection blest, Defies the woes or malice of mankind _ To shake its self-possessing rest, Is it not foul, weak, ignorant, and blind? < Oh man! from conscious Virtue’s praise, Fall’n, fall’n—what refuge canst thou find? What pitying hand again will raise, From native earth thy erarelinig frame ! who will cleanse thy heart from spot of sinful blame >
Bui see! what sudden glories from the sky To my benighted soul appear, ~ And all the gloomy prospect cheer ? What awful form approaches nigh ?
Awful, yet mild as is the southern wind, That gently bids the forest nod.
Hark! thunder breaks the air, and angels speak !
« Behold the Saviour of the World! Behold the Lamb of
God !” Ye sons of Pride, behold his aspect meek ! The tear of pity on his cheek !
See in his train appear Humility and Patience sweet ;
Repentance, prostrate at his sacred feet,
Bedews with tears, and wipes them with her flowing hair!
What scenes now meet my wond’ring eyes, What hallow’d grave, By mourning maids attended round, Attracts the Saviour’s steps? What heart-felt wound His spotless bosom heaves with tender sighs? Why weeps the Son belov’d, Omnipotent to save ?
934 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. But, lo! he waves his awful hand! The sleeping clay obeys his dread command. Oh, Lazarus! come forth !—** Come forth and see « The dear effects of wondrous love!
ee ‘He, at whose word the seas and rocks remove, _ “ Thy Friend, thy Lord, thy Maker, weeps for thee !”
Thy walls, Jerusalem, have seen thy King, In meekness clad, lament thy hapless fate ! Unquench’d his love, though paid with ruthless hate! O lost, relentless Sion! Didst thou know Who thus vouchsafes thy courts to tread, What loud Hosannas wouldst thou sing ! How eager crown his honour’d head ! Nor see unmoy’d his kind paternal woe! Nor force his tears, his precious blood, for thee to flow!
No more repine, my coward soul, The sorrows of mankind to share, Which he, who could the world control, Did not disdain to bear! Check not the flow of sweet fraternal love, | By Heaven’s high King in bounty given, | Thy stubborn heart to soften and improve, Thy earth-clad spirit to refine, And gradual raise to love divine, And wing its soaring flight to heaven.
XIII. Ode on the Passions.
Wauen Music, heav’nly maid, was young, While yet in early Greece she sung, The Passions oft, to hear her shell, Throng’d around her magic cell, Exulting, trembling, raging, fainting, Possess’d beyond the Muse’s painting : By turns they felt the glowing mind Disturb’d, delighted, rais’d, refin’d; Till once, ’tis said, when all were fir’d, Filld with fury, rapt, inspir’d,
From the supporting myrtles round They snatch’d her instruments of sound ; And, -as they oft had heard apart
Sweet lessons of her forceful art,
Each, for Madness rul’d the hour, Would prove his own expressive pow’r.
First Fear, his hand, its skill to try, Amidst the chords bewilder’d laid,
And back recoil’d, he knew not why, Ev’n at the sound himself had made.
Next Anger rush’d ; his eyes on fire, In lightnings ownd his secret stings ; In one rude clash he struck the lyre, And swept with hurried hand the strings.
With woeful measures wan Despair; _
~ Low sullen sounds his grief beguil’d ;
A solemn, strange, and mingled air ; Twas sad by fits, by starts ’twas wild.
= GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
8 pe
236 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
But thou, O Hope! with eyes so fair, - What was thy delighted measure ? : Still it whisper’d promis’d pleasure, ‘ And bade the lovely scenes at distance hail ;. ‘ Still would her touch the scene prolong ; 7 And from the rocks, the wood, the vale, 7 She call’d on Echo still through. all the song ; And where her sweetest theme she chose, ; A soft responsive voice was heard at ev’ry close: : ‘And Hope enchanted smil’d, and way’d her golden hair. t t i 4
And longer had she sung :—but, with a frown, Revenge impatient rose : He threw his blood-stain’d sword i in thunder down, And, with a with’ring look The war-denouncing trumpet took, ’ And blew a blast so loud and dread, | Were ne’er prophetic sounds so full of woe. And ever and anon.he beat ’ The doubling drum with furious heat ; And though, sometimes, each dreary pause between, Dejected Pity, at his.side, Her soul-subduing voice applied, Yet still he kept his wild unalter’d mien, While each strain’d ball of sight seem’d bursting from hii head.
Thy numbers, Jealousy, to nought were fix’d, Sad proof of thy distressful state ; Of diff’ring themes the veering song was mix’d, And now it courted Laat: raving, call’d on Hate.
With eyes uprais’d, as one inspir’d, Pale Melancholy sat retir’d,
| nal
. GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. 937
And from her wild sequester’d seat, — In notes by distance made more sweet, ~ Pour’d through the mellow horn her pensive soul ; And, dashing soft from rocks around, _ Bubbling runnels join’d the sound : Through glades and glooms the mingled measures stole, Or o’er some haunted streams with fond delay, Round a holy calm diffusing, Love of peace, and lonely musing, | In hollow murmurs died away.
But oh, how alter’d was its sprightlier tone
When Cheerfulness, a nymph of healthiest hue, ’ Her bow across her shoulder flung,
_ Her buskins gemm’d with morning dew,
Blew an inspiring air, that dale and thicket rung, The hunter’s call to Faun and Dryad known ; The oak-crown’d Sisters and their chaste-eyed Queen,
Satyrs, and Sylvan Boys, were seen,
Peeping from forth their alleys green ;
Brown Exercise rejoic’d to hear,
And Sport leapt up, and seiz’d his beechen spear.
Last came Joy’s ecstatic trial : He, with viny crown advancing,
First to the lively pipe his hand address’d ; But soon he saw the brisk awak’ning viol,
Whose sweet entrancing voice he lov’d the best. They would have thought, who heard the strain, They saw in Tempé’s vale her native maids, Amidst the festal sounding shades, |
To some unwearied minstrel dancing ;
238, GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. -
While, as his flying fingers kiss’d the strings, Love fram’d with Mirth a gay fantastic round ; Loose were her tresse8 seen, her zone unbound, And he, amidst his frolic play,
As if he would the charming air repay,
Shook thousand odours from his dewy wings.
O Music! sphere-descended maid,
' Friend of pleasure, wisdom’s aid, Why, goddess, why, to us denied, Lay’st thou thy ancient lyre aside ? As in that lov’d Athenian bow’r,
You learnt an all-commanding pow’r, Thy mimic soul, O nymph endear’d !
- Can well recall what then it heard.
Where is thy native simple heart, Devote to virtue, fancy, art? ~ Arise, as in that elder time,
Warm, energetic, chaste, sublime. ; Thy wonders, in that god-like age, | Fill thy recording Sister’s page.
: my Se eee we Oe
*Tis said, and I believe the tale,
Thy humblest reed could more prevail, Had more of strength, diviner rage, Than all which charms this laggard age ; Even all at once together found,
Cecilia’s mingled world of sound.— O bid our vain endeavours cease, Revive the just designs of Greece! _ Return in all thy simple state, Confirm the tales her sons relate!
LS eee ~ +e = : et
_ GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. 239
XIV. The ery of Bolingbroke and Richard into London. . Duke and Duchess of York,
Dich. My Lord, you told me, you would tell the rest,
When weeping made you break the story off, Of our two cousins coming into London.
York. Where did I leave? _
‘Duch. At that sad stop, my Lord, Where rude misgovern’d hands, from window-tops, - Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard’s head. York. Then, as I said, the Duke, great Bolingbroke, Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed, Which his aspiring rider seem’d to know, With slow, but stately pace, kept on his course ; While all tongues cried, God save thee, Bolingbroke ! You would have thought the very windows spake, So many greedy looks of young and old Through casements darted their desiring eyes Upon his visage: and that all the walls With painted imag’ry had said at once, Good Heav’n preserve thee! Welcome, Bolingbroke! Whilst he, from one side to the other turning, Bare-headed, lower than his proud steed’s neck, Bespoke them thus: I thank you, countrymen! And thus still doing, thus he pass’d along.
Duch. Alas! poor Richard, where rides he the while ?
York. As, in a theatre, the eyes of men, After a well-grac’d actor leaves the stage, Are idly bent on him that enters next, Thinking his prattle to be tedious: Ev’n so, or with much more contempt, men’s eyes Did scowl on Richard: no man cry’d, God save him!
240 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home ;
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head ; '
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off
(His face still combating with tears and smiles,
The badges of his grief and patience), ; That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel’d The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted, And barbarism itself have pitied him.
But Heaven hath a hand in these events,
To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
XV. Scroop and Richard.
Scroop. Mors health and happiness betide my Liege, Than can my care-tun’d tongue deliver him! K. Rich. My ear is open and my heart prepar’d ; The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold. Say, is my kingdom lost? Why, *twas my care ; And what loss is it to be rid of care ? Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we? Greater he shall not be; if he serve God/ We'll serve him too, and be his fellow so. Revolt cur subjects? That we cannot mend; _ They break their faith te God as well as us. Cry woe, destruction, ruin, loss, decay ; The worst is death, and death will have his day. Scroop. Glad am I that your Highness is so arm’d To bear the tidings of calamity. Like an unseasonable stormy day, Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores, As if the world were all dissolv’d to tears ; So high above his limits swells the rage Of Bolingbroke, cov’ring your fearful land
/
With hard bright steel, and hearts more hard than steel.
ee ee eT ee ee ee ee ee mee ial
a
Bat 2
aso ent nenyaapeiie eae
| GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. 244 White-beards have arm’d thejr thin and hairless scalps Against thy Majesty ; boys, with women’s voices,
Strive to speak big, and clasp their female joints
In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown :
The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows
Of double-fatal yew against thy state: ~ Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills,
Against thy seat both young and old rebel,
And all goes worse than I have pow’r to tell. °
K. Rich. Too well, too well thou tell’st a tale so ill.
Where is the earl of Wiltshire? Where is he?
And where, alas! are all my bosom-friends?
—No matter where ; of comfort no man speak :
Let’s talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs ;
Make dust our paper, and, with rainy eyes,
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth !
Let’s choose executors, and talk of wills ;
And yet not so for what can we bequeath,
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our lands, our lives, and all, are Bolingbroke’s,
And nothing can we call our own but death,
And that small model of the barren earth
Which serves as paste. and cover to our bones.
For Heav’n’s sake let us sit upon the ground,
And tell sad stories of the death of kings, How some have been depos’d, some slain in war ; Some haunted by the ghosts they dispossess’d ; Some poison’d by their wives ; some sleeping kill’d ; All murder’d :—for within the hollow crown That rounds the mortal temples of a king
Keeps Death his court; and there the antick sits, Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp } Allowing him a breath, a little scene, » monarchize, be fear'd, and. kill with looks ;
M
242 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
As if this flesh which walls about our life
Were brass impregnable ; and humour’d thus, Comes at the last; and, with a little pin, . : Bores through his ‘castle-walls, and farewell king! Cover your heads, and mock not flesh and blood With solemn rev’rence : throw away respect, Tradition, form, and ceremonious duty ;
For you have but mistook me all this while,
T live on bread like you, feel want like you ;
Taste grief, need friends, like * > you: : “subjected thus, How can you say to me, I am a king?
XVIII. Henry IV. and Prinee Henry.
P. Henry. I never thought to hear you speak again. K. Henry. Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought.
I stay too long by thee, I weary thee.
Dost thou so hunger for my empty chair,
That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth!
Thou seek’st the greatness that ‘will overwhelm thee.
Stay but a little ; for my cloud of dignity Is held from falling by so weak a wind That it will'quickly drop ;—my day is dim.
Thou hast stol’n that, which, after some few hours,
Were thine without offence; and, at my death, Thou hast seal’d up my expectation.
Thy life did manifest thou lov’dst me not,
And thou wilt have me die assur’d of it.
Thou hid’st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts, Which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart, To stab at half an hour of my frail life. ’
Fe ee ee a ee ene eee
EL ama cttons = hitipe
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. 243
What! canst thou not forbear me half an hour? Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thyself, And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear, That thou art crown’d, not that I am. dead. Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse Be drops of balm to sanctify thy head ; Only compound me with forgotten =atah Give that which gave thee life unto the worms ; Pluck down my officers, break my. decrees ; - For now a time is come to mock at form; __ Henry the Fifth is crown’d: up, Vanity! . Down, Royal state! All you sage counsellors, hence, And to the English court assemble now, . From ev ry region, apes of idleness. Now, neighbour confines, purge you of your scum: Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance, Revel the night, rob,. murder, and commit The oldest sins the newest kind of ways? Be happy,—he will trouble you no more ; England shall give him office, honour, might ; For the Fifth Harry from curb’d licence plucks The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent. O my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows! When that my care could not withhold thy riot, What wilt thou do when riot is thy care? O thou wilt be a wilderness again, Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants,
P, Henry. O pardon me, my liege! but for my tears (The moist impediments unto my speech), I had forestall’d this dear and deep rebuke Ere you with grief had spoke, and I had heard, The course of it so far. There is your crown; _.
M.2
O44 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. And he that wears the crown immortally
Long guard it yours! If I affect it more —
Than as your honour and as your renown,
Let me no more from this obedience rise, (Which my most true and inward duteous spirit Teacheth), this prostrate and exterior bending. Heav’n witness with me, when I here came in And found no course of breath within your majesty, How cold it struck my heart! If 1 do feign,
Oh let me in my present wildness die,
And never live to shew th’ incredulous world The noble change that I have purposed. Coming to look on you, thinking you dead, (And dead almost, my liege, to think you were,) I spake unto the crown, as having sense,
And thus upbraided it :—The care on thee depending Hath fed upon the body of my father ;
Therefore thou, best of gold, art worst of gold : Other, less fine in carat, is more precious, Preserving life in med’cine potable ;
But thou, most fine, most honour’d, most renown’d, Hast eat thy bearer up.—Thus, royal liege, Accusing it, I put it on my head,
To try’with it (as with an enemy
That had before my face murder’d my father) The quarrel of a true inheritor.
But if it did infect my blood with joy, *
Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride,— If any rebel or vain spirit of mine
Did with the least affection of a welcome _ Give entertainment to the might of it,—
Let Heav’n for ever keep it from my head,
And make me as the poorest vassal is,
That doth with awe and terror kneel to it !
ca
er area Le NS Cerone tae Cer Saw |
a es ad ae
| GRE AND, END RRNESS,
K. Henry. Omy son! — ‘Heav’n put it in thy mind to take thas. ede That thou might’st win the more thy father’s love, Pleading so wisely in excuse of it.
‘Come hither, Harry, sit thou by my bed,
And hear, I think, the very latest counsel That ever I shall breathe. Heaven knows, my son, By what bye-paths, and indireet.crook’d ways, | I met this crown; and I myself know well - How troublesome it sat upon my head.
To thee it shall descend with better quiet, ‘Better opinion, better confirmation :_
For all the soil of the achievement goes
With me into the earth. Therefore, my Harry, Be it thy course to busy giddy minds
With foreign quarrels; that action, hence borne out, May waste the memory of former days.
More would I, but my lungs are wasted so
That strength of speech is utterly deny’d me, How I came to the crown, O God, forgive! And grant it may with thee in true peace live !
P. Henry. My gracious liege,
You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me;
Then plain and right must my possession be ; Which J with more than with a common pain, ’Gainst all the world, will rightfully maintain,
XIX. Wolsey and Cromwell.
Wol. Farewet, a long farewell, to all‘ my greatness ! This is the state of man ;:—To-day he puts forth The tender leaves of hope; to-morrow blossoms, And bears his blushing honours thick upon him ; The third day comes a frost, a killing frost, And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
24
246 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. His greatness is a ripening, nips his root ;- And then he falls,-as Ido. I have yentur’d, Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders, These many summers in a sea of glory 5"
But far beyond my-depth: my high-blown pride
At length broke under me ; and now has left me, Weary, and old with perrice! to the mercy’ Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me. Vain pomp and glory of the world, 1 hate ye! I feel my heart new-opened.** Oh,-how wretched Is that poor man that hangs on princes’ favours! There is, betwixt that smile he would aspire to, That sweet aspect of princes, and his ruin, More pangs and fears than war or woman have ; And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer, : Never to hope again. Why, how now, Cromwell ?
Crom. I have no power to speak, Sir.
Wol. What, amaz’d At my misfortunes ? Can thy spirit wonder A great man should decline? Nay, if you weep, Tm fall’n indeed. Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear In all my miseries ; but thou hast fore’d me, Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
Let’s dry our eyes ; and thus far hear me, Cromwell,
And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention , ° Of me must more be heard, say then I taught thee;
Say, Wolsey, that once rode the waves of glory, And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour, Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in ; A sure and'safe one, though thy master miss’d it. Mark but my fall, and that which ruin’d me:
cithmiraptaiadentacne Tend’
ror pricnlitier tl ell
J
it ely adeahthdte ss
GRIEF AND. TENDERNESS. 247
| romweli, I charge thee, fling away ambition; .
By that sin fell the angels ; 3 how can man, then, at (Though th’ i image of his Maker) hope to win by’t? ‘Love thyself last ; cherish those hearts that hate thee ; ‘Corruption wins ae more than honesty. : “Still in thy right | hand carry gentle peace, ~ To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not: Let all the ends thou aim st at be thy Country’ Seda Thy God’s, and Truth’s $3 then if thou fall’st, re) Cromwell, Thou fall’st a | blessed 1 martyr. “Serve the King——
And pr’ythee | lead me in / “There take an inventory of all have; _
To the last penny, *tis the King’s. My robe,
And my integrity to Heav’n, is all
I dare now call my own. O Cromwell! Cromvell! Had I but served my God with half the zeal a I serv’d my King, he would notinmy age Have left me naked to my enemies.
Crom. Good Sir, have patience. Wol. Solhave. Farewell : ‘The hopes of court! My hopes in heaven do dwell.
“s
XX. Aletes and Ilyssus, in Creusa Queen of Athens,
Ale. My dearest boy : Ilys. Speak on, Aletes, And do not by that look of tenderness, And murm’ring to thyself, alarm me more. Ale. What should I speak? This very morn, Ilyssus ; This very morn I told thee a few hours Would show thee what thou wert ; but thy impatience Brooks not that short delay. It seems Aletes Has lost his usual credit with Tlyssus ; ' Ev’n with the youth his anxious care has form’d. Think’st thou the man who taught thy feeling heart
248 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
To start at falsehood, would himself commit The fraud thou shudder’st at? What have I done, Which should induce thee to a thought so base ? Did e’er my precepts contradict my heart? —
Did I e’er teach a virtue I not practis’d ?
—I see thou art confounded. Know then, youth, I blame not thy impatience ; nay, I praise
That modesty which can so soon resume
Its seat, when all things round are big with wonder.
Ere night thou shalt know all ; tll ppc, ES eae Behave as Athens’ King.
Ilys. O good Aletes, Forgive my rashness. Yes, I know thee honest As truth itself; and know the- wondrous debt I owe thy goodness. Yet, if thou confess That f have reason for these anxious cares, Thou wilt permit me still to question thee. Nay, look upon me whilst I speak to thee. Perhaps thou hast some secret cause, Aletes, For all that kind attention thou hast shown me, From infancy till now. Why dost thou turn Thy eyes to earth? *Tis plain thou hast a cause;
Thou know’st from whom I sprung ; how canst thou else
With confidence assert, that yet ere night I shall know all ?—Say this at least, Aletes, Shall the Queen’s anger cease ?
Ale. It shall, Ilyssus, Ey’n now I wait her here ; on what design, I must not yet inform thee. The next time Thou shalt behold her, thou wilt find a change Incredible indeed, from rage to fondness, From cold reserve to tears of bursting joy.
[Ilyssus is going to speak eagerly,
—Ask meno more,—Yet something didst thou say
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS; 249 Relating to the cause which fix’d me here, . Thy guardian, thy instructor, and—the time —
Will come when thou shalt atl it all, Tyssus, © ‘And bless my memory. © Ilys. Thou weep’st, Aletes ! My tears will mingle too. Ale. Forbear, and leave me ; Yet stay awhile ; for now, eas we eal To meet no more. _ Ilys. No more! Thou wilt net leave me When most I want thy care! ’Twas my first thought, *T was the first boon I ask’d of the good King, That thou might’st be my kind instructor still. p He prais’d my gratitude, and I had promis’d a To bring him to my cottage. He himself Shail be a suitor to thee. Ale. Thou hast ask’d Thou know’st not what: it cannot be, Ilyssus, That Xuthus and Aletes e’er should meet On terms of amity. The smiles of greatness To me have lost their value. For thy love I could do much ; and to be sever’d from thee Pulls at my heart-strings. But resistless fate Has fix’d the seal, and we must part for ever, How hard soe’er it seem. Thy youth will soon, Amidst the busy scenes of active greatness, Forget its monitor: but I must bear, In hopeless solitude, the pangs of absence Till thought shall be no more. Ilys. O heav’nly powers! Then there is something dreadful yet conceal’d. I cannot part from thee in ignorance. Tell me, Aletes! Ale. Would I could! but now
250 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
+ It must not be.—Haste to the banquet, youth ; E : Thy duty calls thee thither. : Ilys. Go I cannot,
Till thou assur’st me we shall meet again:
Ale. If possible we will. If not, remember, When thou shalt know thyself, that on thyself Thy fate depends ; that virtue, glory, happiness, Are close connected, and their sad reverse ~ Is vice, is pain, is infamy:—Alas!
These were the lessons of thy private life !
This I have told thee oft, but my fond tongue Runs o’er iis former precepts, and forgets Thou now must mount a throne ; a larger scene Of duty opens.
Ilys. Yet the tender friend,
Who should direct me, leaves me to myself. © Canst thou abandon me? :
Ale. Would fate permit, © ° ay I would attend thee still. But oh, Tlyssus ! } Whate’er becomes of me, when thou shalt reach > 4 That envied pinnacle of earthly greatness,
Where faithful monitors but rarely follow,
Ev’n there, amidst the kindest smiles of fortune, ° Forget not thou wert once distress’d and friendless. Be strictly just ; but yet, like Heav’n, with mercy Temper thy justice. From thy purged ear Banish base flattery, and spurn the wretch Who would persuade thee thou art more than man $ Weak, erring, selfish man, endued with power, To be the minister of public good. . If conquest charm thee, and the pride of war Blaze on thy sight, remember thou art placed The guardian of mankind, nor build thy fame - On rapines and on murders, Should soft peace
- + 4
;
| m, ) Paty’ wt eee b bected
‘GRIEF At AND. ‘TENDERNESS. 251
Tnvite to luxury—the pleasing bane _ Of happy kingdoms, know, from thy example, _ The bliss or woe of nameless millions springs,
Their virtue, or their vice. Nor think by laws | To curb licentious man: those Jaws alone _ Can bend the headstrong many to their yoke, Which make it present inPrest to obey them.
O boy !—Thy fate depends _ Upon thy absence now. The queen approaches. After the banquet I, again, will see thee, _ And thou shalt know the whole. XXI. Juba and Syphax. -
Juba. Svppax, I joy to meet thee, thus, alone: T have observ’d of late thy looks are fall’n, O’ercast with gloomy cares, and discontent ;
Then tell me, Syphax, I-conjure thee tell me, What are the thoughts that knit thy brow in frowns, And turn thine eyes thus coldly on thy prince ?
Syph. *Tis not my talent to conceal my thoughts, Or carry smiles and sunshine in my face,
When discontent sits heavy on my heart: I have not yet so much the Roman in me.
Jub. Why dost thou cast out such ungen’rous terms Against the lords and sov’reigns of the world ? Dost thou not see mankind fall down before them, And own the force of their superior virtue?
Is there a nation in the wilds of Afric, Amidst our barren rocks, and burning sands, That does not tremble at the Roman name?
Syph. Gods! where’s the worth that sets this people up
Above your own Numidia’s tawny sons?
252 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
Do they with tougher sinews bend the bow?
Or flies the jav’lin swifter to its mark,
Launch’d from the vigour of a Roman arm?
Who, like our active African, instructs
The fiery steed, and trains him to his hand?
Or guides in troops th’ embattled elephant,
Loaden with war? These, these are arts, my prince,
In which your Zama does not stoop to Rome. Jub. These all are virtues of a meaner rank,
Perfections that are plac’d in bones and nerves ;
A Roman soul is bent on higher views:
To civilize the rude, unpolish’d world;
To lay it under the restraint of laws ;
To make man mild, and sociable to man ;
To cultivate the wild licentious savagé
With wisdom, discipline, and lib’ral arts,
Th’ embellishments of life: virtues like these
Make human nature shine, reform the soul, :
And break our fierce barbarians into men. : Syph. Patience, just Heav’ns! —Excuse an old man’s
warmth.
What are these wondrous civilizing arts,
This Roman polish, and this smooth behaviour,
That render man thus tractable and tame?
Are they not only to disguise our passions,
To set our looks at variance with our thoughts,
To check the starts and sallies of the soul,
And break off all its commerce with the tongue?
In short, to change us into other creatures,
Than what our nature and the gods design’d us ? Jub. To strike thee dumb, turn up thine eyes to Cato.
There may’st thou see to what a godlike height
The Roman virtues lift up mortal man.
me qoute bedi ere ere
Bg
-
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS, 253 While good, and just, and anxious for his friends, He’s still severely bent against himself: Renouncing sleep, and rest, and food, and ease, He strives with thirst and hunger, toil and heat: And when his fortune sets before him all ~The pomps and pleasures that his soul can wish, His rigid virtue will accept of none. Syph. Believe me, prince, there’s not an ‘African That traverses our vast Numidian deserts - In quest of prey, and lives upon his bow, But better practises these boasted virtues. Coarse are his meals, the fortune of the chase: Amidst the running stream he stakes his thirst ; Toils all the day, and at th’ approach of night On the first friendly bank he throws him down, Or rests his head upon a rock till morn: Then rises fresh, pursues his wonted game ; And if the following day he chance to find A new repast, or an untasted spring, Blesses his stars, and thinks it luxury. Jub. Thy prejudices, Syphax, won’t discern _ What virtues grow from ignorance and choice, Nor how the hero differs from the brute. But grant that others could with equal glory Look down on pleasures and the baits of sense 5 Where shall we find a man that bears affliction, Great and majestic in his griefs, like Cato? Heav’ns! with what strength, what steadiness of mind, He triumphs in the midst of all his suff’rings ! How does he risé against a load of woes, And thank the gods that throw the weight upon him! Syph. ’Tis pride, rank pride, and ch Sate - of soul : I think the Romans call it Stoicism.
ae eae
254 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS.
Had not your royal father thought so highly _
Of Roman virtue, and of Cato’s cause,
He had not fall’n by a slave’s hand, inglorious ;
Nor would his slaughter’d army now have lain
On Afric’s sands disfigur’d with their wounds, __
To gorge the wolves and vultures of Numidia.
Jub. Why dost thou call my sorrows up afresh ?
My father’s name brings tears into my eyes.
Syph. Oh, that you’d profit by your father’s ills,
By laying up his counsels in your heart ! : Jub. His counsels bade me yield to thy directions :
Then, Syphax, chide me in severest terms, x
Vent all thy passion, and I'll stand its shock,
Calm and unruffled as a summer’s sea,
When not a breath of wind flies o’er its surface. _ Syph. Alas, my prince, I’d guide you to your safety ! Jub. I do believe thou wouldst, but tell me how. Syph. Fly from the fate that follows Czesar’s foes. Jub. My father scorn’d to do it. . ‘ Syph. And therefore died. i
' Jub. Better to die ten thousand deaths, _
Than wound my honour.
Syph, Rather say, your love. - ; Jub. Syphax, I’ve promis’'d to preserve my temper : f Why wilt thou urge me to confess a flame 4 I long have stifled, and would fain conceal? - :
Syph. Believe me, prince, though hard to conquer love, *Tis easy to divert and break its force: Absence might cure it, or a second mistress Light up another flame, and put out this. The glowing dames of Zama’s royal court Have faces flush’d with more exalted charms ; The sun that rolls his chariot o’er their heads
5 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. | 255 Works up more fire and colour in their cheeks: Were you with these, my prince, you’d soon forget The pale, unripen’d beauties of the North. ~
Jub. ’Tis not a set of features, a complexion, The tincture of a skin, that I admire. Beauty soon grows familiar to the lover, © Fades in his eye, and palls upon the sense. The virtuous Marcia tow’rs above her sex: True she is fair, (Oh, how divinely fair!) > But still the lovely maid improves her charms, With inward greatness, unaffected wisdom, And sanctity of manners. Cato’s soul — Shines out in every thing she acts and speaks, © While winning mildness and attractive smiles Dwell in her looks, and with becoming grace Soften the rigour of her father’s virtues. Syph. How does your tongue grow wanton in her praise
XXII. Parting of Hector and Andromache.
Hector now pass’d, with sad presaging heart, To seek his spouse, his soul’s far dearer part. At home he sought her, but he sought in vain ; She, with one maid of all her menial train, Had thence retir’d; and, with her second joy, The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy, Pensive she stood on Ilion’s tow’ry height, Beheld the war, and sicken’d at the sight : There her sad éyes in vain her lord explore, Or weep the wounds her weeping country bore.
Hector, this heard, return’d without delay: Swift through the town he took his former way,
256 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS,
Through streets of palaces and walks of state, And met the mourner at the Scan gate. _ With haste to meet him sprung the joyfal fair, His blameless wife, Aétion’s wealthy heir.
The nurse stood near, in whose embraces prest, - His only hope hung smiling at her breast ; Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn, Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn. Silent, the warrior smil’d ; and, pleas’d, resign’d To tender passions all his mighty mind.
His beauteous princess cast-a mournful look, __ Hung on his hand, and then, dejected, spoke; Her bosom labour’d with a boding sigh, And the big tear stood trembling in her eye.
The chief began « Still foremost let me stand, to guard the throne, To save my father’s honours and my own.— Yet come it will, the day decreed by fates, (How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!) The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend, Must see thy warriors fall, thy gloriesend. And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind, My mother’s death, the ruin of my kind, Not Priam’s hoary hairs defil’d with gore, Not all my brothers gasping on the shore, As thine, Andromache !—Thy griefs I dread! I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led, In Argive looms our battles to design, And woes of which so large a part was thine: There, while you groan beneath the load of life, They cry—‘ Behold the mighty Hector’s wife ! Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to. see, Embitters all thy woes by naming me.
[he thoughts of Seis past, and present nee A thousand griefs shall waken at the name ! May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
Press’d with a load of monumental clay !
Phy Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep,
Shall neither hear thee sigh nor see thee weep.”
Thus having spoke, th’ illustrious chief of Troy Stretch’d his fond arms to clasp the weil boy. Phe babe clung, crying, to his nurse’s breast, scar’d with the dazzling helm and nodding crest; With secret pleasure each fond parent smil’d, And Hector hasted to relieve his child ;
Phe glitt’ring terrors from his brows unbound, And plac’d the beaming helmet on the ground ; [hen kiss’d the child ; and, lifting high in air, hus to the gods: preferr’d a parent’s pray’r:
« O Thou whose glory fills th’ ethereal throne! And all ye deathless pow’rs! protect my son! Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown, To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown, Against his country’s foes the war to wage,
And rise the Hector of the future age.
So when, triumphant from successful toils,
Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
Whole hosts may hail him with deserv’d acclaim, And say—This chief transcends his father’s fame ; While, pleas’d amidst the gen’ral shouts of joy, His mother’s conscious heart o’erflows with joy.”
He spoke: and, fondly gazing on her charms, Restor’d the pleasing burden to her arms.
957
258 GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. : Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid, ’ i Hush’d to repose, and with a smile survey’d: “ The troubled pleasure soon chastis’d with fear, She mingled with the smile a tender tear.
The soften’d chief with kind compassion view’d And dry’d the falling drops, and thus pursu’d :—
« Andromache! my soul’s far better part, Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart ? No hostile hand ean antedate my doom,
Till fate condemn me to the silent tomb! Fix’d is the term of all the race of earth ;
And such the hard condition of our birth.
No force can then resist, no flight can save: All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
No more—but hasten to thy tasks at home ; There guide the spindle and direct the loom. Me glory summons to the martial scene ;
The field of combat is the sphere for men :. Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim, The first in danger, as the first in fame.”
Thus having said, th’ undaunted chief resumes His tow’ry helmet, black with shading plumes. His princess parts, with a prophetic sigh, Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye,
That stream’d at ev’ry look; then, moving slow, Sought her own palace, and indulg’d her woe. There, while her tears deplor’d the god-like man, Through all her train the soft infection ran ;
The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed, And mourn’d the living Hector as the dead.
GRIEF AND TENDERNESS. 259
CXIL The Fate of Modern Languages compared with that of “ = Painting.
3z thou the first, true merit to befriend :
lis praise is lost, who stays till all commend. hort is the date, alas! of modern rhymes,
ind ’tis but just to let them live betimes:
Yo longer now that golden age appears,
Vhen patriarch wits surviv’d a thousand years ; Yow length of fame (our second life) is lost, ind bare threescore is all ev’n that can boast. Jur sons their fathers’ failing language see, ind such as Chaucer is, shall Dryden be.
0 when the faithful pencil has design’d
ome bright idea of the master’s mind,
Vhere a new world leaps out at his command, ind ready Nature waits upon his hand ;
Vhen the ripe colours soften and unite,
ind sweetly melt into just shade and light, Vhen mellowing years their full perfection give, ind each bold figure just begins to live ;
‘he treach’rous colours the fair art betray,
ind all the bright creation fades away.
PART VI.
COMIC HUMOUR,
i re
I. Jaques on Fools and the Progress of Life.
A Foot, a fool; I met a fool i’th’ forest,
A motley fool; a miserable varlet !
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down and bask’d him in the sun, And rail’d on Lady Fortune in good terms ;
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool. Good-morrow, Fool, quoth I. No, Sir, quoth he; Call me not fool till Heav’n hath sent me fortune ; And then he drew a dial from his poke,
And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,
Says, very wisely, It is ten o'clock.
Thus may we see, quoth he, how the world wags ; Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
And after one hour more ’twill be eleven :
And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe, And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot ; And thereby hangs a tale. When I did hear The motley fool thus moral on the time,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,
That fools should be so deep contemplative ;
. on
te
Ait TIN td GN RR to aed le hy ele (eet BE eee nnps
Seem aes ame! lis
comic HUMOUR. 96)
And I did laugh, sans intermission,
_ An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
A worthy fool! motley’s the only wear.
~ But though the fool may act the wise man’s part, Yet full as oft the wise man plays the fool.
_ For all the world’s a stage,
» And all the men and women merely players:
They have their exits and their entrances,
_And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
_Mewling and puking in the nurse’s arms,
And then the whining school-boy with his satchel, And shining morning face, creeping like snail Unwillingly to school. And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad “Made to his mistress’s eye-brow. Then the soldier, Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard, Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel ; Seeking the bubble reputation Even in the cannon’s mouth. And then the justice, Tn fair round belly, with good capon lin’d ;
‘With eyes severe, and beard of formal cut ; Full of wise saws and modern instances ;
‘And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts Into the lean and slipper’d pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side ; His youthful hose, well sav’d, a world too wide For his shrunk shank ; and his big manly voice, Turning again towards childish treble, pipes And whisties in the sound. Last scene of all, ‘That ends this strange eventful history, .
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
‘Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste,—sans every thing.
262 COMIC HUMOUR.
Il. Clown, Duke, and Jaques.
_ Jag. Here comes a very strange beast, which in all tongues is called fool.
Clo. Salutation and greeting to you all. —
Jag. Good my lord, bid him welcome. This is motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in t forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.
Clo. If any man doubt that, let him put me to my p gation: .I have trod a measure, T have flatter’d a lady, I have been politic with my friend, smooth w ‘with my enemy, have undene three tailors, I have had four quarrels, and hai like to have fought one.
Jag. And how was that ta’en up?
Clo. Why, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.
Jaq. How, the seventh cause? Good my lord, like 4 fellow. >
Duke Sen. I like him very well.
Clo. I press in here, Sir, amongst the rest of the count copulatives. Rich honesty dwells like a miser, Sir, in a poor house, as your pearl in your foul oyster.
Duke Sen. By my honour he is very swift and sententiou
Clo. According to the fool’s bolt, Sus: and such no diseases.
Jaq. But for the seventh cause ; ; how did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause? 3
Clo. Upon a lie seven times removed :—as thus, Sir: I did dislike the cut of a certain courtier’s beard; he sent me word, if I said his beard was not well cut, he was in the mind it was: this is called the retort courteous. If I sent him word again it was not cut well, he would send me word he cut it to please himself: this ‘is called the quip
4 COMIC HUMOUR: ; 263 modest. If again it was not well cut, he disabled my judg- ‘ment: this is called the reply churlish. If again it was not well cut, he would answer I spoke not true: this is called the reproof valiant. If again it was not well cut, he would say I lie: this is called the countercheck quarrelsome ; and so the lie circumstantial, and the lie direct. < Jaq. And how oft did you say his beard was not well cue?
Clo. I durst go no farther than the lie circumstantial, and he durst not give me the lie direct ; and so we met, measured swords, and parted: E _ Jag. Can you nominate in order now, the ies) of the ‘lie?
Clo, O, Sir, we ee in print, by the book; as you have books for good manners. I will name you the degrees. The first, the retort courteous ; the second, the quip modest ; the third, the reply churlish; the fourth, the reproof va- liant ; the fifth,,the countercheck quarrelsome ; the sixth, the lie with circumstance ; the seventh, the lie direct— All these you may avoid but the lie direct ; and you may avoid that too with an If. Iknew when seven justices could not take up a quarrel; but when the parties were met them- selves, one of them thought but of an If; as, If you said so, then I said so: O ho! did you so? So they shook hands, and swore brothers. Your If is the only peacemaker ; much virtue in If, ;
Jaq. Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? He’s good at any thing, and yet a fool.
Duke Sen. He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit,
264 COMIC HUMOUR.
Ill. The Town and Country Mice.
Once on a time (so runs the fable),
A country mouse, right hospitable,
Receiv’d a town mouse at his board,
Just as a farmer might a lord:
A frugal mouse upon the whole,
Yet lov’d his friend, and had a soul ;
Knew what was handsome, -and would do’t,
On just occasion, codte gw il cotite.
He brought him bacon, nothing lean ;
Pudding, that might have pleas’d a dean ;
Cheese, such as men in Suffolk make,
But wish’d it Stilton for his sake ;
Yet, to his guest though no way sparing,
He eat himself the rind and paring.
Qur courtier scarce could touch a bit,
But show’d his breeding and his wit ;
He did his best to seem to eat,
And ery’d,—“ I vow you’re mighty neat:
« But, my dear friend, this savage scene !
“For Heaven’s sake, come and live with men:
« Consider, mice, like men, must die,
«« Both small and great, both you and I:
“Then spend your life in joy and sport.
‘« This doctrine, friend, I learnt at court.” The veriest hermit in the nation
May yield, Heav’n knows, to strong temptation.
Away they come, through thick and thin,
To a tall house near Lincoln’s Inn:
*Twas on the night of a debate,
When all their lordships had sat late.
COMIC HUMOUR.
Behold the place! where, if a poet
‘Shin’d in description, he might show it ; Tell how the moon-beam trembling falls,
And tips with silver all the walls ; Palladian walls, Venetian doors, _Grotesco roofs, and stucco floors :
“But let it, in a word, be said, The moon was up, and men abed, } The napkins white, the carpetred: The guests withdrawn had left the treat, And down the mice sat, téte-a-téte.
- Our courtier walks from dish to dish, Tastes for his friend of fowl and fish ; Tells all their names, lays down the law ; *¢ Que ca est bon! Ah, goiitez ga!
“« That jelly’s rich, this malmsey healing ; *«« Pray dip your whiskers and your tail in.” ‘Was ever such a happy swain!
He stuffs and swills, and stuffs again : «lm quite asham’d—'is mighty rude “© To eat so much—but all’s so good !
“ T have a thousand thanks to give—— « My lord alone knows how to live.” No sooner said, but from the hall Rush chaplain, butler, dogs, and all;
“« Arat, arat! clap-to the door,”
The cat comes bouncing on the floor.
Oh for the heart of Homer’s mice,
Or gods to save them in a trice!
And when the mice at last had stole,
With trembling hearts, into a hole,
An’t please your honour, quoth the peasant, This same dessert is not so pleasant.
Give me again my hollow tree,
A crust of bread, and liberty.
x
265
266 COMIC HUMOUR. :
IV. Esop and Beau.
Esop. Wet, Sir, what are you? Beau. A fool. Esop. That’s impossible— for if you were, you'd: think yourself a wise man. Beau. So I do——This is my own opinion—the t’ other’s my neighbour’s. __ [Walking airily abou Esop. [gazing after him.) Have Mou. any business © witlt me, Sir? wih Hn Beau. Sir, I have business with nobody ; pleasure’s my study. Esop. [aside.} An odd fellow this !—-Pray, Sir, who e you? t Beau. I can’t tell. rar Se Esop. Do you know who I am? ; Beau. No:—Sir, I’m a favourite at court; and I neither know myself, nor any body else. a _ Esop. Are you in any employment ? : Beau. Yes———
5
Esop. What is it ? | Beau. I don’t know the name on’t. 4 Esop. You know the business on’t, I hope? os ae
Beau. That I do—the business of it is——to—put id a deputy, and receive the money.
Esop. Pray, what may be your name?
Beau. Empty.
Esop. Where do you live?
Beau. In the side-box.
Esop. What‘do you there ?
Beau. I ogle the ladies.
Esop. To what purpose ?
Beau. To no purpose.
:
~~
COMIC HUMOUR. 267 Esop. Why then do you doit? v0 Beau. Because I like it. Esop. Wherein consists the pleasure ? Beau. In playing the fool. _ Esop. Where were you brought up ° Beau. At school. Esop. What school ? Beau. The school of the Graces. _ Esop. Were you ever at thé University? Beau. Yes, Esop. “What ‘study did you follow there? — Beau. My pleasure. _ Esop. How long did'you stay : ? Beau. Till I had lost my character: Esop. Why did you'come away ? Beau. Because I was expelled. Esop. Where did you go then? Beau, To Court. Esop. Who took care of your education there? Beau. A gamester and a dancing-master. Esop. What did you gain by them? Beau. A minuet, and a pack of cards. Esop. Have you an estate ? Beau. I had. Esop. Wiiat’s become of it? Beau. Spent. - Esop. In what ?
Beau. Ia a twelvemonth.
Esop. But how? ' Beau. Why in dressing, dice, and scriveners. What do
you think of me now, old gentleman?
Esop. Pray, what do you think of yourself ?
Beau. I don’t think at all; I know how to bestow my time better. : .
n 2
268 COMIC HUMOUR.
Esop. Are you married? -
Beau. No——Have you e’er a daughter to bestow upon me?
Esop. Have you then a 1 mind to a wife, Sir?
Beau. Yaw, min Heer.
Esop. What would you do with her ?
Ty om
Beau. Why, Vd take care of her affairs, rid her of all her 1
troubles, and her portion.
Esop. And pray what sort of a wife would you be willing to throw yourself away upon?
Beau. Why, upon one that has youth, beauty, quality, virtue, wit, and money.
ain
Esop. And how may you be qualified yourself, to back —
you in your pretensions to such a one? Beau. Why, I am qualified with a fine head of hair—a feather—a smooth face —a fool’s head—and a club stick.
Esop. But one question more: What settlement can you —
make ? Beau. Settlement!——Why, if she be a very great heiress indeed, I believe I may settlh——myself upon her for life.
Esop. ’Tis enough ; you may expect I’ll serve you, if it lies — in my way. But I wou’d not have you rely too much upon ~
your success, because people sometimes are mistaken.
Beau. Tis very well ;—'tis very well, old spark: I say — *tis very well. Because I ha’n’t a pair of plod shoes, anda —
dirty shirt, you think a woman won’t venture upon me for a
husband—Why now, to shew you, old father, how little you —
philosophers know of the ladies—I’'ll tell you an adventure of a friend of mine.
A Band, a Bob Wig, and a Feather, Attack’d a Lady’s heart together :
~ COMIC HUMOUR. 269 The Band, in a most learned plea, Made up of deep philosophy, Told her, if she would please to espouse, A reverend beard, and take, instead Of vig’rous youth, Old solemn Truth,
With books and morals to her boop How happy she would be !
The Bob, he talked of management, What wondrous blessings heaven sent On care, and pains, and industry ; And truly he must be so free, . To own he thought your airy beaux, With powder’d heads, and dancing-shoes, Were good for nothing (mend his soul !) But prate and talk, and play the fool.
He said, *twas Wealth gave joy and mirth, And that to be the dearest wife Of one who labour’d all his life To make a mine of gold his own, And not spend sixpence when he’d done,
~ Was heaven upon earth.
When these two blades had done, d’ye see, The Feather (as it might be me) Steps out, Sir, from behind the screen, With such an air, and such a mien, Look you, old Gentleman, in short, He quickly spoil’d the Tradesman’s sport.
It prov’d such prosp’rous weather, That you must know, at the first beck, The Lady leap’d about his neck, | And off they went together.
(To Esop.) There’s a tale for you, old dad.
Sept
270 COMIC HUMOUR.
Esop. Well, Sir ; and in return for your tale, I must tell you what happied to a young spark of my acquaintance, exaculy such a fop as you are. ss 3
> .
An Ape there was, of nimble parts, 9 A great intruder into hearts,
As brisk, and gay, and full of air, : As you, or I, or any here ; : q ’ Rich in his dress, of splendid show, ; } And with a head like any beau: ;
Eternal mirth was in his face ; Where’er he went, ; He was content, ‘
So fortune had but kindly sent
Some Ladies——and a looking-glass.
Encouragement they always gaye him,
Encouragement to play the fool!
For soon they found it was a tool
Wou’d hardly be so much in love,
But that the mumbling of a glove,
Or tearing of a fan, wou’d save him.
These bounties he accepts as proof
Of feats done by his wit and youth ;
He gives their freedom gone for ever,
Concludes each female heart undone,
Except that very happy one .
Whom he was pleas’d to favour.
In short, so smooth his matters went,
' He guess’d, where’er his thoughts were bent,
The Lady he must carry:
So put on a fine new cravat ;
He comb’d his hair, he cock’d his hat,
And gave it out, he’d marry.
COMIC HUMOUR. 271 But here, alas! he found to’s cost,
- He had reckon’d long without his host ; ~ For, wheresoe’er he made th’ attack, Poor Pug with shame was beaten back,
The first fair she he had in chase Was a young cat, a cunning blowser, Her mother was a noted mouser ; So, had the daughter proved his wife, He might have fed on rats oie life: But when he came - To urge his flame, She scratch’d him o’er the face. With that he went among the hounds, Such as had beauty, wit, and pounds, And swore Miss Maulken, to her cost, Should quickly see what she had lost ; But the poor unlucky swain Miss’d his shepherdess again ; His fate was to miscarry ; It was his destiny to find, 4 That Cats and Dogs are of a mind, When Monkeys come to marry.
V. Menenius Agrippa’s Fable of the Belly and Members.
A Company of mutinous Citizens. 1 Citizen. _ Berore we proceed any farther, hear me BECai All. Speak, speak! 1 Cit. You are all resolv’d rather to die than to famish ? All. Resolv’d, resolv’d ! 1 Cit. First, you know, Caius Marcius is the ehief enemy to the people. All, We know it, we know it!
272 COMIC HUMOUR.
1 Cit. Let, us kill him, and we’ll have corn at our own price. Is’t a verdict ?
All. No more talking on’t, let’t be done—away ! away !
2 Cit. One word, good citizens.
1 Cit, We are accounted poor citizens; the patricians, good: what authority surfeits on, would relieve us: if they would yield us but the superfluity while it were wholesome, we might guess they relieve us humanely; but they a we are too dear; the leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is an inyentory to particularise their abun-_ dance; our sufferance is a gain to'them. Let us revenge this with our pikes, ere we become rakes; for the gods know I speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.
2 Cit. Would you proceed especially against Caius Mar-§ cius ?
All. Against him first: he’s a very dog to the com-— monalty.
2 Cit. Consider you what services he has done for his” country ?
— 1 Cit. Very well; and could be content to give him good © report for’t ; but that he pays himself with being proud. ‘
2 Cit. Nay, but speak not maliciously.
1 Ci. I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did it to that end; though soft-conscienced men can be content to say it was for his country: he did it to please his” mother, and to be partly proud; which he is, even to the - altitude of his virtue.
2 Cit. What he cannot help in his nature, you account a vice in him: you must in no way say he is covetous. 1
1 Cit. If IT must not, I need not be barren of accusa-— tions; he hath faults with surplus, to tire in repetition. [Shouts within.] What shouts are those? The other side -
nr
let PE re
Po
COMIC HUMOUR. 273
oth’ city is risen. Why stay we prating here? To the ~ capitol— . All. Come! come! - 1 Cit. Soft——who comes here?
Enter Menenius Agrippa.
2 Cit, Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always loved the people.
1 Cit. He’s one honest enough ; would all the rest were ‘so!
_ Men. What work’s, my soumtrymen, in ‘hand? where go you With bats and clubs? The matter ?———-Speak, I pray you.
1 Cit. Our business is not unknown to the senate; they have had inkling, this fortnight, what we intend to do, which now we’ll show them in deeds: they say, poor suitors. have strong breaths; they shall know we have strong arms too.
Men. Why,. masters! my good friends! my honest
neighbours ! Will you undo yourselves ?
1 Cit. We cannot, Sir; we are undone already.
Men. I tell you, friends, most charitable. care Have the patricians of you; for your wants,
Your suff’rings in this dearth, you may as well Strike at the heaven with your staves, as lift them. Against the Roman state, whose course will on The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs. Of more strong links asunder than can ever Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,. The gods, not the patricians, make it; and Your knees to them (not arms) must help. Alack! You are transported by calamity Thither, where more attends you; and you slander n 3
274 COMIC HUMOUR.
The helms o’th’ state, who care for you, like fathers, “ “s
When you curse them as enemies. a 1 Cit. Care for us!——True, indeed! they ne’er car
for us yet. Suffer us to famish, and their storehous
cramm’d with grain; make edicts for usury, to support
_ usurers ; repeal daily any wholesome act established against
the ‘ick and provide more piercing statutes daily to chain,
up and restrain the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they
will; and there’s all the love they bear us.
~ Men. Either you must - '
Confess yourselves wondrous malicious,
Or be accus’d of folly. Ishall tell you. | . ;
A pretty tale (it may be you have heard it) ; =
But since it serves my purpose, I will venture 3
To stale’t a little more. 3 1 Cit. Well, :
Pil hear it, Sir, —-yet you must not think 3
To fob off our disgraces with a tale:
But, an’t please you, deliver. ; Men. There was a time when all the body’s members
Rebell’d against the belly ; thus accus’d it :—
That only, like a gulf, it did remain
I’th’ midst o’th’ body, idle and inactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labour with the rest; where th’ other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And mutually participate ; did minister.
Unto the appetite, and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answered 1 Cit. Well, Sir, what answer made the belly ? Men. Sir, I shall tell you :—With a kind of smile,
Which ne’er came from the lungs, but even thusx———
(For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak) it tauntingly reply’d
comic “HUMOUR. : 275°
To th’ discontented members, th’ mutinous trl; That envied his receipt ; even so, most fitly, As you malign our senators, for that _ They are not such as you— a 1 Cit. Your belly’s answer-—what ! ink. b =<eex The kingly crowned head, the vigilant eye, x4 ~ The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier, Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter 3. With other muniments and petty helps... . ier) 5 In this our fabric, if that they -————— aE es | Men. What then ?—’Fore me, this fellow speaks, — ~ What then ? What then? $s 1 Cit. Should by the cormorant belly joe restrain -4, Who is the sink o’th’ body, Men. Well, what then? 1 Cit. The former agents if they did complain, - What could the belly answer? Men. Twill tell you ; If you'll bestow a small (of what you’ve little). Patience awhile, you’ll hear the belly’s answer. 1 Cit. Y’are long about it. Men. Note me this, good friend ; Your most grave belly was deliberate, Not rash, like his accusers, and thus answer’d :—— True is it, my incorporate friends, quoth he, That I receive the general food at first, Which you do live upon ; and fit it is, Because I am the storehouse, and the shop Of the whole body. But if you do remember, I send it through the rivers of your blood, Even to the court, the heart ; to th’ seat o’th’ brain ; And through the cranks and offices of man. The strongest nerves, and small inferior veins, From me receive that natural competency
276 COMIC HUMOUR. Whereby they live. And though that all at once, ©
“You, my good friends, (this says the belly) mark me—— °
1 Cit, Aye, Sir; well! well!
Men. Though all at once cannot ‘See what I do deliver out to each, Yet I can make my audit up, that all ert From me do back receive the flour of all, ; And leave me but the bran.—What say you to’t ?
1 Cit. It was an answer. How apply you this?
Men. The senators of Rome are this good belly, And you the mutinous members ; for, examine Their counsels and their cares ; digest things rightly, Touching the weal o’th’ common, you shall find No public benefit which you receive, But it proceeds, or comes, from them to you, And no way from yourselves. What do you think * You, the great toe of this assembly !
1 Cit. I the great toe! Why the great toe?
Men. For that, being one o’th’ lowest, basest, poorest, Of this most wise rebellion, thou goest foremost : Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,’ Lead’st first to win some ’vantage. But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs ; a Rome and her rats are at the point of battle: The one side must have bale.
VI. A Description of Queen Mab.
O THEN I see Queen Mab hath been with you : She is the Fancy’s midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger' of an alderman :
Drawn with a team of little atomies
[Sp
; bb + tual catch oe ae nate
4 AO ALE LOL LIE AL
a ee Te ne eres ene
COMIC HUMOUR.
_ Athwart men’s noses as they lie asleep :
Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners’ legs : The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
_ The traces, of the smallest spider’s web ;
The collars, of the moonshine’s wat’ry beni’ Her whip, of cricket’s bone; the lash, of film ;
- Her waggoner a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round, little worm, — Prick’d from the lazy finger of a maid.
‘Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut,
Made by the joiner squirrel, or old grub,
Time out of mind the fairies’. coachmakers. And in this state she gallops, night by night, Through lovers’ brains, and then they dream of love ;
O’er courtiers’ knees, that dream on curtsies straight ;
O’er lawyers’ fingers, who straight dream on fees ; ’ O’er Jadies’ lips, who straight on kisses dream. Sometimes she gallops o’er a lawyer’s nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit:
And sometimes comes she with a tithe-pig’s tail, Tickling the parson as he lies asleep 5
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Sometimes she driveth o’er a soldier’s neck ;
And then he dreams of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of bealths five fathom deep: and then anon Drums in his ears, at which he starts—and wakes— And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two, And sleeps again.
ae
278 COMIC HUMOUR.
VIL. The Cameleon.
Orr it has been my lot te mark A proud, conceited, talking spark, With eyes, that hardly serv’d at most © To guard their master ’gainst a post : Yet round the world the blade has been, To see whatever could be seen. Returning from his finish’d tour, Grown ten times perter than before ; Whatever word you chance to drop, The travell’d fool your mouth will stop ;. “ Sir, if my judgment you'll allow— _ I’ve seen—and sure I ought to know” — So begs you’d pay a due submission, And acquiesce in his decision.
Two travellers of such a cast, As o’er Arabia’s wilds they past; And on their way in friendly chat Now talk’d of this, and then of that; Discours’d a while, ’mongst other matter,. Of the Cameleon’s form and nature. «« A stranger animal,” cries one, «« Sure never liv’d beneath the sun: « A lizard’s body lean and long, “ A fish’s head, a serpent’s tongue, “ Tts tooth with triple claw disjoin’d ; « And what a length of tail behind ! « How slow its pace! and then its hue— «« Who ever saw so fine a blue ?”
« Hold there,” the other quick replies, «Tis green—I saw it with these eyes,
Ere PEt Bene,
nated
Ptpee
”
Ne eer ete te tiation Lange waa
f io
ee
sa sage hoe vege Tile
COMIC HUMOUR. _ © As late with open mouth it lay, ** And warm/d it in the sunny ray ; *« Stretch’d at its ease the beast I view’d, ** And saw it eat the air for food.” “ [ve seen it, Sir, as well as you, “ And must again affirm it blue; “ At leisure I the beast survey’d, «« Extended in the cooling shade.” __ «Tis green, “tis green, Sir, I assure ye.”—. - Green!” cries the other in a fury— _ “Why, Sir—d’ye think I’ve lost my eyes?” ~~ «?Twere no great loss,” the friend replies ; « For if they always serve you thus, « You'll find ’em but of little use.” So high at last the contest rose, From words they almost came to blows: When luckily came by a third ; To-him the question they referr’d, And begg’d he’d tell ’em, if he knew, Whether the thing was green or blue. « Sirs,” cries the umpire, ‘“ cease your pother— « The creature’s neither one nor tother. “ T caught the animal last night, « And view’d it o’er by candle-light : «1 mark’d it well—’twas black as jet. « You stare—but, Sirs, I’ve got it yet, « And can produce it.’—“ Pray, Sir, do: « Pll lay my life the thing is blue.”—
« And I’ll be sworn, that when you’ve seen «« The reptile, you'll pronounce him green.” « Well then, at once to ease the doubt,”
Replies the man, “ I'll turn him out : «¢ And when before your eyes I’ve set him, « Tf you don’t find him black Pll eat him.”
279
280 COMIC HUMOUR.
He said ; then full before their sight — Produc’d the beast, and lo!—’twas white. Both star’d, the man look’d wondrous wise— ** My children,” the Cameleon cries,
(Then first the creature found a tongue,)
« You all are right, and all are wrong:
« When next you talk of what you view,
« Think others see, as well as you:
« Nor wonder, if you find that none ~
« Prefers your eye-sight to his own.” __
sec? @»,.
VIII. The Monkey who had seen the World.
A Monkey, to reform the times, Resolv’d to visit foreign climes: _ For men in distant ages roam
To bring politer manners home. So forth he fares, all toil defies : Misfortunes serve to make us wise.
At length the treach’rous snare was laid ;. Poor Pug was caught, to town convey’d, There sold. How envy’d was his doom, Made captive in a lady’s room!
Proud as a lover of his chains,
He day by day her favour gains. Whene’er the duty of the day
The toilet calls, with mimic play
He twirls her knots, ‘he cracks her fan, ~ Like any other gentleman.
In visits too his parts and wit,
When jests grew dull, were sure to hit.
LL a Able TOI LRN Neg AE AD CA Atte en toe
Lp pm A.
f COMIC HUMOUR. 281 Proud with applause, he thought his mind _In ev’ry courtly art refin’d ; Like Orpheus, burnt with pels zeal _ To civilize the monkey weal: So watch’d occasion, broke his chain, _ And sought his native woods again. The hairy sylvans round him press, Astonish’d at his strut and dress. _ Some praise his sleeve ; and others glote Upon his rich embroider’d coat ; ‘His dapper periwig commending, “With the black tail behind depending ; His powder’d back, above, below, Like hoary frost, or fleecy snow ; But all, with envy and desire, His flutt’ring shoulder-knot admire. _
«* Hear and improve,” he pertly cries ;
« T come to make a nation wise.
“ Weigh your own worth ; support your place,
« The next in rank to susie race.
« In cities long I pass’d my days,
«¢ Convers’d with men, and learnt their ways. « Their dress, their courtly manners, see ;
«‘ Reform your state, and copy me.
“« Seek ye to thrive, in flatt’ry deal ;
«Your scorn, your hate, with that conceal :
“ Seem only to regard your friends,
«« But use them for your private ends.
« Stint not to truth the flow of wit;
«< Be prompt to lie whene’er ’tis fit.
« Bend all your force to spatter merit 5
«« Scandal is conversation’s spirit.
282 COMIC HUMOUR. : 7
« Boldly to evry thing pretend, =
« And men your talents shall commend.
“TI knew the great. Observe me right:
“So shall you grow like man polite.” He spoke and bow’d. With mutt’ring jaws. why: d
The wondring circle grinn’d applause.
Now, warm with malice, envy, spite,
Their most obliging friends they bite 5
And, fond to copy human ways,
Practise new mischiefs all their days. ©
Thus the dull lad, too tall for school, With travel finishes the fool ; Studious of ev’ry coxcomb’s airs, He drinks, games, dresses, rakes, and swears ; O’erlooks with scorn all virtuous arts, For vice is fitted to his parts.
: a d
IX. Ancient and Modern Music compared
Wuen father Orpheus wanted sport, he, By touching his piano forte,
Drew out his beasts by millions : Hinds, with high heads, each other butted ; Pigs, en pas grave, like ******* strutted 5
Cows capered in cotillions.
Amphion too (though by the bye This sounds extremely like a lie)
Could animate earth, air, and water ;_
_ Melt the hard hearts of brick and mortar; _ Make stocks and stones so very supple, - _ They’d lead up ten or twenty couple ; _And grow, directed by their ears,
A house for pigs, or house for peers.
From hence the lovers of antiquity Do most maliciously assert, Sia _That Music, like a child that’s rickety,
_ Is now degraded to the dirt : “And, having lost the pow’r to soar, Is fore’d to creep upon all-four: Since not Giardini’s self is able To animate a chair or table ;
Nor give it the most distant notion
Of plain and simple locomotion.
But now the ancients have been heard, We moderns sure may speak a word.— That the old music, and the new, Are very different, is true ; ' You might as properly compare The war-hoop of a Cherokee,
To such a hoop as ladies wear.
Your Messieurs Orpheus and Amphion, With their confounded break-tooth words, Might try their skill on beasts and birds,
-Without a single bed to lie on.
For what might please the Greeks and Latins, To our politer ears, would sound
Just like an Abigail in pattens,
Parading o’er a stony ground,
284 COMIC HUMOUR. Then for your instruments—you'll own They’re far inferior to our own ; Unless they only chose to leave us Those meanest instruments of chiming, Tongs, pokers, marrow-bones and cleavers, And other followers of Hymen, Basely condemning te the fire- The noble pipe and nobler lyre.
Ea Feito gneve tera
Thus Pedants, when we come to college,. With care suppress all useful knowledge; _ Whip us whenever we presume a To think what-ne’er was thought at Rome ;. And punish, with the same severity,
Both our posteriors and posterity.
But to conclude—Where’er you range,. Or to St. James’s or the Change, To Portman-square or Leadenhall,. We're Dilettantes one and all.
By Music’s charms, like those of Circe, ; You'll see all moving vice versa ; All, from the porter to the peer, Or have, or think they have, an ear. Cits grow refin’d and spend their money, And starve on soups and macaroni. The roughest, rudest Country Squire, Deserts his pipe and parlour fire ; His tenants want the savoir vivre ; The parson puts him in a fever ; To harmony a convert grown, He swears he only breathes in town.
Now for new miracles prepare ; Behold that punch-bowl in the air,
, comic. HUMOUR. | 285.
That shame to ancient Greece and Rome.. Twas Music rais’d the pensile dome.
Twas she that form’d our proud Casinos, — Jur rooms for Concerts and Festinos ;
Jur villas in St. George’s Fields, White-Conduit House and Bagnigge Wells : As she directs, the artists rear
The Crescent, Oblong, or the Square ; The Octagon, with sides so small,
And Circus, with no sides-at all, —
With every angle charm our eyes, That e’er the most consummate skill Of great Vauban, or greater Gill,
das form’d for ramparts, or mince’d pies.
30, Ladies who have heard our suit,
My hand is tir’d, my Muse is mute, lease to determine the dispute. .
<. The grand Question debated—Whether Hamilton's Bawn should be turned into a Barrack or a Malé-house ?
[us spoke to my lady the knight full of care :
set me have your advice in a weighty affair.
This Hamilton’s Bawn whilst it sticks on my hand,
lose by the house what I get by the land ;
3ut how to dispose of it to the best bidder,
‘or a barrack or malt-house, we now must consider. First, let me suppose I make it a malt-house ;
[here I have computed the profit will fall t’us :
Jere’s nine hundred pounds for labour and grain
increase it to twelve, so three hundred remain;
\
ay
286 COMIC HUMOUR. : A handsome addition for wine and good cheer, Three dishes a day, and three hogsheads a year : With a dozen large vessels my vault shall be stor’d ; No little scrub joint shall come on my board :
And you and the dean no more shall combine - To stint me at night to one bottle of wine ; R Nor shall I, for his humour, permit you to purloin A stone and a quarter of beef from my sirloin.
If I make it a barrack, the crown is my tenant 5 My dear, L have ponder’d again and again on’t :
In poundage and drawbacks I lost half my renty Whatever they give me I must be content,
Or join with the court in every debate ;
And, rather than that, I would lose my estate. Thus ended the knight :—Thus began his meek wife : It must and it shall be a barrack, my life!
I’m grown a mere mopus ; no company comes, But a rabble of tenants and rusty dull rums. With parsons, what lady can keep herself clean? I’m all over daub’d when I sit by the dean- But if you will give us a barrack, my dear, The captain, Im sure, will always come here. I then shall not value his deanship a straw, The captain, I warrant, will keep him in awe; 7 Or, should he pretend to be brisk and alert, Will tell him that chaplains should not be so pert : That men of his coat should be minding their pray’rs, And not among ladies to give themselves airs. Thus argu’d my lady, but argu’d in vain ; The knight bis opinion resolv’d to maintain. But Hannah, who listen’d to all that was pass’d, And could not endure so vulgar a taste, As soon as her ladyship call’d to be dress’d, Cry’d, Madam, why surely my master’s possess’d.
Sir Arthur the malster! how fine it will sound! T’d rather the Bawn were sunk under ground. Dear Madam, whene’er of a barrack I think, An I were to be hang’d I can’t sleep a wink; For if a new crotchet comes into my brain, I can’t get it out though I’m never so fain. T fancy already a barrack contriv’d At Hamilton’s Bawn, and the troop is arriy’d ; Of this, to be sure, Sir Arthur has warning,” And waits on the captain betimes the next morning.
987
Now see, when they meet, how their honours behave :
Noble captain, your servant—Sir Arthur, your slave ; You honour me much—The honour is mine— ?Twas a sad rainy night—But the morning is fine— Pray how does my lady ?—My wife’s at your service— I think I have seen her picture by Jervas— Good morrow, good captain—I’ll wait on you down— You shan’t stir a foot— You'll think me a clown— For all the world, captain, not half an inch farther— You must be obey’d: your servant, Sir Arthur ; My humble respects to my lady unknown I hope you will use my house as your own.
<_Go, bring me my gown, and leave off your prate, « Thou hast certainly gotten a cup in thy pate.” Pray, madam, be quiet ; what was it I said >— You had like to have put it quite out of my head.
Next day, to be sure, the captain will come At the head of his troop, with trumpet and drum, Now, madam, observe how he marches in state : The man with the kettle-drum enters the gate : Dub, dub, adub, dub. The trumpeters follow : Tantara, tantara: while all the boys hollow. See, now comes the captain, all daub’d with gold lace ; O la! the sweet gentleman ! look in his face ;
~
288 COMIC HUMOUR.
And see how he rides, like a lord of the land, With the fine flaming sword that he holds in his hand By And his horse, the dear creter, it prances and rears, With ribbands, in knots, at his tail and his ears.
At last comes the troop, by the word of command, Drawn up in our court ; when the captain cries—Stand ! Your ladyship lifts up the sash to be seen,
(For sure I had dizen’d you out like a queen :)
The captain, to show he is proud of the favour, Looks up to your window, and cocks up his beaver ; (His beaver is cock’d; pray, madam, mark that ; For a captain of horse never takes off his hat, Because he has never a hand that is idle,
For the right holds his sword, and the left holds the bridle; Then flourishes thrice his sword in the air, . As a compliment due to a lady so fair ;
2 ae tcl entices CAAT AS oe
: (How I tremble to think of the blood it hath spilt !) - Then he lowers down the point, and kisses the hilt. $ Your ladyship smiles, and thus you begin : i Pray, captain, be pleas’d to alight and walk in. 3 The captain salutes you with congee profound, { And your ladyship curtsies half-way to the ground. j
Kit, run to your master, and bid him come to us; ' I’m sure he’ll be proud of the honour you do us; And, captain, you'll do us the favour to stay, And take a short dinner here with us to-day : You're heartily welcome ; but as for good cheer, ~ You come in the very worst time of the year :
If I had expected so worthy a guest Dear madam! your ladyship sure is in jest ;
You banter me, madam. The kingdom must grant,— You officers, captain, are so complaisant.
“COMIC HUMOUR. 289° * Hist, hussy, I think I hear somebody coming”—— = No, madam, ’tis only sir Arthur a-humming.
To shorten my tale (for I hate a long story),
The captain at dinner appears in his glory :
The dean and the doctor have humbled their pride, For the captain’s entreated to sit by your side ;
And because he’s their betters, you carve os him od: 4 The parsons, for envy, are ready to burst :
The servants, amazed, are scarce ever able _Tokeep off their eyes as they wait at the table ;
And Molly and I have thrust in our nose
To peep at the captain, in all his fine clothes:
Dear Madam, be sure he’s a fine-spoken man ;
Do but hear on the clergy how glib his tongue ran : « And, madam, (says he) if such dinners you give, «© You'll never want parsons as long as you live;
« T ne’er knew a parson without a good nose,
«« But the devil’s as welcome wherever he goes:
«« The hypocrites bid us reform and repent,
«* But yet, by their looks, they never keep Lent :
« A scholard, when just from his college broke loose, « Can hardly tell how to cry bo! to a goose:
*¢ Your Novids, and Blutarks, and Omurs, and stuff, « By Jove they don’t signify this pinch of snuff.
« To give a young gentleman right education,
«« The army’s the only good school in the nation :
« My schoolmaster call’d me a dunce and a fool,
« But at cuffs I was always the cock of the school ;
<< I never could take to my book for the blood o’me, «* And the puppy confess’d he expected no good o’me. « Now, madam, you'll think it a strange thing to say, «« But the sight of a book makes me sick to this day.”
C)
290 COMIC HUMOUR.
Never since Iwas born did Lheat so much wits ult And, madam, I laugh’d oo ages ~ “gomme m
Thus merciless Hannah ran on in her talk, © Till she heard the dean call, « Will your ladyship walk ?” Her ladyship answers, Pm just coming down; Then turning to Hannah, and forcing a frown, - (Although it was plain in her heart she was glad,) © Cry’d, Hussy, why sure the wench isgone mad :. How could these chimeras get into your brains? Come hither,—and take this old gown for your pains. But the dean, if this secret should come to his ears, Will never have done with his gibes and his jeers. For your life, not a word of the matter, I charge ye: Give me but a barrack, a fig for the clergy !
anal” —
+ “201. : ‘CONCLUSION.
Ar the end of a work calculated for the improvement of Youth in speaking, the author cannot lose the opportunity of recommending, to parents and teachers, the study of the several inflexions of the human voice. These inflexions, joined with the distinction of force which divides every sen- tence into so many portions as there are accents, form a precise and definite notation of speaking sounds. By this notation a teacher is not only capable of conveying exact ideas of tone, inflexion, and force, to his pupil, but is en- abled to give instruction at a distance, nearly in the same manner as a musician would point out the notes of a song. The advantages of such a notation of speaking sounds are too obvious to be insisted on, and are exemplified at large in Elements of Elocution, and the Rhetorical Grammar: what is intended by the present address is, to inculcate the,ne- cessity of teaching these inflexions of voice to children as soon as they’ can read. At this age the ear is quick, the organs flexible, and the power of imitation strong; and the nicest distinctions of sound will then be imbibed without trouble ; but in advanced life, though ‘the ear and under- standing may be sufficiently convinced of the justness and reality of the principles, the organs will often find the utmost difficulty in pronouncing with any conformity to them. In short, the advantages arising from an early acquaintance with the powers of the voice are so great, that in hopes of rousing the public attention to so important a point, the author has abruptly introduced a specimen of his notation of speaking sounds, in the beautiful expostulation of Portia on Mercy, in the Merchant of Venice; and those who have either philosophy or curiosity enough to see the, whole system explained and exemplified, may consult Elements of Elocution and The Rhetorical Grammar. 02
292 PORTIA’S SPEECH ON MERCY.
C Persuasive entreaty 3 soft, middle tone. a
Tue quality | of mércy | is not | strdin’d; |
It dréppeth | as the géntle | rain | from héav’n | Upon the place | benéath. | It is twice bless’d ; |
Tt blésseth | him | that gives, | and him | that takes. | °Tis mightiest, | in the mightiest ; | it becémes:|
The ebrons | monarch | better | than his crown: |
(Solemn monotone ; Fic, )
His scéptre | shows | the force | of temporal power, | The attribute | to awe | and majesty, | Wherein | doth sit | the dréad | and féar of kings: |
(Rapture ; high strong tone.)
But mercy | is above | this scépter’d sway. |
It is enthréned | in the héarts of kings ; |
It is an attribute | to Géd | himself; |
And éarthly power | doth thén | show likest Ged’s, | When | mércy | séasons | justice. |
EXPLANATION OF THE MARKS.
The Monotone ; a continuation or sameness of sound, — like that produced by repeatedly striking a bell; it may be
louder or softer, but continues exactly in the same pitch.
To express this tone a horizontal line is adopted, such —
as is generally used to express a long syllable in verse, thus (-). “ High on.a throne of royal state, which far “ Outshone the wealth of Ormus or of Inde, “Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand : “ Show’rs on her kings barbaric péarl and géld, : “ Satan exalted sat” ——-—— Miton’s Par, Lost, Book ii, v. i.
293 The rising inflexion is that upward turn of the voice we
- generally use at the comma, or in asking a question which
begins with a verb: (Did he say, N6?) For expressing this,
the acute is adapted, thus (’).
.
The falling inflexion is generally used at the colon and semicolon, and must necessarily be heard in answer to the former question.: (He did; he said, No.) To express this, the grave accent is adopted, thus (‘). ; ;
The rising circumflex .begins with the falling slide, and - ends with the rising upon the same syllable. This inflexion may be exemplified by the drawling tone we give to some words spoken ironically, asthe word Clodius, in Cicero’s Oration for Milo. This turn of the voice is marked in this
_manner (v). ;
«« But it is foolish in us to compare Drusus Africanus and “ ourselves with Clodius; all our other calamities were “ tolerable: but no one can patiently bear the death of
Sas «© Clodius.”
The falling, circumflex begins with the rising and ends with the falling slide. This inflexion may be exemplified by the pronunciation of the word sword, in Cato’s reply to Decius. _ This turn of yoice is marked thus (a).
« Tis Casar’s sword has made Rome’s senate little,
« And thinn’d its ranks.” ADDISON.
The relative forces ef words are shown by associating such words as have no accent with those which have, and considering the assemblage as one word. ‘Thus in the sen- tence,
«* IT do not | ask; | I demand your attention,” we may consider each accentual portion as one word; the first to be pronounced as a word of three syllables, the second as a monosyllable, and the third as a word of seven syllables, with the accent on the third syllable.
These five modifications of the voice may be called abso- Jute, as they are the only possible ways of varying it so as to make one mode essentially different from the other. High and low, loud and soft, quick and slow, which may accompany them, may be called comparative modifications 5 as what is high in one case may be low in another, and so of
the rest.. 03
294
, fe sate te Op” ARO AO A
ee A. = PAGE Apversity, a Hymn toit ¢........06 bie, Soe cogt ZEschines against Demosthenes, on the crown ..... . 1135
JEsop and a Beau, a Dialogue between them .....: 266 Aletes and Tlyssus, in Creusa, Queen of Athens... .. . 247 Alexander on passing the Granicus..... oc o SS J Ancient and Modern Music compared ......... S82 Antony’s Funeral Oration over Cesar’s Body .... . ..220 — Soliloquy over Cesar’s Body ......... 135
B.
Bard, an Ode, by Mr.Gray .......... be ble tO Barnard (Mr.), his Speech on continuing the Army . 7 (Sir John), his Speech on the Prizes taken in War, 22
——— on raising the Wages of
Seametr sso a rcnthe econ en eng ae -- Ol, 574 Beauty, its different Degrees in n different Objects . . 195 Belial’s Speech, dissuading from War.......... 92 | Belly and Members, a Fable, by Menenius Agrippa . . 271 Bolingbroke, and Richard’s Entry into London. . . ; . 239 Brutus on the Death of Cesar .......... Farce oe GONE
and Cassius accusing each other. ........ 166 and Cassius, in Julius Cesar. ...... primera
Soliloquy on killing Cesar ..... - St aaeiad ie | Buckingham’s ‘Speech as he is going to execution . 22. 208
C. Gameleanethe =. og oc coend te bs oe i hae eee 278 Carlisle (Bishop of), in Defence of King Richard IT... .., 69 Cassius and Brutus, in Julius Cesar ........... 145 Cato, Prologue to that Tragedy ..... Sting these ae OG Cato’s Senate, in the Tragedy of Cato. ........ Pee ys Cato’s Soliloquy on the Immortality of the Soul... . . 176
Speech on the Death of hisSon .......... 212
INDEX.
Comic Humour, Pieces in that Style of Speaking .. . . 260 Cromwell and Wolsey ....... SETI Tha. SF 5 . . 245 Soe. a : Decius, his Embassy to Cato cc eiepeieie aise « 100° _ Declamation, Pieces in that Style of Speaking. ..... 65 _ Demosthenes against schines on the Crown. ..... 116 : to the Athenians against Philip... .... 109 * Digby (Lord), on the Trial of Lord Strafford ...... 183 Douglas to Lord Randolph. ...............4. 66 - his Accountjof,the; Hermit, «00.06 s cue we 194 Drowning Fly ....... ee Se eee me 199 E. Eton College, an Ode on the distant Prospect of it . .. 214 Esop dnd Beau... 09. oe eos isis aca! 6: niet meee « 266 F. Fable of the Belly and Members ..........:5.. 271 of the Town and Country Mice .......... 264 Faulconbridge and King John ...........4... 144 Fool, a Description of one, by Jaques .......... 260 Fox (Mr. Henry), on the Prizes taken in War...... 23 — on raising the Wages of Seamen 50 G. Gesture, the Elements of it, explained by Plates .... Vv Gibbon (Mr.), on a Vote of Thanks to the King 39 Gloucester and Hastings, in Jane Shore......... 148 Gloucester’s Speech to the Notes of England...... 89 Greatness and Sublimity of the Imagination. ...... 71 Grief and Tenderness, Pieces in that Style ....... 207 Hs Hamilton’s Bawn . 1 wwe te ee tee ee ee ee 285
Bae 8 @ 6 6
296 INDEX. - PAGE| Hamlet’s Soliloquy on his own conduct .....+-+ + 172° upon Life and Death ........ 173° — upon Delay in his revenge .. +++ 1
upon his Father’s Death, ..... . 207
Hannibal’s Speech to his Soldiers ... 1.444424 1227 Hastings and Gloucester, in Jane Shore... ..... + 148 Hay (Mr.), his Speech on the Prizes taken in War . . « = Hector and Andromache, their Parting .........- 255 Henry IV. Northumberland and.Hotspur.......+- 1535
-— and the Prince of Wales ~~... 52... stu; wag
—- andePrince Penny... 2 ee ws 242°
=~ his Soliloquy on Sleep. Y.dm.. . 2... “. 2097 Soe V. his Condemnation of Tredsot ia ee his Soliloquy on the Miseries of waite 2 » . “86
——-— — and Lord Chief Justice. ........ oe ee 1050 ———— to his Soldiers, at Agincourt. .....-... 139 — tg his Soldiers, at Harfleur, ... wo... 1388 Herbert (Mr.), on a Vote of Thanks to the iting 5 Te 34 Hervey (Lord), his Speech on the Army . fy ee Q Hotspur, his Description of a Fop ..... 2.22 es . 1939 I. ;
Jaques on Fools and the Progress of Life ........ . 260, Ilyssus and Aletes, in Creusa, Queen of Athens... .. 247°
Juba and Syphax, in the bet of Cato: eee. «ee 20 Pug ent taerees i. oe te ae See one WT oa :
King, in Hamlet, his Soliloquy on his Crimes .. . . ... 210° Se
Life, the Progress of it described by Jaques... « «« « 260: Lucius, his Speech in Cato’s Senate... ......... 98) M.
Mansfield’s (Lord) Speech in Favour of Wilkes ... .. 188: on: Privilege:iceedt hee eee
Marullus’s Speech to the Mob, in Julius Cesar... . 134. Marcus and Portius, in: Cato “92... ee et 142 Members and Belly, a Fable ......... YS HSte% 271 Mercutio’s Description of Queen Mab... .. fet. Se Mice (the Town and Country), a Fable ......... 264
Miseries of Royalty ...... bo 2 cic AR Se eee
INDEX, 297
PAGE  Milton’s Lamentation for his loss of Sight ........ 197 Moloch’s Speech, persuading to War ......... . 140 _ Monkey tat had. scenttie Worl): oS. 5? ona 280 rning Hymn of Adam and Eve............ 90 Morpeth (Lord), his Speech on continuing the Army, 1 é wee PN Nicholaus’s Speech in favour of Nicias.......... 7 Noel (Mr.), his Speech on continuing the Army . 8 Novelty ; the Pleasures arising fromite. +... S. eS _— O, Peesow st. Cecilia’s Day.s . 0!» ss ees star acikkiesale te  « 200 _ Ode on Stoical and Christian Philosophy ........ 231 Ode to Truth. co cdacatariend Meaacyetin IP or ass 5 204 Orestes delivering his Embassy to Pyrrhus........ 102 Othello’s Apology to the Senate ....... Sa | 67 a Pr. Painting and Modern Languages compared . ~ +--+ 259 Parliamentary Debates on the Army. .......... 1 ——_—_-- on the Prizes taken in War. eee" - on the King’s Speech ...... 34 - —— onraising the Seamen’s Wages. 49 Parting of Hector and Andromache ........... 255 Passions; an Ode on them by Collins... ....... 235
Pelham (Mr.), his Speech on continuing the Army... 6 Phillips (Mr.), his Speech on a Vote of Thanks to the
OTS oc ia) sae we et ge ao VRE ves 46 Pitt (Mr.), his Speech on raising the Wages of Sea-
DNCH Sa a ak Bh ak ees ia ot ad 54, 59 Plomer (Mr.), his Speech on continuing the Army. 3 Portius and. Marcus, in Catoa% ..... i/o 0 a ee elie is , 142 Procrastination, the Folly of it. ....... 3 plats be <s 88 Pulteney (Mr.), his Speech on the Army ........ 13 — —_— on the Prizestakenin War 17
on the King’s Speech. ... 42 Pym (Mr. ), his Speech at the opening of the Charge of High Treason against Lord Strafford ...... 181
Q. Quarrelling ; Rules laid down for it by the Jester. . . . 262
298 INDEXS ge Queen Mab; Mercutio’s Description of her... ... R. "2 Reflection and Argument, Pieces in that Style ..... 17 Richard I1.’s Entry into London... . . oth lo Pama 239° and Lord Scroop....... ct es 2a Richmond encouraging his cogs. Mt Rumour, Speech in the Character of. ta . a ae S. ; Remtont ploring his Blindness and Captivity « ere | Satan’s Address to the Sun... . ei 217 Scale of Animal Existence... ...... — Re TOF Scroop and Richard Il. ........... ve 8s ee eee Sempronius, his Speech in Cato’s Senate ........ 97 Shippen (Mr.), on continuing the Army ........ S a on a Vote of Thanks to the Minis. i. 36 Sleep, a Soliloquy on it, by Henry IV. ......... 20 Social Duties arising from Nature ......... Somerset (Lord Noel), his Speech on a Vote of Thanks to the Kings inseness-< sis . salt « we Speaker of the House of Commons, his "Speech onthe Order of (h@.200V-.-ccip ia gaps gees Sess , 24,26, 52m Strafford (Lord), his Speech before his Seatenke es . 186 Strickland (Sir William), his Speech on the Army . 1 Syphax and Juba, in the Tragedy of Cato... ..... , 251° Syracusan’s Speech against putting the Athenian Ge- | nerais to: Death=s>. see NOS othe, Ma 1073 pee Taste, its Universality and Diversity. ¢ 2... 8 va Titus Quintius’s Speech to the Roman People... ... 125 Town and Country Mice, a Fables. 2. 2 P ee. 264
Trevor (Mr.) his Speech on a Vote of Thanks to the King, 35 Truth (an Ode to it)
Vanoc and Valens, in the Tr agedy of the Briton . .... 161 Vehement Passion, Pieces in that Style of Speaking SR Virtue both our Duty and our Interest... ... sake eee
W. Wager (Sir Charles), on raising the Wages of Seamen . 49
4 / INDEX. . 7 299 = PAGE Walpote (Mr. Horace), on the Army ....... oe
7
on raising the View of Seamen. 58
‘Walpole ole (Sir Rahert), on the Army . 0s pencwie a LE the Prizes taken in War . 20, 30 the King’s Speech .... 41, 44. ——_—_—_—.--—__——_ raising the Wagesof Seamen, 51, 56 Winnington (Mr. ), on the Prizes taken in War, 26, 27, 28 , on raising the Wages of Seamen, 61, 62
Wolsey and Cromwell 1...» sis sin Ei drages . 208 Wright (Mr.), on the Prizes takenin War ....-.+.. 31 Wyndham (Sir Willi 5h NCCC aaa |
Prizes taken in War . 19
ELE TS Yonge soe bh his poerth on oni the rmy -
Ui. RES a eS 18 Youth and the Philosopher... . . Be ARE ae ws OF Zz.
Zang? 's Joy and Remorse on the success of his Plot .. 136 encouraging Alonzo to kill his Wife ........ 137
J. M‘Creery, Printer, Black-horse- ourt, London.
3 BOOKS lately published A iow F uthor, =
é 4 s - ie adios ; ao ~ A CRITICAL PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY, — AND ,
EXPOSITOR of the ENGLISH LANGUAGE;
In which the Meaning of every Werd- is explained, the— Sound of. every Syllable is clearly shown; and*where Words are subject to different Pronunciations, the Authorities our best Pronouncing Dictionaries ar by exhibited, the a for each are at large displaye Bemigferablet Pro ciation is pointed out:
To which are prefixed, PRINCIPLES OF ENGLISH PRONUNCIATION ;
-
. In which the influence of the Greex and Latin Accent” and Quantity, on the Accent and Quantity of the Eng- lish, is thoroughly examined and clearly defined; and the” Analogies of the Language are so fully shown, as to lay ~ the Foundation of a consistent and rational Pronunciation. — To which is added, Directions To Foreicners for acquiring a knowledge’ of the Use of this Dictionary: The whole in-— terspersed with Observations, Etymological, Critical, and— Grammatical. The SevenTEENTH EpiTion, in one Volume Octavo, Price 14s. in boards, |
. ~~
2.
A KEY TO THE CLASSICAL PRONUNCIATION OF GREEK, LATIN, AND SCRIPTURE PROPER NAMES ; “Tn which the words are accented and divided into Syllables exactly as they are pronounced, according to Rules drawn
from Analogy and the best Usage. In one Volume Octavo, Frice 7s. in Boards.
r ee! Dec. 1818: SCHOOL BOOKS,
: --. «PRINTED FoR” a0 LONGMAN; HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN, age PATERNOSTER ROW. a :
Met of Reading,
FIRST BOOK for CHILDREN. By LINDLEY MURRAY. Tw Edition. Price 6d. sewed.
AN ENGLISH SPELLING BO Lessons adapted to the Capaciti Calculated te adyan arners by natural and easy Grada- tions, and to tea ography and Pronunciation together. By NDLEY AY. Price 1s. 6d. bound.
_ INTRODUCTION to the ENGLISH READER; or,
a Selection of Pieces, in Prose and Poetry, &c. By LINDLEY MURRAY. Fifteenth Edition. Price 3s, bound.
THE ENGLISH READER; or, Pieces in Prose and Poetry, selected from the best Writers. Designed to assist young Persons to read with Propriety and Effect; to improve their Language and Sentiments; and to inculcate some of the most im- portant Principles of Piety and Virtue. With afew preliminary Obseryations on the Principles of good Reading. By LINDLEY MURRAY. Fourteenth Edition. Price 4s. 6d. bound.
SEQUEL to the ENGLISH READER ; or, Elegant Selections in Prose and Poetry. Designed to improve the higher Class of Learners in Reading; to establisha Taste for just and accurate Composition, and to promote the Interests of Piety and Virtue. By LINDLEY MURRAY. Fifth Edition. Price 4s. Gd,
THE ENGLISH SPELLING-BOOK, accompanied by a progressive Series of-easy and familiar Lessons, adapted to the Capacities of Children, and embellished with a Variety of Engraviugs ; the whole intended to furnish, for the Use of Schools, an improved introductory Book to the first Elements of the English Language. By WILLIAM MAVOR, LL.D. Price 1s. 6d.
The CLASS-BOOK; or, THREE HUNDRED and SIXTY-FIVE READING LESSONS for Schools of either SEX; combining the Elements of all Knowledge, with a greater Number of Reading Exercises, from the best Authors, than are to be
- found in any other Work of the same Description; every Lesson _ having a clearly defined Object, and teaching some Principle -_of Science or Morality, or some important Truth. By the Rev. | DAVID BLAIR, A new Edition... Price 5s. 64. bound.
ldren; in Three Parts,
Reading”
w/
-
2 School Books, printed for Longman and Co. 7
READING EXERCISES for SCHOOLS, on a new and very popular Plan, being a Sequel to MAVOR’S SPELLAN G, and an Introduction to the Class-B ilar in Arrangement to Brown’s Testament. By the Rev. DA BLAIR. 28. 6d. ~
CLASSICAL READING LESSONS for every Da in the Year, selected chiefly from modern English Writers of the Reign of George the Third. By the Rev, W.SHARPE. Printed a large clear type. Price 5s. 6d. bound.
The BOOK of MONOSYLLABLES; or, an In- — troduction to the Child’s Monitor; adapted to the Capacities of young Childreu. In Two Parts, Calculated to instruct by fami- liar Gradations in the first Principles of Education and Morality. By JOHN HORNSEY. Price Is. 6d.
The PRONOUNCING EXPOSITOR; or, a New SPELLING-BOOK. In Three Parts. By JOHN HORNSEY, In 12mo. Price 2s. bound. PSs
The CHILD’S MONITOR; or, Parental Instruc- tion. In Five Parts. Containing great Variety of progressive Lessons, adapted to the Comprehension of Children. By JOHN ~ TOL Price 4s, bound.
The SCHOLAR’S SPELLING SSISTANT.  In- tended for the Use of Schools and priva fition.. By THOMAS | CARPENTER, Master of the Academy, lavicned ates :
An ENGLISH VOCABULARY, designed as a Sequel to the Scholar’s Spelling Assistant, for the purpose of grounding — young Persons more effectually in Spelling and Pronunciation, — By THOMAS CARPENTER. In l2mo. Price 2s. ;
The FLOWER-BASKET, a Fairy Tale. In 18mo. with a Frontispiece. Price 2s, 6d. neatly half-bound,
POETRY for CHILDREN ; consisting of Selections of easy aud interesting Pieces from the best Poets, interspersed with Original Pieces; adapted to Children between the Ages of Six and Twelve. By Miss AIKEN. Price °s-. E :
CLASSICAL ENGLISH POETRY; consisting of — from Three to Four Hundred of the best short Pieces in the Lan- guage, selected for the Use of Schools and young Persons, froin the Works of the British Poets, with some original Pieces. By Dr. MAVOR and Mr. PRATT. With a Preface, indicating the se- yeral Species of Poetry and their best Modes of Recitation. 6s.
A SEQUEL to the POETICAL MONITOR; con- sisting of Pieces select and original, adapted to improve the Minds
and Manners of Young Persons. By ELIZ.HILL. Second Edition. Price 3s. bound.
Me 4
English Language, FIRST LESSONS in ENGLISH GRAMMAR,
adapted to the Capacities of Children, from Six to Ten Years old.
Designed as an Introduction to the Abridgment of Murray's Gram- mar. Price 9d.
= :
- ety School Books, printed for Longman and Co. 3 ie An. ABRIDGMENT of MURRAY’S ENGLISH
_ GRAMMAR. W n Appendix, containing Exercises in Pars- va ing, inicthoera a in Syntax, and in Punctuation. Designed for Slasses of Learners. Price 1s. bound.
rad
M
| to enable |
‘the ENGLIS es <¥- ; r, “ ‘ ef 7 ye ‘
ENGLISH GRAMMAR, adapted to the different Classes of Learners, With an Appendix, containing Rules and Observations for assisting the more advanced Students to write with icuity and Accuracy. By LINDLEY MURRAY. Thir- tieth Edition. Price 4s. bound. ‘ te : An ENGLISH GRAMMAR, pomprehentws. the PRINCIPLES and RULES of the LANGUAGE, illustrated »y ap- _ propriate Exercises, and a Key to the Exercises. By LINDLEY
MURRAY. In2vols.8vo, Third Edition. -Price 12. 1s, boards. ENGLISH EXERCISES, adapted to MURRAY’S ENGLISH GRAMMAR; consisting of Exemplifications of the Parts of Speech, Instances of false Orthography, Violations of the Rules of Syntax, Defects in Punctuation, and Violations of the Rules respecting Perspicuity and Accuracy. Designed for the Benefit of private Learners, as well as for the 0 ools.. -Twenty-
fourth Edition. Price 2s. 6d. ; . A KEY tot EXERCISES; calculated earners to become their own Instructors in d Composition. Fourteenth Edition. Price 2s. 6d:
ar an
Grammar “bound. The Exercises and Key may be had together, price 4s. 6d.
GRAMMATICAL QUESTIONS, adapted to ihe Grammar of Linptry Morray, with Notes. By C. BRADLEY, A.M. Price 2s. 6d. bound. Third Edition, considerably improved.
RULES for ENGLISH COMPOSITION, and parti-.
cularly for Themes. Designed for the Use of Schools, and in Aid of Self-instruction. By JOHN RIPPINGHAM, Private Tutor at Westminster School. Third Edition. 12mo. 4s. boards.
The ART of EXTEMPORE PUBLIC SPEAKING, including a Course of Discipline for obtaining the Faculties of Discrimination, Arrangement, and Oral Discussion. Designed for the Use of Schools and Self-instruction. By JOHN RIPPINGHAM, Second Edition. Price 6s. boards.
RUDIMENTS of ENGLISH GRAMMAR, for the Use of Schools. By the Rev. HENRY ST. JOHN BULLEN, M.A. of Trinity College, Cambridge, and Head Master of the Grammar School, Leicester. Third Edition. Price 2s, 6d. bound, — :
A SHORT GRAMMAR of the ENGLISH LAN- GUAGE, simplified to the Capacities of Children. By JOHN HORNSEY. A new Edition, corrected. 2s. bound.
The CLASSICAL: ENGLISH LETTER-WRITER; or, EPISTOLARY SELECTIONS. By the Author of LESSONS for YOUNG PERSONS in HUMBLE LIFE, &c. &c. 58. bound,
ENGLISH EXERCISES, Orthographical and Gram- matical, in Two Parts: being a Selection of choice Pieces in Prose and Verse. With many original Reflections, &c. designed to im- prove the Juvenile Mind in Spelling and Grammar. By JOHN HORNSEY. Inismo. Price ls, bound.
en School Books, printed for Longman and Co, >
French Language, + GRAMMATICAL EXERCISES upon the FRENC
LANGUAGE, compared with the English. By NICHOLAS HAMEL,»
A new Edition, with great Improvements. 4s. 3 An UNIVERSAL FRENCH GRAMMAR, being an
accurate System of French Accidence and Syntax, on an improved Plan. By NICHOLAS HAMEL. A new Edition. Price 4s.
CLEF, ou THEMES TRADUITS de la. GRAM- MAIRE de NICHOLAS HAMEL, d’apres Edition stéréotype, in lzmo. Price 3s. bound.
The WORLD in MINIATURE: containing a cu- vious and faithful Account of the Situation, Extent, Productions, Government, Population, Dress, Manners, Curiosities, &c. &c. of the different Countries of the World. Compiled from the best Authorities. A Book particularly useful to Students in Geography, History, and of the French Language. By NICHOLAS HAMEL. Price 4s. ODUCT .
INTRODUCTION au LECTEUR FRANCOIS; ou,
Recueil de Pieces choises: avec PExplication.dcs Idiotismes et, des Phrases difficiles, quis’y trouyent. Par LINDEBY. MURRAY. In 12mo. Price 3s. 6d. bound.
Pate LECTEUR FRANCOIS; ou, Recueil de Pieces,
en Prose et eu Verse, tirées des meilleurs Ecrivains, pour servir a perfectionner les jeunes Gens daus la Lecteur; a etendre leur Connoisance de la Langue Frangois; et a leur inculquer des Prin- cipes de Vertu et de Piete. Par LINDLEY MURRAY. Third Edition. Price 4s. 6d. bound.
A SEQUEL to the EXERCISES of Chambaud,
Hamel, Perrin, Wanostrocht, and olher Grammars, being a Prac- tical Guide to translate from English into good French, on a new
PN ete tsar >
Pian, with Grammatical Notes. By G.H.POPPLETON. In i2mo. ©
Price 3s, bound. A KEY to POPPLETON’S FRENCH EXERCISES ;
being a Translation of the various Exercises contained in that Book. In 12mo, 2s. 6d, bound.
mee
A KEY to CHAMBAUD’S EXERCISES; being a>
correct Translation of the various Exercises contained in that —
Book. ByE.J.VOISON. Third Edition. Price 4s. bound.
An EXPEANATORY PRONOUNCING DICTION- AR Y of the FRENCH LANGUAGE, in French and English; wherein the exact Sound and Articulation of every Sylable are distinctly marked (according to the Method adopted by Mr. Wal- Ker in his Pronouncing Dictionary); to which are prefixed, the
Principles of the Freach Pronunciation. By L;:ABBE TARDY, late —
Master of Arts in the University of Paris. A new Edition, revised, in 12mo0. Price 7s. bound.
RULES for PRONOUNCING and READING the
FRENCH LANGUAGE. By the Rev. ISRAEL WORSLEY. Second Kdition, In1l2mo, Price 2g. bound, ; >
School Books, printed for Longman and Co. 5 ry A DELECTUS of SENTENCES and PASSAGES ‘om the most estee uch Authors, Designed to facilitate
a Knowledge of the French Tongue. Arranged under the several pervades oo ne oe . To See vith romiscuous Rus
dioms. By the Rev. SRA % Bait. In l2mo. Price 4s. bound, : pe, ** eer ge ey
‘
Latin Language, S WARD’S LATIN ACCIDENCE. Price 1s. bound.
WARD’S LATIN GRAMMAR. Price Qs. 6d. bound. EXERCISES to the ACCIDENCE and GRAMMAR;
or, an Exemplification of the several Moods and Tenses, and of the principal Rules of Construction; consisting. chiefly of Moral Sentences, collected out of the best Roman Authors, and trans- Jated into English, to be rendered back_int in, the Latin Words being set in the : n, with References tothe _ Latin Syntax, and No y WILLIAM TURNER, M.A. late
Master of the chool at Colchester,- Price 2s. 6d. bound.
TER ATIONES et EXEMPLA DECLINATIO- NUM et CONJUGATIONUM ITEMQUE PROPRIA QU MARI. BUS, QUA GENUS et AS IN PR#ESENTI, Englished and ex- plained, for the Use of Young Grammarians. Opera et Studio CAROLI HOOLE, M.A.E. Col. e Oxon Scolarche olim Rothera- miensis egro Ebor, IniSmo. Price ls, 6d.
An ABRIDGMENT of the LATIN PROSODY MADE EASY, for the Use of Schools; containing’ as much of the Information given on each Subject in the larger Work, as appear- ed suited to the Use and Capacity of young Prosodians. By JOHN CAREY, LL.D. In 12mo, Price 3s. 6d. bound.
An ALPHABETICAL KEY te PROPRIA QU MARIBUS, QU GENUS, and AS IN PR2SENTI, containing all the Examples declined and translated, with the Rules quoted un- der each, and numerical References to the Contents.. A new Edit. By J. CAREY,LL.D. In 12mo. Price 3s. bound. ’
The ETON LATIN PROSODY, illustrated with English Explanations of the Rules and Authorities from the Latin Poets. By J. CAREY, LL.D. 12mo. . Price 1s. 6d. bound.
A METRICAL GUIDE to the right Intelligence of Virgil’s Versification, By J. CAREY, LL.D. 12mo. 1s. 6d. F
The LONDON VOCABULARY, English and. Latin, designed for the Use of Schools. By JAMES GREENWOOD, for- merly Sur-master of St. Paul’s School. Revised and arranged systematically, to advance the Learner in Scientific as well as verbal Knowledge. By NATHANIEL HOWARD, Author of a systematic English and Greek Vocabulary, &c. &c, A new Edit. in 18mo. Price 1s. 6d. bound.
INTRODUCTORY LATIN. EXERCISES to those of CLARKE, ELLIS, and TURNER. Designed for the younger Classes of Learners, By NATHANLEL HOWARD. Price 2s. 6d.
&
Fe. ~ . 4 a 6 School Books, printed for Longman and Co. :
MAITTAIRE'’S CLASSICS.
C. J. CRSARIS COMMENTARII, emo. 58. cd C. NEPOS, 12mo. Price 1s. 6d. bound. | SALLUST, 12mo. Price 2s. 6d. bound. VIRGIL, 18mo. Price 3s. 6d. bound.
OVIDII EPISTOLE, 18mo. Price 3s. 6d. bound. MUSH ANGLICAN, 2 vols. 12mo. Price 7s.
bound.
m
Greek Language. WARD’S GREEK GRAMMAR. Price 2s. 6d.
bound.
A GRAMMAR: of the GREEK LANGUAGE, ona new and improved Plan, ia English and Creek. By JOHN JONES, Member of the Philological Society at Momsheatcr. Third Edition. © Price 6s. 6d. bound. ;
DELECTUS SENTENTIARUM GRECARUM. ad Usum TTRONUM ACCOMMODATUS; cum Notulis et Lexico, on ihe Plan of Dr. Valpy’s Latin Dilectus. In 12mo. Price 48. a
A VOCABULARY, English and Greek, arranged systematically, to advance the 1 Learner in scientific as well as — verbal Knowledge. For the Use of Schools. By NATHANIEL ~ HOWARD. 3s, bound.
GREEK EXERCISES, in Syntax, Ellipses, Dialects, Prosody, and Metaphrases (after the Manner of * Clarke’s and Man’s Introduction to the making of Latin,”) adapted to the Gram- — mars of Eton, Wettenhall, Moore, Bell, and Holmes. To whichis © prefixed, a concise but comprehensive Syntax. By the Rev. WiL- LIAM NEILSON, D.D. Minister of Dundalk, treland. Fourth © Bdition, Ini vol.8vo- 5s. boards, and with the Key, 8s.
GREEK IDIOMS, exhibited in select Passages from the best Authors, with English Notes anda parsing Index. To which are added, Observations on some Ld ge of the Greek
‘ Language. By the Rev, W. NEILSON, D.D. M.R.LA. In vo Price 5s. bound,
MAITTAIRE’S CLASSICS.
HOMER, l2mo. Price 6s. bound. GREEK TESTAMENT, 12mo. Price 4s. bound.
en RO et a ade wert. —
Geagraphn,
An EASY GRAMMAR. of GEOGRAPHY ; being an Introduction and Companior to the larger Work of the same
¢ \ School Books, printed for Longman and Co. 7 - Author, published under the Title of “ Geograph Plan,” 2 obs estoceua ike mi eaear ak of the Kind a otaat
d ~ A COMPENDHJM of GEOGRAPHY, for the Use of Schools, private Families, and those who study this neces- sary Science. By RICHMAL MANGNALL, Author of “ Historical Questions.” In12mo. Price 9s, bound. 2 ae ' PINKERTON’S SCHOOL 21 Maps, neatly coloured. Priee-T25-
ical View of the Earth and Heavens; comprehend-
r ccount of the Figure, Magnitude, and Motion of the
Earth; with the natural Changes of its Surface, caused by Floods,
_ Earthquakes, &c. designed for the Instruction of Youth. By THOMAS KEITH. Price 6s. boards. i ‘
An INTRODUCTION to the GEOGRAPHY of the NEW TESTAMENT; comprising a Summary Chronological and Geographical View of the Events recorded respecting the Minis-
‘y of our Saviour: with Questions for Examination, and an accented Index; principally designed forthe Use of Young Per- sons, and for the Sunday Employment of Schools. By LANT CAR- PENTER, LL.D. With Maps. Fourth Edit. Price 4s. boards.
INSTRUCTIVE RAMBLES through London and its Environs. By Mrs. HELME. Fourth Edit. Price 4s. 6d. bd.
A SKETCH of MODERN and ANCIENT GEOGRA- PHY, for the Use of Schools. By SAMUEL BUTLER, D.D. Head Master of the Royal Free Grammar School of Shrewsbury, Fourth Edit. In 8vo, Price 9s. boards. '
_ OUTLINE MAPS of ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY, ‘printed on Drawing Colombier, Price 10s.6d. being a Selection from D’Anville’s Ancient Atlas, intended as Practical Exercises for the Pupil to fill up, and designed as an Accompaniment to Dr. Butler’s Sketch of Modern and Ancient Geography.
TRAVELS at HOME, and VOYAGES by the FIRE- ' SIDE; for the Instruction and Entertainment of Young Persons: in 5 yols. 18mo. (containing Europe, Asia, Africa, and America). Price. 15s. half-bound. .
GEOGRAPHY for YOUTH, adapted to the different Classes of Learners. By the Rev. JOHN HARTLEY. In i12mo. ‘Second Edit. Price 4s. 6a. bound,
”
§ School Books, printed for Longman and Co. ; rd ; cs Soi Wistorp, oe
HISTORICAL and MISCELLANEOUS QUEST for the Use of Young People; with a Selection of British General Biography, &c. By RICHMAL MANGNALL. Four Edit. Price 5s. bound. :
A.M. Inlyol12mo. Fourth Edit. Price 5s.bound. —
- LETTERS on FRENCH HISTORY, from | e Earliest Period to the Battle of Waterloo, and re-establishment of the House of Bourbon; for the Use of Schools. By J. D. Inkemo. Price 6s. Bds. {
LETTERS on ENGLISH HISTORY, from the Inva- sion of Julius Cesar to the Battle of Waterloo; for the Use of Schools. By J.BIGLAND. In 12mo. 6s. Bds.
UNIVERSAL HISTORY, in Twenty-four Books. Translated from the-German of JOHN MULLER. In 3 vols... 5yv0. Price 12.168. bds. oe :
This Work is not a mere compendium of i sal History, but contains a Philosophical Inquiry into the Moral, ore copes cially the Political Causes which have given rise to im- portant Revolutions in the History of the Human Race. ~~ ¢
A SKETCH of the HISTORY of EUROPE from the Year 1783 to the General Peace in 1814. By JOHN BIGLAND. In 2 vols. 8vo. Second Edit. Price 1l. Ss. bds. :
An INTRODUCTION to the STUDY of CHRONO- LOGY and UNIVERSAL HISTORY. By WILLIAM JILLARD HORT. In 18mo. 4s. bds, ; : :
The NEW PANTHEON; or, an Introduction to the Mythology of the Ancients, in Question and Answer. Compiled principally for the Use of Females. By W. JILLARD HORT. Third Edit. With Plates. Price 5s. bds. 3
The HISTORY of ENGLAND, related in Familiar Conversations, by a Father to his Children. Interspersed with moral and instructive Remarks and Observations on the mos leading and interesting Subjects. Designed for the Perusal of Youth. By ELIZABETH HELME, Third Edit. In 2 vols. 12mo. Price 9s. bound, with Frontispiece. ;
A CONCISE VIEW of the CONSTITUTION of ENGLAND. By GEORGE CUSTANCE. Third Edition, improved and enlarged. 8yvo,. Price 10s. 6d. bds.
Wiographp,
The BRITISH NEPOS; consisting of Select Lives of the illustrious Britons who have been the most distinguished for their Virtues, Talents, or remarkable Advancement in Life. Interspersed with practical Reflections; written purposely for the Use of Young Persons, on the obvious and important Principle—
School Books, printed for
ay ee ee 4 Ss , ré 7%
Longman and Co. 9
ridged for the Use of Schools. By WILLIAM MAVOR,LL.D. &c. ‘rice 6s. bound, and containing Accounts of the most ain aan
 ____, Religion and Barals, ~. TRUE STORIES; or, Interesting Anecdotes of > : designed, through the Medium of Example, to inculcate . Principles of Virtue and Piety. Price 2s. 6d. bds. TRUE STORIES; or, Interesting Anecdotes of = Young Persons: designed, through the Medium of Example, to in- culcate Principles of Virtue and Piety. By the Author of “ Lessons _ for Young Persons in humble Life,” &c. In l2mo. 4s, Gd. bds. LESSONS for YOUNG PERSONS in HUMBLE LIFE; calculated to promote their Improyem in the Art of Reading, in Virtue and Piety, and parti y in the Knowledge of the Duties peculiar to thei ns. 3dEdit. Price 3s. 6d. bds. A FRIEND T for SERVANTS and APPREN- TICES; ing the Character of a good and faithful Servant, Advice to Servants of every Denomination, Letter from an Uncle -_ to his Nephew, on taking him Apprentice: and Anecdotes of good and faithful Servants. By the Author of “Lessons for Young Per- sons in humble Life.” Price 9d. ROSE and EMILY; or, Sketches of Youth. By Mrs. ROBERTS, Author of ** Mental Telescope.” 12mo. 5s. 6d. bds,
_PITY’S GIFT: a Collection of Interesting Tales from the Works of Mr. Prarr, Third Edit. Price 3s. bound.
MATERNAL INSTRUCTION; or, Family Conver- ations on moral and interesting Subjects: interspersed with History, Biography, and Original Stories. Designed for the pe- rusal of Youth. By ELIZABETH HELME. Third Edit. In 12mo. Price 48.64, bds.
The PATERNAL PRESENT ; being a SEQUEL to
Piry’s Gist: chiefly selected from the Writings of Mr. Pratt. ‘Second Edit. with 11 Wood-Cuts. Price 3s. bound,
SERMONS for SCHOOLS; containing one for every Sunday in the Year; and also for Christmas-Day, Good-Friday, Easter-Sunday, and Fast-days; of Lengths and on Subjects adapted to Young Persons of either Sex: selected and abridged from Horne, Blair, Gisborne, Zollikofer, Paley, Porteus, Jortin, Enfield, Horsley, Seed, &c. &c. By the Rey. S. BARROW. Price 1s. bound and lettered. :
SCRIPTURAL ESSAYS, adapted to the Holidays of the Church of England; with Meditations on the prescribed Ser- vices. By Mrs. WEST. In2vols.12mo. Price 12s. bds.
The DUTY and BENEFIT of a DAILY PERUSAL of the HOLY SCRIPTURES in FAMILIES. By LINDLEY MUR- RAY, Author of an English Grammar, &c. Price 1s. sewed.
10 School Books, printed for Longman and Ci ‘The POWER of RELIGION on the MIND, tirement, Affliction, and at the Approach of Death; xem
fine Paper, 10s. 6d. bds.
Grithmeric, Wenk-keeping, General ‘Setence, Ec. xe
The ARITHMETICIAN’S GUIDE; or) a»Com plete Exercise Book, for the Use of public Schools and private Teachers. By WILLIAM TAYLOR, Teacher of the Mathematics, &c. Price 3s, bound. y
An INTRODUCTION to PRACTICAL ARITHME- TIC, in Two Parts, with various Notes and occasional Directions for the Use of Learners. By THOMAS MOLINEUX, many Years Teacher of Accounts, Short-hand, and the Mathematics, at the Free Grammar School. at Macclesfield. Eighth Edit. in 12mo. Part I, Price 2s.6d. bound. Part II, Third Edit. Price 2s. 6d, bd.
The ARITHMETIC of REAL LIFE and BUSINESS, adapted to the practical Use of Sehools, including a complete Reformation of all the ‘fables of Weights and Measures; the ~ Calculation of Annuities, Leases, Estates, Lives, Stocks, Ex- changes, &c.3; and more numerous Examples under every Rul than are to be found in any other Book of this Kind. By the Rev. J. JOYCE. Closely printed. Price 3s.6d. bound ‘
A KEY to DITTO, for the Use of Teachers; t which is subjeined, a System o Mental Arithmetic. Price 3s.6d.
In the KEY to JOYCE’S ARITHMETIC, is given a new and yer useful Discovery, by means of which all Sums in the First Rules of Arithmetic, simple or compound, may be examined at a glance of the Eye. ;
The ELEMENTS of BOOK-KEEPING, by SINGLE and DOUBLE ENTRY; comprising several Sets of Books, ar= ranged according to present Practice, and designed for the Use of Schools.. To which is annexed, an Introduction on Merchants? Accounts, with engraved Specimens. By JAMES MORRISON, ese of the Mercantile Academy at Glasgow. In Syo. 8s. half
ound,
I ee ee Ee ee ae
_ School Books, printed for Longman and Co. = 11 at CONCISE SYSTEM of COMMERCIAL ARITH- "Author of the E me) epaD ook beaghe ae. ee r%
_. The FIRST ELEMENTS of ARITHMETIC; or, _ the TEACHER’S and SCHOLAR’S ASSISTANT, practically ar- _ Yanged in Lessons, and expressly designed for Classes; ‘compris- _. ing the Four Simple Rules, viz. Addition, Subtraction, Multiplica- __ tion, and Division, comnmep into ong sum, and taught w one oPERA-
tion, in Twelve Series. To which is prefixed, the ‘odactory ~ Rules of Numeration and Notation. By GEORGE REYNOLDS, Writing-Master, Christ’s Hospital. In 12mo. Price 4s. 6d. bound.
- A FAMILIAR. INTRODUCTION to the ARTS and SCIENCES, for the Use of Schools and Young Persons; containing
. a General Explication of the Fundamettal Principles and Facts of the Sciences; divided into Lessons, with Questions subjoined to each, for the Examination of Pupils. By the Rev. J. JOYCE, Au- thor of Scientific Dialogues,&c. Second Edition. Inl2mo. Price 6s. boards, with Plates by Lowry.
SYSTEMATIC EDUC INSTRUCTION in
ees)
s~or ELEMENTARY us Departments of Literature and
Science, with al Rules for studying each Branch of useful _ Knowledge. “By the Rev. W. SHEPHERD, the Rev. J. JOYCE, “and-the Rev. LANT CARPENTER, LL.D. Second Edition. In 2 » thick Vols. Svo. (closely printed, and illustrated with nine Plates ~ by Lowry, &c.) Price ll. 11s. 6d. boards.
- An INTRODUCTION to the THEORY and PRAC- TICE of PLAIN and SPHERICAL TRIGONOMETRY, and the Stereographic Projection of the Sphere; including the Theory of Navigation ; comprehending a Variety of Rules, Formule, &c. with their Practical Applications to the Mensuration of Heights and Distances, to determine the Latitude by two Altitudes of the Sun, the Longitude by the Lunar Observations, and to other important Problems on thé Sphere, and on Nautical Astronomy, By THO- MAS KEITH, Private Teacher of Mathematics, In Svo. Price 12s. boards. Second Edition, corrected and improved.
The ELEMENTS of PLANE GEOMETRY; con- taining the first Six Books of Euclid, from the Text of Dr. SIMP- SON, Emeritus Professor of Mathematics in the University of Glasgow, with Notes, Critical and Explanatory. To which are
_ added, Book VIL. including several important Propositions which are not in Euclid; and Book VIII. consisting of Practical Geome- try; also Book IX. of Planes and their Intersections; and Book X. of the Geometry of Solids. By THOMAS KEITH. In 8vo. Price 10s. 6d. boards.
The ELEMENTS of NATURAL HISTORY, for
the Use of Schools. Founded on the Linnzan Arrangement of
Animals, with popular Descriptions, in the Manner of Goldsmith,
and Buffon. By WILLIAM MAVOR, LL.D. Ninth Edition. Price
483. Gd. bound, with Fifty Engravings, representing 200 of the most - curious Objects.
COLE. i2mo. Price 7s. boards.
cies, parti nei ak Cigent stances of their . Member-of the Linnzan
12, 48, boards.
The ELEMENTS of meee gs in _— Branches, practically adapted for the Use of Schools and Stu- dents; illustrated by highly-finished Engravings, plain and co- loured $complete Tables of Sines and Tangents, Logarithms, &c. — &c. By ABRAHAM CROCKER, Land-Surveyor. Price 9s. bound.
_ CONVERSATIONS on CHEMISTRY. In which the Elements of that Science are familiarly explained and illus- trated by Experiments. In 2 vols. 12mo. with plates by’ Lowry. Fifth Edition. Price 14s. boards. a
CONVERSATIONS on POLITICAL ECONOMY : in whichthe Elements of that Science are familiarly explained. By the Author of “ Conversations on Chemistry.” In 1 large vol. — Second Edition. 12mo. Price 9s. boards. ~~. i
CONVERSATIONS on BOTANY, with ™Twenty Engravings. Second Edition. In1 yol. 12mo. Price 7s. 6d. plain, — or 10s. 6d. coloured. 4
The object of this Work is to enable young persons to acquire a
knowledge of the Vegetable Productions of their Native Country ; i
for this purpose the arrangement of Linnzus is briefly explained, anda Native Plant of each Class (with a few exceptions) is exa- mined, and illustrated by an Engraving; and a short Account is added of some of the principal Foreign Species.
CONVERSATIONS in ALGEBRA. Being an Intro- i duction to the First Principles of that Science: in a Series of Dia- logues. Designed for those who have not the Advantage of a Tu- © tor, as well as for the Use of Students in Schools. By WILLIAM ©
An INTRODUCTION to the STUDY of BOTANY. By Sir J. SMITH, M.D. F.R.S.P.L.S. Third Edition. In 1 vol. Syo. with Fifteen Plates. Price 14s. boards.
*,* A few Copies are coloured. Price 1. 8s. boards. ° Z
The plan of this Work is to render the Science of Botanical Ar-
rangement, as well as the general Structure and Anatomy of : Plants, accessible, and in every point eligible for young persons of - either sex, who may be desirous of making this elegant‘and useful — Science a part of their education or amusement. ;
4
marge
* g
ein ve huge ie”
- pegs
t . 5 1 j. rl | - = - 3 +19 z c ‘ yy = wet. — . a a as - . 2 . “ : * * 6 - 2 : ; F * - ? eGR: ae a
s i ‘ * i
Date Due
