+s S252 SN
SPS Pre
v
Rte ; Sarees SSS > Riese Beet an Der gr srmrogrrorrerens Raveresesexarags 2 Resaeaatetat Bates Saba trees 3 Necaaunraecee neous ase sat
BCRAC A be SSPROND: Sects es
> ; SEN Se Aree es iS > - ; Py s. Ie ee He) t: 7 Seen ee RPVONNon. s BNR iKeteteatake S SESE SIO SS HR reeks CGO IES? oS ox i BOO Nes DeeydararePa ats ees ee Resvrerererarinaentsctees bss a eeomnaeercies Ese seetees ee taets KeaSeserarects
e es take ae
is aiaaSesceastee antec a cde Seeeeetia See ere Nae clears eS ieeusseieestetssek re 2 .¢
ENSaSCueNT eS 2 oe ? Saran share < ROS SORE Sie emsai %
537)? Sea
Mien eee Ee 53.
SESS Or Ser¢ ade He Repatests ry. <e rhe eae
£8 ha
fete
7 aes Parety
keen
9. wey
ate: friend en servant ot twe at ave _ now mmgde ;
Mr. JAMES BRYCE
—
S \\
MMONWEALTH
0
CAN C
f
THE AMERI
i tiger
‘, ea sar
re BL GcAGa a) , 2 - bn
RICAN COMMONWEALTH
Ps 5
ioe
JAMES BRYCE _ a4 AUTHOR OF ‘THE HOLY ROMAN EMPIRE’ ae : Nia } M.P, FOR ABERDEEN
a
IN TWO VOLUMES
WC ALy I
3 ‘ : S ee
2 : Tur Narionat GoverNMent—TuHE SratE GOVERNMENTS Be Tue Parry System . * ekg
Lonvon MACMILLAN AND CO.
AND NEW YORK
a 1889
Ree 1 rights reserved:
‘
“THOMAS ERSKINE HOLLAND
olleagues
i
7) \Rz = ES Ht r=)
i
Sr
ALBERT VENN DICEY
To my
ea * é
— = na, Was, ve
=)
en
PREFACE
As the introductory chapter of this work contains such explanations as seem needed of its scope and plan, the Author has little to do in this place except express his thanks to the numerous friends who have helped him with facts, opinions, and criticisms, or by the gift of books or pamphlets. Among these he is especially indebted to the Hon. Thomas M. Cooley, now Chairman of the Inter-State Commerce Commission in Washington; Mr. James B. Thayer of the Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Mass.; Hon. Seth Low, formerly Mayor of Brooklyn; Mr. Theodore Roosevelt of New York; Mr..G. Bradford of Cambridge, Mass.; and Mr. Theodore Bacon of Rochester, N.Y.; by one or other of whom the greater part of the proofs of these volumes have been read. He has also received valuable aid from Mr. Justice Holmes of the Supreme Court of Massa- chusetts ; Mr. Theodore Dwight, late Librarian of the State Department at Washington; Mr. H. Villard of New York ;. Dr. Albert Shaw of Minneapolis; Mr. Jesse Macy of Grin- nell, Ia.; Mr. Simeon Baldwin and Dr. George P. Fisher of Newhaven, Conn.; Mr. Henry C. Lea of Philadelphia ; Col. T. W. Higginson of Cambridge, Mass.; Mr. Bernard Moses
‘of Berkeley, Cal.; Mr. A. B. Houghton of Corning, N.Y. ;
Mr. John Hay of Washington; Mr. Henry Hitchcock of St.
vill PREFACE
Louis, Mo.; President James B, Angell of Ann Arbor, Mich.; Hon. Andrew D. White of Syracuse, N.Y.; Mr. Frank J. Goodnow of New York; Dr. Atherton of the State College, Pennsylvania; and the U.S. Bureau of Education. No one of these gentlemen is, however, responsible for any of the facts stated or views expressed in the book.
The Author is further indebted to Mr. Low and Mr. Goodnow for two chapters which they have written, and which contain, as he believes, matter of much interest relating to municipal government and politics.
He gladly takes this opportunity of thanking for their aid and counsel four English friends: Mr. Henry Sidgwick, who has read most of the proofs with great care and made valuable suggestions upon them; the Rev. Stopford A. Brooke, whose literary criticisms have been very helpful; Mr. Albert V. Dicey, and Mr. W. Robertson Smith.
He is aware that, notwithstanding the assistance ren- dered by friends in America, he must have fallen into not a few errors, and without asking to be excused for these, he desires to plead in extenuation that the book has been written under the constant pressure of public duties as well as of other private work, and that the difficulty of obtaining in Europe correct information regarding the constitutions and laws of American States and the rules of party organiza- tions 1s very great.
When the book was begun, it was intended to contain a study of the more salient social and intellectual phenomena of contemporary America, together with descriptions of the scenery and aspects of nature and human nature in the West, all of whose States and Territories the Author has visited. But as the work advanced, he found that to carry
19) *
PREFACE 1x
out this plan it would be necessary either unduly to curtail the account of the government and politics of the United States, or else to extend the book to a still greater length than that which, much to his regret, it has now reached. He therefore reluctantly abandoned the hope of describing in these volumes the scenery and life of the West. As regards the non-political topics which were to have been dealt with, he has selected for discussion in the concluding chapters those of them which either were comparatively unfamiliar to European readers, or seemed specially calculated to throw light on the political life of the country, and to complete the picture which he has sought to draw of the American Com-
monwealth as a whole.
October 22, 1888.
CONTENTS
VOL. I
fea. Rei Kein AND DATE OF (ee OF THE cae : ATES OF SOME REMARKABLE EVENTS IN THE HisTorRyY oF THE
SOEEN I. INrRoDUCTORY : 5 4 = : ;
PART J—Tue NationaAL GovERNMENT
. Tur NATION AND THE STATES
Tur ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION . 1422
“Narvre or Tr FupEraL GovERNMENT
THE PRESIDENT : : ¢ ; : : PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES . $ : : OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY . :
Way Great Men Are Nor CHOSEN PRESIDENTS ;
Tue CABINET . ; : ; ;
Tur SENATE . : F ;
THE SENATE AS AN eiopane® AND JUDICIAL Bopy : THE SENATE: ITS WORKING AND INFLUENCE 3
THE Hovusk or REPRESENTATIVES . 3
Tur Hovust At WorkK : 2 : ,
Tur CoMMITTEES OF CONGRESS y . 5
CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION ; : ?
CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE. : ; 3 :
Tun RELATIONS or Tun Two Houszs ; ; ;
f Norra AMERICAN CoLonizs AND Unirep Srarns PY ete
(xa CONTENTS CHAP. PAGE XIX. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS ; 186 xx. Tur RELATIONS oF CONGRESS TO THE PRESIDENT . 205 xxi. THE LEGISLATURE AND THE EXECUTIVE 212 xxu. Tue FaprraL Courts ; 225 xxi. THE CouRTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 237 xxiy. THE WoRKING OF THE CoURTS 2 : ; 255 Xxv. COMPARISON OF THE AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS . 271 XXVI. OBSERVATIONS ON THE FRAME OF NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 291 xxvll. THr FEDERAL SYSTEM ; ; . 2 305 XXvllI. WorkING RELATIONS OF THE NATIONAL AND THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS : ; 318
XXIX. CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 3384 xxx. MrrITSs OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 342 XXXI. GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 350 xxxur. Tut AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION . 4 355 xxx. Tur INTERPRETATION OF THE CONSTITUTION ‘ 363 xxxiv. Tum DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION BY USAGE > 881 xxxy. THE RESULTS OF CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT 890
PART II.—TuHE STATE GOVERNMENTS
Xxxvi. NATURE OF THE AMERICAN STATE. 398 Xxxvil. STaTE CONSTITUTIONS : : 2 413 xxxvill. Tum DEVELOPMENT OF STATE CONSTITUTIONS 34 xxxrx. Direct LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 446 XL. STATE LEGISLATURES 458 xuI. THE STATE EXECUTIVE 473 xLit, THE STATE JUDICIARY 480 XLII. STATE FINANCE 5 : ‘ 490 xLiv. THe WorKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS . § : 505 XLV. REMEDIES FOR THE FAULTS OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 525 XLVI. STATE PoLITIcs . : ‘ ; ; 540 XLvul. THE TERRITORIES 552
XLVIII. LocaAL GovERNMENT 5 F 561 ° XLIX. OBSERVATIONS ON RurAL LocAL GOVERNMENT 582 L. THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES x . 593
LI. Tum WorKING oF CITY GOVERNMENTS . 606,
tii. AN AMERICAN VIEW oF MuNIcIPAL GOVERNMENT IN THE
UNITED STATES . , . :
620
\
APPENDIX
T ConstITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS . | ; 5 662
Pt TIONS. Us os ea : , : 5.) 0 OO aaa RACTS FROM THE RULES OF THE SENATE . ; , : 669 wr IVATE Bris : a ‘ ie a ae : Cilia
Loppy . 673 ‘Tue FrpErRAL SYSTEM oF THE ENGLISH Te ees ¢ 678 ; NSTITUTION OF THE CONFEDERATE STATES, 1861-65 «679 LE FepEran CONSTITUTION OF CANADA : : a : 681 DarrmovurH CoLiece Case F 7 : 7 2 OP w AMERICAN View oF PARLIAMENT : : . _ 683 SPECIMENS OF PROVISIONS IN STATE ConsTITUTIONS LIMITING TAXING AND Borrowine PowERS 4 F ‘ : i 684 ieee 3 RTICLES oF CONFEDERATION, 1781-88 d 3 : = op S88i50%9 e se ee OF THE UNITED STATES ; E 695 eo
CHAP.
LY. LVI. LVII. LVIII. LIX. LX. LXI. LXII. LXIII. LXIV. LXV. LXVI. LXVII. LXVIII. LXIX, LXxX. LXXxI. LXXII, LXXIII. LXXIV. LXXV.
LXXVI. LXXVII. LXXVIII. LXXIX.
VOL. I
PART UI—Tue Parry System (Continued)
CoMPOSITION OF THE PARTIES
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES
TuE POLITICIANS : j : ‘ Wuy tHE Best MEN DO NOT GO INTO PoLITIcs . Party ORGANIZATIONS
Tur MAcHINE
WHAT THE MACHINE HAS TO DO . ‘ é How THE MAcHINE WorRKS
Rines AND Bossks.
Locan EXTENSION oF RINGS AND nose F
SPoILs : i A
ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY
CoRRUPTION :
Tor WAR AGAINST BossDoM
NoMINATING CONVENTIONS
THE NoMINATING CONVENTION AT Woe
THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN
Tux Issues IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Typrs oF AMERICAN STATESMEN WHAT THE PEOPLE THINK OF IT
PART IV—Pupstic Opinion
Tur NATURE OF PUBLIC OPINION
GOVERNMENT BY PUBLIC OPINION
How Pusuic Orprnton RuLEs IN AMERICA OrGANS OF PuBLic OPINION 5 4 .
107 121 134 142 151 168 we 186 194 202
209 217 225 232
CONTENTS
' omar,
LXxx. NATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS AS MoULDING PuBLic OPINION
: LXXXI,
LXxxil. Loca Typns or Oprnrion—Hasr, Wrst, AND SouTH
CLASSES AS INFLUENCING OPINION
Lxxxiu. Tor ACTION or PuBLic OPINION
LXXXIVy. ‘LXXXY. LXXXVI,. LXXXVII.
LXXXVIII. LXXXIX. xo.
XCI.
XOII: XOIII. XOly. XOv. XOVI. XCVII.
XCVIII, XCIX. Cc.
cI, Ort. CIIl. CIV. CV. CVI. CVII. OVIII. CIX. OX,
‘Tur Farauism oF THE MULTITUDE
Tum TYRANNY OF THE MaAgoriry. WHEREIN PUBLIC OPINION FAILS. WHEREIN PUBLIC OPINION SUCCEEDS
PART V—ILLUSTRATIONS AND REFLECTIONS
Tur Twrep Rine In New York Crry
Tur PHILADELPHIA GAS RING
KrARNEYISM IN CALIFORNIA
THE PROBLEM OF TERRITORIAL EXTENSION LaIssnEz FAIRE
WoMEN’s SUFFRAGE
Tue Supposrp FAuuts or Dmmocracy
Tue Trur Favutts or AMERICAN DEMOCRACY TuE STRENGTH OF AMERICAN DEMOCRACY .
How FAR AMERICAN EXPERIENCE IS AVAILABLE FOR
EUROPE : , ; ‘ F
PART VI—Soctau INSTITUTIONS
Tur Bar . ; , ‘i
THE BEencH
RAILROADS. ; :
WALL STREET ; ‘ 5
Tuer UNIVERSITIES : : c
THE CHURCHES AND THE CLERGY. : : Tur INFLUENCE OF RELIGION
TuE Posirion oF WOMEN .
EQUALITY . 5 5 : Tue INFLUENCE OF DrEmMocRACY ON THOUGHT CREATIVE INTELLECTUAL POWER . ; - THe RELATION OF THE UNITED STATES To EUROPE Tur ABSENCE OF A CAPITAL : : ;
335 854 372 396 404 424 436 450 461
474
481 495 506 517 525 554 571 584 599 611 621 634. 644
OXI, American Obras oe: ae > ox, Tae PLEASANTNESS OF AMBRICAN LIFE oxi. THs Unirormiry or Ammrican Lire. os
oxrv. Tan Temper or THE West. : cs ane oxy, Tan Fururs oF Pourrican INstirurrions ds eae : oxvi. SocraL ANd Economic Furure eRe ic
APPENDIX
_ EXPLANATION (py Mr. G. Pane OF THE Nomrwariy
¥ yh! MAcHINERY AND ITS PROCEDURE IN THE STATE OF Massa-
pet el #3 CHUSETTS is oe eS Ee . .
Ing ConVENTION oF 1884 en : ¢ . na -'
INDEX
1789-1793
1801-1805 1805-1809
1813-1817 1817-1821 1821-1825
meet SS3-1837 ‘1837-1841 1841-1845
1845-1849 1849-1853
» 1853-1857 ee 4 1857-1861 1861-1865 i). 1865-1869
mare “186921873 1873-1877 1877-1881 Br 1881-1885
1885-1889
LIST OF PRESIDENTS
pie 1703-17977 | | a ' Joun ApAms. i ae
1809-1813.
r
GrorGE WASHINGTON. Re-elected. |
THOMAS JEFFERSON. ; Re-elected. ee a Jamms Mapison. ae Re-elected. JAMES MONROE. Re-elected. JOHN Quincy ADAMS. ANDREW JACKSON. Re-elected. Martin VAN BurReEN. Wititam Henry Harrison (died 1841). >) JoHN TYLER. ~ a ize oe | Jamms K. Pouk. ZACHARY Taytor (died 1850). a MILLARD FinuMoreE. oe ; FRANKLIN Pierce. 57a ta JAMES BUCHANAN. ABRAHAM LINCOLN. Re-elected (died 1865), ANDREW JOHNSON. Unyssrs S. GRANT. =e
Re-elected. ee RuTHERFORD B. Hayes. <i James ABRAM GARFIELD (died 1881). oe
Curstrr A. ARTHUR. SrrPHEN GROVER CLEVELAND,
AREA, POPULATION, AND DATE OF ADMISSION OF THE STATES
Tur THIRTEEN ORIGINAL STATES, IN THE ORDER IN WHICH THEY RATIFIED THE CONSTITUTION.
Ratified the Area in
Constitution. square miles. Delaware 1787 1,960 Pennsylvania . 1787 44,985 New Jersey 1787 7,455 Georgia 1788 58,980 Connecticut ; 1788 4,845 Massachusetts . : 1788 8,040 Maryland ‘ 1788 9,860 South Carolina : 1788 30,170 New Hampshire : 1788 9,005 Virginia 1788 40,125 New York 5 1788 47,620 North Carolina é 1789 48,580 Rhode Island . ‘ 1790 1,085 -
STATES SUBSEQUENTLY ADMITTED, IN
Vermont Kentucky Tennessee Ohio Louisiana Indiana Mississippi Illinois Alabama,
1791 1792 1796 1802 1812 1816 1817 1818 1819
THE ORDER OF THEIR ADMISSION,
9,135 40,000 41,750 40,760 45,420 35,910 46,340 56,000 51,540
4 According to census returns of 1880,
Population (1880).
146,608 4,282, 891 TUS G 1,542,180 622,700 1,783, 085 934,943 995,577 346,991 1,512,565 5,082, 871 1,399,750 276,531
332,286 1,648, 690 1,542,359 3,198,062
939,946 1,978,301 1,131,597 3,077,871 1,262,505
Maine . Missouri Arkansas Michigan Florida Texas . Towa Wisconsin California Minnesota Oregon Kansas W. Virginia Nevada Nebraska Colorado
Dakota Wyoming Montana Idaho Washington Utah
New Mexico Arizona
(The population of Dakota and Washington has enormously increased
AREA, POPULATION, ETC,
xix Ratified the Area in Population Constitution. square miles, (1880). 1820 29,895 648,936 1821 68,735 2,168,380 1836 53,045 802,525 1837 57,480 1,636,937 1845 54,240 269,493 1845 262,290 1,591,749 1846 55,475 1,624,615 1848 54,450 1,315,497 1850 155,980 864, 694 1858 79,205 780,773 1859 94,560 174,768 1861 81,700 996,096 1863 24,645 618,457 1864 109,740 62,266 1867 76,185 452, 402 1876 103,645 194,327
THE TERRITORIES
Area, 147,700 97,575 145,310 84,290 66, 880 82,190 122,460 112, 920
since 1880.)
Population in 1880.
135,177 20,789 39,159 32,610 75,116
143,963
119,565 40,440
DATES OF SOME. REMARKABLE EVENTS IN THE HISTORY OF THE NortH AMERICAN COLONIES AND UNITED STATES.
1606 First Charter of Virginia.
1607 First Settlement in Virginia.
1620 First Settlement in Massachusetts.
1664 Taking of New Amsterdam (New York).
1759 ~— Battle of Heights of Abraham and taking of Quebec. 1775 Beginning of the Revolutionary War.
1776 Declaration of Independence.
1781 Formation of the Confederation.
1783 Independence of United States recognized.
1787 Constitutional Convention at Philadelphia.
1788 The Constitution ratified by Nine States.
1789 Beginning of the Federal Government.
1793 Invention of the Cotton Gin.
1803 Purchase of Louisiana from France.
1812-14 War with England.
1812-15 Disappearance of the Federalist Party.
1819 Purchase of Florida from Spain.
1819 Steamers begin to cross the Atlantic.
1820 The Missouri Compromise.
1828-32 Formation of the Whig Party.
1830 First Passenger Railway opened.
1840 National Nominating Conventions regularly established. 1844 First Electric Telegraph in operation.
1845 Admission of Texas to the Union.
1846-48 Mexican War and Cession of California.
1852-56 Fall of the Whig Party.
1854-56 Formation of the Republican Party.
1857 Dred Scott decision delivered.
1861-65 War of Secession.
1869 First Trans-Continental Railway completed. 4 1877 Final withdrawal of Federal troops from the South.
1879 Specie Payments resumed.
Original Area of the U. States uv 1776 Tinted
Area of the Original thirteen States = SR Ne ile ECS, ee LAD peaerr, Oe Sar SER Re 2 7% f
‘MINN i 1868 b Te Ame
E®BOTA:
me
F LOU] V TERR TOP
2
TIiON
f] NDIAN Gey
1845
min a ee
J Dasa
ARKANSAS J i 1a36 E
‘S - 0) Ga camer ee Sa, I o Saal!
GROWTH or mz UNITED STATES |" |
A MAP TO ILLUSTRATE THE
i Seale of English Miles 2 @ ue 1 a0 eq ago ee |! OSE t- ay : aN —} 100° 90° Longitude West of Greenwich 80°
Stanfords Geog? Estab?
London: Macmillan & Co.,
The names of the Territories are given in sloping capttals. The date of admission ts placed, after fhe
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTORY
“Wuar do you think of our institutions?” is the question addressed to the European traveller in the United States by
- every chance acquaintance. The traveller finds the question
natural, for if he be an observant man his own mind is full of these institutions. But he asks himself why it should be in America only that he is so interrogated. In England one does not inquire from foreigners, nor even from Americans, their views on the English laws and government; nor does the Englishman on the Continent find Frenchmen or Germans or Italians. anxious to have his judgment on their politics. Pre-
sently the reason of the difference appears. The institutions of
the United States are deemed by inhabitants and admitted by strangers to be a matter of more general interest than those of the not less famous nations of the Old World. They are, or are supposed to be, institutions of a new type. They form, or are supposed to form, a symmetrical whole, capable of being studied and judged all together more profitably than the less perfectly harmonized institutions of older countries. They represent an experiment in the rule of the multitude, tried on a scale un- precedentedly vast, and the results of which every one is con- cerned to watch. And yet they are something more than an experiment, for they are believed to disclose and display the type of institutions towards which, as by a law of fate, the rest of civilized mankind are forced to move, some with swifter, others with slower, but all with unresting feet.
_ When our traveller returns home he is again interrogated by the more intelligently curious of his friends. But what now strikes him is the inaptness of their questions. Thoughtful Europeans have begun to realize, whether with satisfaction or regret, the enormous and daily-increasing influence of the United
VOL. 1 B
7\
+
2 THE UNITED STATES CHAP.
States, and the splendour of the part reserved for them in the development of civilization. But such men, unless they have themselves crossed the Atlantic, have seldom either exact or correct ideas regarding the phenomena of the New World. The social and political experiments of America constantly cited in Europe both as patterns and as warnings are hardly ever cited with due knowledge of the facts, much less with comprehension of what they teach; and where premises are misunderstood in- ferences must be unsound.
It is such a feeling as this, a sense of the immense curiosity of Europe regarding the social and political life of America, and of the incomparable significance of American experience, that has led and will lead so many travellers to record their impressions of the Land of the Future. Yet the very abundance of descrip- tions in existence seems to require the author of another to justify himself for adding it to the list.
I might plead that America changes so fast that every few. years a new crop of books is needed to describe the new face which things have put on, the new problems that have appeared, the new ideas germinating among her people, the new and unexpected developments for evil as well as for good of which her established institutions have been found capable. I might observe that a new generation grows up every few years in Europe, which does not read the older books, because they are old, but may desire to read a new one. And if a further reason is asked for, let it be found in this, that during the last fifty years no author has proposed to himself the aim of portraying the whole political system of the country in its practice as well as its theory, of explaining not only the National Government but the State Governments, not only the Constitution but the party system, not only the party system but the ideas, temper, habits of the sovereign people. Much that is valuable has been written on particular parts or aspects of the subject, but no one seems to have tried to deal with it as a whole; not to add that some of the ablest writers have been either advocates, often professed advocates, or detractors of democracy.
To present such a general view of the United States both as a Government and as a Nation is the aim of the present book. But in seeking to be comprehensive it does not attempt to be exhaustive. The effort to cover the whole ground with equal minuteness, which a penetrating critic—the late Karl Hillebrand
I INTRODUCTORY 3
—remarked upon as a characteristic fault of English writers, is to be avoided not merely because it wearies a reader, but because it leads the writer to descant as fully upon matters he knows imperfectly as upon those with which his own tastes and know- ledge qualify him to deal. I shall endeavour to omit nothing which seems necessary to make the political life and the national character and tendencies of the Americans intelligible to Euro- peans, and with this view shall touch upon some topics only distantly connected with government or politics. But there are also many topics, perhaps no more remote from the main subject, which I shall pass lightly over, either because they have been sufficiently handled by previous writers, or because I have no such minute acquaintance with them as would make my observa- tions profitable. For instance, the common-school system of the United States has been so frequently and fully described in many easily accessible books that an account of it will not be expected from me. But American universities have been gener- ally neglected by European observers, and may therefore properly claim some pages. ‘The statistics of manufactures, agriculture, and commerce, the systems of railway finance and railway management, are full of interest, but they would need so much space to be properly set forth and commented on that it would be impossible to bring them within the present volumes, even had I the special skill and knowledge needed to distil from rows of figures the refined spirit of instruction. Moreover, although an account of these facts might be made to illustrate the features of American civilization, it is not necessary to a comprehension of American character. Observations on the state of literature and religion are necessary, and I have therefore endeavoured to convey some idea of the literary tastes and the religious habits of the people, and of the part which these play in forming and colouring the whole life of the country.
The book which it might seem natural for me to take as a model is the Democracy in America of Alexis de Tocqueville. It would indeed, apart from the danger of provoking a comparison with such an admirable master of style, have been an interesting and useful task to tread in his steps, and seek to do for the United States of 1888, with their sixty millions of people, what he did for the fifteen millions of 1832. But what I have actually tried to accomplish is something different, for I have conceived the subject upon quite other lines. To De Tocqueville America
4 THE UNITED STATES CHAP,
was primarily a democracy, the ideal democracy, fraught with lessons for Europe, and above all for his own France. What he has given us is not so much a description of the country and © people as a treatise, full of exquisite observation and elevated thinking, upon democracy, a treatise whose conclusions are illus- trated from America, but are in large measure founded, not so much on an analysis of American phenomena, as on general views of democracy which the circumstances of France had suggested. Democratic government seems to me, with all defer- ence to his high authority, a cause not so potent in the moral and social sphere as he deemed it; and my object has been less to discuss its merits than to paint the institutions and people of America as they are, tracing what is peculiar in them not merely to the sovereignty of the masses, but also to the history and traditions of the race, to its fundamental ideas, to its material environment. I have striven to avoid the temptations of the deductive method, and to present simply the facts of the. case, arranging and connecting them as best I can, but letting them speak for themselves rather than pressing upon the reader my own conclusions. The longer any one studies a vast subject, the more cautious in inference does he become. When I first visited America eighteen years ago, I brought home a swarm of bold generalizations. Half of them were thrown overboard after a second visit in 1881. Of the half that remained, some were ~ , dropped into the Atlantic when I returned across it after a third visit in 1883-84 : and although the two later journeys gave birth to some new views, these views are fewer and more discreetly cautious than their departed sisters of 1870. I can honestly say. that I shall be far better pleased if readers of a philosophic turn find — in the book matter on which they feel they can safely build theories for themselves, than if they take from it theories ready made. In the effort to bring within reasonable compass a description of the facts of to-day, I have had to resist another temptation, that of straying off into history. The temptation has been strong, for occasional excursions into the past might have been used not only to enliven but to confirm and illustrate statements the evidence for which it has sometimes been necessary to omit. | American history, of which Europeans know scarcely anything, may be wanting in colour and romance when compared with the annals of the great states of the Old World; but it is eminently rich in political instruction. I hope that my American readers, |
I . INTRODUCTORY 5
who, if I am not mistaken, know the history of their country
better than the English know that of England, will not suppose that I have ignored this instruction, but will allow for the omissions forced on me by the magnitude of the subject which I am trying to compress into two volumes. Similar reasons have compelled me to deal briefly with the legal aspects of the Constitution; but this is a defect which the lay reader will probably deem a merit.
Even when limited by the exclusion of history and law, the subject remains so vast and complex as to make necessary an explanation of the conception I have formed of it, and of the plan upon which the book has been constructed.
There are three main things that one wishes to know about a national commonwealth, viz. its framework and constitutional machinery, the methods by which it is worked, the forces which move it and direct its course. It is natural to begin with the first of these. Accordingly, I begin with the government; and as the powers of government are two-fold, being vested partly in the National or Federal authorities and partly in the States, I begin with the National government, whose structure presents less difficulty to European minds, because it resembles the national government in each of their own countries. Part I. therefore contains an account of the several Federal authorities, the President, Congress, the Courts of Law. It describes the relations of the National or central power to the several States. It discusses the nature of the Constitution as a fundamental supreme law, and shows how this stable and rigid instrument has been in a few points expressly, in many others tacitly and half-unconsciously modified.
Part II. deals similarly with the State Governments, examin- ing the constitutions that have established them, the authorities which administer them, the practical working of their legislative bodies. And as local government is a matter of State regulation, there is also given some account of the systems of rural and city government which have been created in the various States, and which have, rural government for its merits and city government
for its faults, become the theme of copious discussion among
foreign students of American institutions.
(Part III.) The whole machinery, both of national and of State governments, is worked by the political parties. Parties have been organized far more elaborately in the United States
6 THE UNITED STATES CHAP.
than anywhere else in the world, and have passed more com- © .
pletely under the control of a professional class. The party organizations in fact form a second body of political machinery, existing side by side with that of the legally constituted govern- ment, and scarcely less complicated. Politics, considered not as the science of government, but as the art of winning elections and securing ‘office, has reached in the United States a develop- ment surpassing in elaborateness that of England or France as, much as the methods of those countries surpass the methods of Servia or Roumania. Part III. contains a sketch of this party system, and of the men who “run” it, topics which deserve and would repay a fuller examination than they have yet received | even in America, or than my limits permit me to bestow.
(Part IV.) The parties, however, are not the ultimate force in the conduct of affairs. Behind and above them stands the people. Public opinion, that is the mind and conscience of the whole nation, is the opinion of persons who are included in the parties, for the parties taken together are the nation; and the parties, each claiming to be its true exponent, seek to use it for their purposes. Yet it stands above the parties, being cooler and larger minded than they are; it awes party leaders and holds in check party organizations. No one openly ventures to resist it. It determines the direction and the character of national policy. It is the product of a greater number of minds than in any other country, and it is more indisputably sovereign. It is the central point of the whole American polity. To describe it, that is, to sketch the leading political ideas, habits, and tendencies of the American people, and show how they express themselves in action, is the most difficult and also the most vital part of my task; and to this task the twelve chapters of Part IV. are devoted.
(Part V.) As the descriptions given and propositions advanced in treating of the party system and of public opinion are neces- sarily general, they seem to need illustration by instances drawn from recent American history. I collect three such instances in Part V., and place there a discussion of several political questions which lie outside party politics, together with some chapters in which the attempt is made to estimate the strength and weakness of democratic government as it exists in the United States, and to compare the phenomena which it actually shows with those which European speculation has attributed to democracy in general.
I INTRODUCTORY 7
(Part VI.) At this point the properly political sections of the book end. But there are certain non-political institutions, certain aspects of society, certain intellectual or spiritual forces, which count for so much in the total life of the country, in the total impression which it makes and the hopes for the future which it raises, that they cannot be left unnoticed. These, or rather
such of them as I have been able to study and as have not been
fully handled by others before me, will be found briefly treated
in Part VI. In the view which I take. of them, they are all germane, though not all equally germane, to the main subject of the book, which is the character, temper, and tendencies of the
American nation as they are expressed, primarily in political and
social institutions, secondarily in literature and manners.
This plan involves some repetition. But an author who finds himself obliged to choose between repetition and obscurity ought not to doubt as to his choice. Whenever it has been necessary to trace a phenomenon to its source, or to explain a connection. between several phenomena, I have not hesitated, knowing that one must not expect a reader to carry in his mind all that has
_been told already, to re-state a material fact, or re-enforce a
view which gives to the facts what I conceive to be their true
‘significance.
It may be thought that a subject of this great compass ought, if undertaken at all, to be undertaken by a native American. No native American has, however, undertaken it. Such a writer would doubtless have great advantages over a stranger. Yet there are two advantages which a stranger, or at least a stranger who is also an Englishman, with some practical knowledge of English politics and English law, may hope to secure. He is struck by some things which a native does not think of explain- ing, because they are too obvious, and whose influence on politics or society he forgets to estimate, since they seem to him part of the order of nature. And the stranger finds it easier to maintain a position of detachment, detachment not only from party pre- judice, but from those prepossessions in favour of persons, groups, constitutional dogmas, national pretensions, which a citizen can scarcely escape except by falling into that attitude of impartial cynicism which sours and perverts the historical mind as much as prejudice itself. He who regards a wide landscape from a distant height sees its details imperfectly, and must unfold his map in order to make out where each village lies, and how the
8 THE UNITED STATES CHAP
roads run from point to point. But he catches the true perspec-.
tive of things better than if he were standing among them. The great features of the landscape, the valleys, slopes, and mountains, appear in their relative proportion: he can estimate the height of the peaks and the breadth of the plains. So one who writes of a country not his own may turn his want of
familiarity with details to good account if he fixes his mind.
strenuously on the main characteristics of the people and their institutions, while not forgetting to fill up gaps in his know- ledge by frequent reference to native authorities. My own plan has been first to write down what struck me as the salient and dominant facts, and then to test, by consulting American friends and by a further study of American books, the views which I had reached.
To be non-partisan, as I trust to have been, in describing the politics of the United States, is not difficult for a European, especially if he has the good fortune to have intimate friends in both the great American parties. To feel and show no bias in
those graver and more sharply accentuated issues which divide |
men in Europe, the issues between absolutism, oligarchy, and democracy ; between strongly unified governments and the policy of decentralization, this is a harder task, yet a not less imperative duty. This much I can say, that no fact has been either stated or suppressed, and no opinion put forward, with the purpose of serving any English party-doctrine or party-policy, or in any way furnishing arguments for use in any English controversy. The admirers and the censors of popular government are equally likely to find in the present treatise materials suited to their wishes ; and in many cases, if I may judge from what has be- fallen some of my predecessors, they will draw from these materials conclusions never intended by the author.
Few things are more difficult than to use aright arguments
founded on the political experience of other countries. As the
chief practical use of history is to deliver us from plausible historical analogies, so a comprehension of the institutions of
other nations enables us to expose sometimes the ill-grounded
hopes, sometimes the idle fears, which loose reports about those nations generate. Direct inferences from the success or failure of a particular constitutional arrangement or political usage in another country are rarely sound, because the conditions differ in so many respects that there can be no certainty that what
wy
INTRODUCTORY 9
flourishes or languishes under other skies and in another soil will likewise flourish or languish in our own. Many an American institution would bear a different fruit if transplanted to England, as there is hardly an English institution which has not under- gone, like the plants and animals of the Old World, some change in America. The examination and appraisement of the institu- tions of the United States is no doubt full of instruction for Europe, full of encouragement, full of warning; but its chief value lies in what may be called the laws of political biology which it reveals, in the new illustrations and enforcements it supplies of general truths in social and political science, truths some of which were perceived long ago by Plato and Aristotle, but might have been forgotten had not America poured a stream of new light upon them. Now and then we may directly claim transatlantic experience as accrediting or discrediting some specific constitutional device or the policy of some enactment. But even in these cases he who desires to rely on the results shown in America must first satisfy himself that there is such a parity of conditions and surroundings in respect to the particular matter as justifies him in reasoning directly from ascertained results there to probable results in his own country.
It is possible that these pages, or at least those of them which describe the party system, may produce on European readers an impression which the author neither intends nor desires. They may set before him a picture with fewer lights and deeper shadows than I have wished it to contain. Sixteen years ago I travelled in Iceland with two friends. We crossed the great Desert by a seldom trodden track, encountering, during two months of late autumn, rains, tempests, snow-storms, and other hardships too numerous to recount. But the scenery was so grand and solemn, the life so novel, the character of the people so attractive, the historic and poetic traditions so inspiring, that we returned full of delight with the marvellous isle. When we expressed this enchantment to our English friends, we were questioned about the conditions of travel, and forced to admit that we had been frozen and starved, that we had sought sleep in swamps or on rocks, that the Icelanders lived in huts scattered through a wilderness, with none of the luxuries and few even of the comforts of life. Our friends passed over the record of im- pressions to dwell on the record of physical experiences, and conceived a notion of the island totally different from that which
10 THE UNITED STATES CHAP.
we had meant to convey. We perceived too late how much easier it is to state tangible facts than to communicate impres- sions. If I may attempt to apply the analogy to the United States and their people, I will say that they make on the visitor an impression so strong, so deep, so fascinating, so inwoven with a hundred threads of imagination and emotion, that he cannot hope to reproduce it in words, and to pass it on undiluted to other minds. With the broad facts of politics it is otherwise. These a traveller can easily set forth, and is bound in honesty to set forth, knowing that in doing so he must state much that is sordid, much that will provoke unfavourable comment. The ~ European reader grasps these tangible facts, and, judging them as though they existed under European conditions, draws from them conclusions disparaging to the country and the people. What he probably fails to do, because this is what the writer is most likely to fail in enabling him to do, is to realize the exist- ence in the American people of a reserve of force and patriotism more than sufficient to sweep away all the evils which are now tolerated, and to make the politics of the country worthy of its material grandeur and of the private virtues of its inhabitants. America excites an admiration which must be felt upon the spot to.be understood. ‘The hopefulness of her people communicates itself to one who moves among them, and makes him perceive that the graver faults of politics may be far less dangerous there than they would be in Europe. A hundred times in writing this book have I been disheartened by the facts I was stating: a hundred times has the recollection of the abounding strength and vitality of the nation chased away these tremors.
There are other risks to which such a book as this is neces- sarily exposed. There is the risk of supposing that to be generally true which the writer has himself seen or been told, and the risk of assuming that what is now generally true is likely to continue so. Against the former of these dangers he who is forewarned is forearmed : as to the latter I can but say that whenever I have sought to trace a phenomenon to its causes I have also sought to inquire whether these causes are likely to be permanent, a question which it is well to ask even when no answer can be given. I have attributed less to the influence of democracy than most of my predecessors have done, believing that explanations drawn from a form of government, being easy and obvious, ought to be cautiously employed. Some one has
Tie’ INTRODUCTORY 1
said that the end of philosophy is to diminish the number of causes, as the aim of chemistry is to reduce that of the elemental substances. But it is an end not to be hastily pursued. A close analysis of social and political phenomena often shows us that causes are more complex than had at first appeared, and that that which had been deemed the main cause is active only because some inconspicuous, but not less important, condition is also present. The inquisition of the forces which move society is a high matter ; and even where certainty is unattainable it is some service to science to have determined the facts, and correctly stated the problems, as Aristotle remarked long ago that the first step in investigation is to ask the right questions.
I have, however, dwelt long enough upon the perils of the voyage: it is now time to put to sea. We shall begin with a | survey of the national government, examining its nature and describing the authorities which compose it.
PART I THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER II THE NATION AND THE STATES
A FEW years ago the American Protestant Episcopal Church was © ‘ occupied at its annual Convention in revising its liturgy. It was thought desirable to introduce among the short sentence prayers a prayer for the whole people ; and an eminent New England divine proposed the words “O Lord, bless our nation.” Accepted one afternoon on the spur of the moment, the sentence was brought up next day for reconsideration, when so many objections were raised by the laity to the word “nation,” as importing too definite a recognition of national unity, that it was dropped, and instead there were adopted the words “O Lord, bless these United States.”
To Europeans who are struck by the patriotism and demonstrative national pride of their transatlantic visitors, this fear of admitting that the American people constitute a nation seems extraordinary. But it is only the expression on its sentimental side of the most striking and pervading characteristic of the political system of the country, the existence of a double government, a double allegiance, a double patriotism. America —I call it America (leaving out of sight South America, Canada, and Mexico), in order to avoid using at this stage the term United States—America is a Commonwealth of commonwealths, a Republic of republics, a State which, while one, is neverthe- less composed of other States even more essential to its existence than it is to theirs. .
This is a point of so much consequence, and so apt to be misapprehended by Europeans, that a few sentences may be - given to it.
When within a large political community smaller communities
CHAP. II THE NATION AND THE STATES 13
are found existing, the relation of the smaller to the larger
usually appears in one or other of the two following forms. One form is that of a League, in which a number of political bodies, be they monarchies or republics, are bound together so as to constitute for certain purposes, and especially for the purpose of common defence, a single body. The members of such a composite body or league are not individual men but
communities. It exists only as an aggregate of communities,
and will therefore vanish so soon as the communities which
compose it separate themselves from one another. Moreover it
deals with and acts upon these communities only. With the individual citizen it has nothing to do, no right of taxing him, or judging him, or making laws for him, for in all these matters it is to his own community that the allegiance of the citizen is due. <A familiar instance of this form is to be found in the Germanic Confederation as it existed from 1815 till 1866. The Hanseatic League in medizval Germany, the Swiss Confederation down till the present century, are other examples.
In the second form, the smaller communities are mere sub- divisions of that greater one which we call the Nation. They have been created, or at any rate they exist, for administrative
purposes only. Such powers as they possess are powers
delegated by the nation, and can be overridden by its will. The nation acts directly by its own officers, not merely on the communities, but upon every single citizen; and the nation, because it is independent of these communities, would continue to exist were they all to disappear. Examples of such minor communities may be found in the departments of modern France and the counties of modern England. Some of the English counties were at one time, like Kent or Dorset, independent kingdoms or tribal districts; some, like Bedfordshire, were artificial divisions from the first. All are now merely local administrative areas, the powers of whose local authorities have been delegated from the national government of England. The national government does not stand by virtue of them, does not need them. They might all be abolished or turned into wholly different communities without seriously affecting its structure. The American Federal Republic corresponds to neither of these two forms, but may be said to stand between them. Its central or national government is not a mere league, for it does not wholly depend on the component communities which we call
14 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
the States. It is itself a commonwealth as well as a union of commonwealths, because it claims directly the obedience of every citizen, and acts immediately upon him through its courts and
executive officers. Still less are the minor communities, the States, mere subdivisions of the Union, mere creatures of the national government, like the counties of England or the depart- ments of France. They have over their citizens an authority which is their own, and not delegated by the central government. They have not been called into being by that government. They — existed before it. They could exist without it.
The central or national government and the State govern- ments may be compared to a large building and a set of smaller buildings standing on the same ground, yet distinct from each other. It is a combination sometimes seen where a great church has been erected over more ancient homes of worship. First the soil is covered by a number of small shrines and chapels, built at different times and in different styles of architecture, each complete in itself. Then over them and including them all in its spacious fabric there is reared a new pile with its own loftier roof, its own walls, which may perhaps rest on and incorporate the walls of the older shrines, its own internal plan. The identity of the earlier buildings has however not been obliterated; and if the later and larger structure were te disappear, a little repair would enable them to keep out wind and weather, and. be again what they once were, distinct and separate edifices. So the American States are now all inside the Union, and have all become subordinate to it. Yet the Union is more than an aggregate of States, and the States are more than parts of the Union. It might be destroyed, and they, adding a few further attributes of power to those they now possess, might survive as independent self-governing com- munities. ; ig
This is the cause of that immense complexity which startles and at first bewilders the student of American institutions, a complexity which makes American history and current American politics so difficult to the European who finds in them phenomena. | to which his own experience supplies no parallel. There are two loyalties, two patriotisms ; and the lesser patriotism, as the
1 I do not profess to indicate any one building which exactly corresponds to what I have attempted to describe, but there are several both in Italy and in Egypt that seem to justify the simile.
CHAP. I THE NATION AND THE STATES 15
incident in the Episcopal Convention shows, is jealous of the greater. There are two governments, covering the same ground, commanding, with equally direct authority, the obedience of the same citizen.
The casual reader of American political intelligence in European newspapers is not struck by this phenomenon, because State politics and State affairs generally are seldom noticed in Europe. Even the traveller who visits America does not realize its importance, because the things that meet his eye are super- ficially similar all over the continent, and that which Europeans call the machinery of government is in America conspicuous chiefly by its absence. But a due comprehension of this double organization is the first and indispensable step to the comprehen- sion of American institutions: as the eloborate devices whereby the two systems of government are kept from clashing are the most curious subject of study which those institutions present.
How did so complex a system arise, and what influences have moulded it into its present form? This is a question which cannot be answered without a few words of historical retrospect. I am sensible of the danger of straying into history, and the more anxious to avoid this danger, because the task of describing American institutions as they now exist is more than sufficiently heavy for one writer and one book. But an outline, a brief and plain outline, of the events which gave birth to the Federal system in America, and which have nurtured national feeling without extinguishing State feeling, seems the most natural introduction to an account of the present Constitution, and may dispense with the need for subsequent explanations and digressions. It is the only excursion into the historical domain which I shall have to ask the reader to make.
CHAPTER II THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION
WHEN in the reign of George III. troubles arose between England and her North American colonists, there existed along the eastern coast of the Atlantic thirteen little communities, the largest of which (Virginia) had not much more than half a million of people, and the total population of which did not | reach three millions. All owned allegiance to the British Crown, all, except Connecticut and Rhode Island, received their governors from the Crown ; in all, causes were carried by appeal from the colonial courts to the English Privy Council. Acts of the British Parliament ran there, as they now run in the British colonies, whenever expressed to have that effect, and could over-rule such laws as the colonies might make. But practically each colony was a self-governing commonwealth, left to manage its own affairs with scarcely any interference from home. Each had its legislature, its own statutes adding to or modifying the English common law, its local corporate life and traditions, with no small local pride in its own history and institutions, super- added to the pride of forming part of the English race and the great free British realm. Between the various colonies there was no other political connection than that which arose from their all belonging to this race and realm, so that the inhabitants of each enjoyed in every one of the others the rights and privileges of British subjects. When the oppressive measures of the home government roused the colonies, they naturally sought to organize their resistance in
1 In Rhode Island no appeal seems to have lain to the Crown, and the power of legislation was by the charters of 1643 and 1663 left to the colony with the proviso only that the laws should be agreeable to those of England “as near as may be, considering the nature and constitution of the place and people.”
CHAP, III THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 17
common. Singly they would have been an easy prey, for it was long doubtful whether even in combination they could make head against regular armies. A congress of delegates from nine colonies held at New York in 1765 was followed by another at Philadelphia in 1774, at which twelve were represented, which called itself Continental (for the name American had not yet become established),? and spoke in the name of “the good people of these colonies,” the first assertion of a sort of national unity among the English of America. This congress, in which from
1775 onwards all the colonies were represented, was a merely revolutionary body, called into existence by the war with the
mother country. But in 1776 it declared the independence of
_ the colonies, and in 1777 it gave itself a new legal character by
framing the “ Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union,”? whereby the thirteen States (as they now called themselves) en- tered into a “firm league of friendship” with each other, offen- sive and defensive, while declaring that “each State retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and every power, juris- diction, and right which is not by this Confederation expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled.”
This Confederation, which was not ratified by all the States till 1781, was rather a league than a national government, for it possessed no central authority except an assembly in which every State, the largest and the smallest alike, had one vote, and this authority had no jurisdiction over the individual citizens. There was no Federal executive, no Federal judiciary, no means of raising money except by the contributions of the States, con- tributions which they were slow to render, no power of compel- ling the obedience either of States or individuals to the commands
of Congress. The plan corresponded to the wishes of the colon-
ists, who did not yet deem themselves a nation, and who in their struggle against the power of the British Crown were resolved to set over themselves no other power, not even one of their own choosing. But it worked badly even while the struggle lasted,
1 There had been a congress of delegates from seven colonies at Albany in 1754 to deliberate on measures relative to the impending war with France, but this, of course, took place with the sanction of the mother country, and was a purely temporary measure,
2 In the earlier part of last century the name ‘‘ American” seems to have de- noted the native Indians, as it does in Wesley’s hymn *‘The dark Americans con- vert.” The War of Independence gave it its present meaning.
3 See these Articles in the Appendix at the end of this volume.
VOL. I (e)
18 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
and after the immediate danger from England had been removed by the peace of 1783, it worked still worse, and was in fact, as Washington said, no better than anarchy. The States were in- different to Congress and their common concerns, so indifferent that it was found difficult to procure a quorum of States for weeks or even months after the day fixed for meeting. Congress was impotent, and commanded respect as little as obedience. Much distress prevailed in the trading States, and the crude attempts which some legislatures made to remedy the depression by emitting inconvertible paper, by constituting other articles than the precious metals legal tender, and by impeding the re- covery of debts, aggravated the evil, and in several instances led to seditious outbreaks.1 The fortunes of the country seemed at a lower ebb than even during the war with England.
Sad experience of their internal difficulties, and of the con- tempt with which foreign governments treated them, at last produced a feeling that some firmer and closer union was needed, A convention of delegates from five States met at Annapolis in Maryland in 1786 to discuss methods of enabling Congress to regulate commerce. It drew up a report which condemned the existing state of things, declared that reforms were necessary, and suggested a further general convention in the following year to consider the condition of the Union and the needed amendments in its Constitution. Congress, to which the report had been presented, approved it, and recommended the States to send delegates to a convention, which should “revise the Articles of Confederation, and report to Congress and the several legisla- tures such alterations and provisions therein as shall, when agreed to in Congress and confirmed by the States, render the Federal Constitution adequate to the exigencies of government and the preservation of the Union.” 2
1 Rhode Island was the most conspicuous offender, This singular little com- monwealth, whose area is 1085 square miles (less than that of Ayrshire or An- trim), is of all the American States that which has furnished the most abundant analogies to the Greek republics of antiquity, and which best deserves to have its annals treated of by a philosophic historian. A curious feature in its politics is the frequent hostility of the agricultural party in the country to the commercial population in the towns which was at its height in 1788. By making herself an alarming example of what the unbridled rule of the multitude may come to, Rhode Island did much to bring the other States to adopt that Federal Constitu- tion which she was herself the last to accept. See the remarks of Mr. M. Smith, Elliot’s Debates, ii. 335.
* The insurrection then raging in Massachusetts may have helped to stimulate
CHAP, IIT THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 19
The Convention thus summoned met at Philadelphia on the 14th May 1787, became competent to proceed to business on May 25th, when seven States were represented, and chose George Washington to preside.’ Delegates attended from every State but Rhode Island, and these delegates, unlike those usually sent to Congress, were the leading men of the country, influential in their several States, and now filled with a sense of the need for comprehensive reforms. The instructions they had received limited their authority to the revision of the Articles of Con- federation and the proposing to Congress and the State legisla- tures such improvements as were required therein.2 But with admirable boldness, boldness doubly admirable in Englishmen and lawyers, the majority ultimately resolved to disregard these restrictions, and to prepare a wholly new Constitution, to be con- sidered and ratified neither by Congress nor by the State legisla- tures, but by the peoples of the several States.
This famous assembly, which consisted of fifty-five delegates, thirty-nine of whom signed the Constitution which it drafted, sat nearly five months, and expended upon its work an amount of
Congress to prompt action, for it revealed the want of strength in the State governments,
Mr. Justice Miller remarks with reference to the origin of the Annapolis Con- vention, ‘‘It is not a little remarkable that the suggestion which finally led to the relief, without which as a nation we must soon have perished, strongly supports the philosophical maxim of modern times, that of all the agencies of civilization and progress, commerce is the most efficient. What our deranged finances, our discreditable failure to pay our debts, and the sufferings of our soldiers, could not . force the several States to attempt, was brought about by a desire to be released from the evils of an unregulated and burdensome commercial intercourse.”— Memorial Oration at the celebration of the hundredth anniversary of the promul- gation of the Constitution, 17th Sept. 1887.
1 For some remarks on Constitutional Conventions in the United States see the note to this chapter at the end of this volume.
2 Tt was strongly urged when the draft Constitution came up for ratification in the State Conventions that the Philadelphia Convention had no power to do more than amend the Articles of Confederation. To these objections Mr. Wilson of Pennsylvania made answer as follows :—“ The business we are told which was in- trusted to the late Convention was merely to amend the present Articles of Con- federation. This observation has been frequently made, and has often brought to my mind a story that is related of Mr. Pope, who it is well known was not a little deformed. It was customary for him to use this phrase, ‘God mend me,’ when any little accident happened. One evening a link boy was lighting him along, and coming to a gutter the boy jumped nimbly over it. Mr. Pope called to him to turn, adding ‘God mend me!’ The arch rogue, turning to light him, looked at him and repeated ‘God mend you! He would sooner make half a dozen new ones.’ This would apply to the present Confederation, for it would be easier to make another than to amend this.” —Hlliot’s Debates, Pennsylvania Con-
vention, vol. ii. p. 472.
vi
20 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
labour and thought commensurate with the magnitude of the task and the splendour of the result. The debates were secret,*
and fortunately so, for criticism from without might have im-.
perilled a work which seemed repeatedly on the point of break- ing down, so great were the difficulties encountered from the divergent sentiments and interests of different parts of the country, as well as of the larger and smaller States.? The re- cords of the Convention were left in the hands of Washington, who in 1796 deposited them in the State Department. In 1819 they were published along with the notes of the discussions kept by James Madison (afterwards twice President), who had proved himself one of the ablest and most useful members of the body. From these official records and notes? the history of the Conven- tion has been written, and may be found in the instructive volumes of Mr. G. T. Curtis and of Mr. George Bancroft, now the patriarch of American literature.
It is hard to-day, even for Americans, to realize how enormous those difficulties were. The Convention had not only to create de novo, on the most slender basis of pre-existing national institu- tions, a national government for a widely scattered people, but they had in doing so to respect the fears and jealousies and appar- ently irreconcilable interests of thirteen separate commonwealths, to all of whose governments it was necessary to leave a sphere of action wide enough to satisfy a deep-rooted local sentiment, yet not so wide as to imperil national unity. Well might
1 The fact that the country did not complain of this secrecy is the best proof
of the confidence felt in the members of the Convention.
2 Benjamin Franklin, who was one of the delegates from Pennsylvania (being then eighty-one years of age), was so much distressed at the difficulties which arose and the prospect of failure that he proposed that the Convention, as all human means of obtaining agreement seemed to be useless, should open its meet- ings with prayer. The suggestion, remarkable as coming from one so well known for his sceptical opinions, might have been adopted but for the fear that the out- side public might thus learn how grave the position of affairs was. The original of Franklin’s proposition, written in his own still clear and firm hand, with his note stating that only three or four agreed with him, is preserved in the State De- partment at Washington, where may be also seen the original draft of the Consti- tution with the signatures of the thirty-nine delegates.
3 They are printed in the work called Elliot’s Debates (Philadelphia, 1861), which also contains the extremely interesting debates in some of the State Con- ventions which ratified the Constitution.
4 The nearest parallels to such a Federal Union as that formed in 1789 were then to be found in the Achzan and Lycian Leagues, which, however, were not mere leagues, but federated nations. Both are referred to by the authors of the Federalist (see post), but their knowledge was evidently scanty. The acuteness of James Wilson had perceived that the two famous confederations of modern
=
oe
\
OHAP, III THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 21
Hamilton say: “The establishment of a Constitution, in time of profound peace, by the voluntary consent of a whole people, is a prodigy to the completion of which I look forward with trembling anxiety.” +
It was even a disputable point whether the colonists were already a nation or only the raw material out of which a nation might be formed.? There were elements of unity, there were also elements of diversity. All spoke the same language. All, except a few descendants of Dutchmen and Swedes in New York and Delaware, some Germans in Pennsylvania, some children of French Huguenots in New England and the middle States, belonged to the same race.® All, except some Roman Catholics in Maryland, professed the Protestant religion. All were governed by the same English Common Law, and prized it not only as the bulwark which had sheltered their forefathers from the oppression of the Stuart kings, but as the basis of their more recent claims of right against the encroachments of George III. and his colonial officers. In ideas and habits of life there was less similarity, but all were republicans, managing their affairs by elective legislatures, attached to local self-government, and animated by a common pride in their successful resistance
Europe did not supply a model for America. He observed in the Pennsylvania Convention of 1788 : “The Swiss cantons are connected only by alliances. The United Netherlands are indeed an assemblage of societies; but this assemblage constitutes no new one, and therefore it does not correspond with the full defini- tion of a Confederate Republic.”—Hlliot’s Debates, vol. ii. p. 422. The Swiss Confederation has now become a Republic at once Federal and national, coming in most respects very near to its American model.
1 Federalist, No. Ixxxv. He quotes the words of David Hume (Zssays ; ‘The Rise of Arts and Sciences”): “To balance a large State or society, whether monarchical or republican, on general laws, is a work of so great difficulty that no human genius, however comprehensive, is able by the mere dint of reason and re- flection to effect it. The judgments of many must unite in the work: experience must guide their labour ; time must bring it to perfection; and the feeling of in- conveniences must correct the mistakes which they inevitably fall into in their first trials and experiments.’’ Words strikingly verified in the history of the United States from 1777 downwards.
2 Mr. Wilson said in the Pennsylvania Convention of 1787: “By adopting this Constitution we shall become a nation ; we are not now one. We shall form a national character : we are now too dependent on others.” He proceeds with a remarkable prediction of the influence which American freedom would exert upon the Old World.—Elliot’s Debates, vol. ii. p. 526.
3 The Irish, a noticeable element in North Carolina and parts of Pennsylvania, Virginia, and New Hampshire, were not Catholic Celts but Scoto-Irish Presby- terians from Ulster, who, animated by resentment at the wrongs and religious persecution they had suffered at home, had been among the foremost combatants in the Revolutionary War.
22 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
to England, which they then hated with a true family hatred, a hatred to which her contemptuous treatment of them added a sting.
On the other hand their geographical position made com- munication very difficult. The sea was stormy in winter, the roads were bad, it took as long to travel by land from Charleston to Boston as to cross the ocean to Europe, nor was the journey less dangerous. The wealth of some States consisted in slaves ; of others in shipping; while in others there was a population of small farmers, characteristically attached to old habits. Manu- factures had hardly begun to exist. The sentiment of local independence showed itself in intense suspicion of any external authority ; and most parts of the country were so thinly peopled that the inhabitants had lived practically without any govern- ment, and thought that in creating one they would be forging fetters for themselves. But while these diversities and jealousies made union difficult, two dangers were absent which have beset the framers of constitutions for other nations. There were no reactionary conspirators to be feared, for every one prized liberty and equality. There were no questions between classes, no animosities against rank and wealth, for rank and wealth did not exist.
It was inevitable under such circumstances that the Constitu- tion, while aiming at the establishment of a durable central power, should pay great regard to the existing centrifugal forces. It was and remains what its authors styled it, eminently an instrument of compromises; it is perhaps the most successful instance in history of what a judicious spirit of compromise may effect.1 Yet out of the points which it was for this reason obliged to leave unsettled there arose fierce controversies, which after two generations, when accumulated irritation and incurable misunderstanding had been added to the force of material interests, burst into flame in the War of Secession.
The draft Constitution was submitted, as its last article provided, to conventions of the several States (i.¢. bodies speci-
1 Hamilton observed of it in 1788: “The result of the deliberations of all collective bodies must necessarily be a compound as well of the errors and prejudices as of the good sense and wisdom of the individuals of whom they are composed. The compacts which are to embrace thirteen distinct States in a common bond of amity and union must as necessarily be a compromise of as many dissimilar interests and inclinations. How can perfection spring from such materials ?””—Federalist, No. lxxxv.
CHAP, III THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 23
ally chosen by the people for the purpose) for ratification. It was to come into effect as soon as nine States had ratified, the effect of which would have been, in case the remaining States, or any of them, had rejected it, to leave such States standing _alone in the world, since the old Confederation was of course superseded and annihilated. Fortunately all the States did eventually ratify the new Constitution, but two of the most important, Virginia and New York,! did not do so till the middle of 1788, after nine others had already accepted it; and two, North Carolina and Rhode Island, at first refused, and only consented to enter the new Union more than a year later, when the government it. had created had already come into operation.? There was a struggle everywhere over the adoption of the Constitution, a struggle which gave birth to the two great parties that for many years divided the American people. The chief source of hostility was the belief that a strong central government endangered both the rights of the States and the liberties of the individual citizen. Freedom, it was declared, would perish, freedom rescued from George III. would perish at the hands of her own children.* Consolidation (for the word centralization had not yet been invented) would extinguish the State governments and the local institutions they protected. The feeling was very bitter, and in some States, notably in Massachusetts and New York, the majorities were dangerously narrow. Had the decision been left to what is now called “the voice of the people,” that is, to the mass of the citizens all over the country, voting at the polls, the voice of the people would
1 Virginia was then much the largest State (population in 1790, 747,610). New York was reckoned among the smaller States (population 340,120) but her central geographical position made her adhesion extremely important.
2 Mr. Justice Miller observes that the refusal of Rhode Island seems to have been largely due to her desire that “her superior advantages of location, and the possession of what was then supposed to be the best harbour on the Atlantic coast, should not be subjected to the control of a Congress which was by that instrument expressly authorized to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and
provide that no preference should be given to the ports of any State.”—Memorial Oration, ut supra.
3 In the Massachusetts Convention of 1788 Mr. Nason delivered himself of the following pathetic appeal: ‘And here, sir, I beg the indulgence of this honourable body to permit me to make a short apostrophe to Liberty. O Liberty, thou greatest good! thou fairest property! with thee I wish to live—with thee I wish to die! Pardon me if I drop a tear on the peril to which she is ex- posed. I cannot, sir, see this highest of jewels tarnished—a jewel worth ten thousand worlds ; and shall we part with it so soon? Oh no.”—Elliot’s Debates,
ii, 133.
24 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI.
¥
probably have pronounced against the Constitution.’ But this modern method of taking the popular verdict had not been invented. The question was referred to conventions in the several States. The conventions were composed of able men, who listened to weighty arguments, and were themselves in- fluenced by the authority of their leaders. The judgment of the wise prevailed over the prepossessions of the multitude. Yet this judgment would hardly have prevailed but for a cause which is apt to be now overlooked. This was the dread of foreign powers.? The United States had at that time two European monarchies, Spain and England, as its neighbours on the American continent. France had lately held territories to the north of them in Canada, and to the south and west of them in Louisiana.? She had been their ally against England, she | became in a few years again the owner of territories west of | the Mississippi. The fear of foreign interference, the sense of weakness, both at sea and on land, against the military monarchies of Europe, was constantly before the mind of American statesmen, and made them anxious to secure at all hazards a national government capable of raising an army and navy, and of speaking with authority on behalf of the new republic. It is remarkable that the danger of European aggres- sion or complications was far more felt in the United States from 1783 down till about 1820, than it has been during the last half century when steam has brought Europe five times nearer than it then was.
Several of the conventions which ratified the Constitution accompanied their acceptance with an earnest recommendation of various amendments to it, amendments designed to meet the - fears of those who thought that it encroached too far upon the liberties of the people. Some of these were adopted, immediately.
1 Especially if the question had been voted on everywhere upon the same day.
The later decisions in doubtful States were influenced by the approval which other States had already given.
2 The other chief cause was the economic distress and injury to trade conse- quent on the disorganized condition of several States. See the observations of Mr. Wilson in the Pennsylvania Convention (Elliot’s Debates, ii. 524). He shows that the case was one of necessity, and winds up with the remark, “The argument of necessity is the patriot’s defence as well as the tyrant’s plea.”
3 The vast territory then called Louisiana was transferred by France to Spain in 1762, but Spanish government was not established there till 1789. It was ceded by Spain to France in 1800, and purchased by the United States from Napoleon in 1808. Spain held Florida from its discovery till 1819, when she
sold it to the United States.
 onAP. 11 THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 25
after the original instrument had come into force, by the method it prescribes, viz. a two-thirds majority in Congress and a majority in three-fourths of the States. They are the amend- ments of 1791, ten in number, and they constitute what the Americans, following a venerable English precedent, call a Bill or Declaration of Rights.
The Constitution of 17891 deserves the veneration with which the Americans have been accustomed to regard it. It is true that many criticisms have been passed upon its arrange- ment, upon its omissions, upon the artificial character of some of the institutions it creates. Recognising slavery as an institution existing in some States, and not expressly negativing the right of a State to withdraw from the Union, it has been charged with having contained the germ of civil war, though that. germ took seventy years to come to maturity. And whatever success it has attained must be in large measure ascribed to the political genius, ripened by long experience, of the Anglo-American race, by whom it has been worked, and who might have managed to work even a worse drawn instrument. Yet, after all deductions, it ranks above every other written constitution for the intrinsic excellence of its scheme, its adaptation to the circumstances of the people, the simplicity, brevity, and precision of its language, its judicious mixture of deffniteness in principle with elasticity in details.2 One is therefore induced to ask, before proceeding to examine it, to what causes, over and above the capacity of its authors, and the patient toil they bestowed upon it, these merits are due, or in other words, what were the materials at the command of the Philadelphia Convention for the achieve- ment of so great an enterprise as the creation of a nation by means of an instrument of government. The American
1 Tt is hard to say whether one ought to call the Constitution after the year 1787, when it was drafted, or the year 1788, when it was accepted by the re- quisite number of States, or the year 1789, when it took full effect, the Congress of the Confederation having fixed the first Wednesday in March in that year as the day when it should come into force. The year 1789 has the advantage of being easily remembered, because it coincides with the beginning of the great revolutionary movements of modern Europe. The Confederation may be taken to have expired with the expiry of its Congress, and its Congress died for want of a quorum. f
2 The literary Bostonians laid hold at once of its style as proper for admira- tion, Mr. Ames said in the Massachusetts Convention of 1788, ‘‘ Considered merely as a literary performance, the Constitution is an honour to our country. Legislators have at length condescended to speak the language of philosophy.”-— Elliot’s Debates, ii. 55. ;
26 3 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
Constitution is no exception to the rule that everything which has power to win the obedience and respect of men must have its roots deep in the past, and that the more slowly every institution has grown, so much the more enduring is it likely to prove. There is little in that Constitution that is absolutely new. ‘There is much that is as old as Magna Charta.
The men of the Convention had the experience of the English Constitution. That Constitution, very different then from what it is now, was even then not quite what they thought it. Their view was tinged not only by recollections of the influence exer- cised by King George the Third, an influence due to transitory causes, but which made them overrate its monarchical element,! but also by the presentation of it which they found in the work of Mr. Justice Blackstone. He, as was natural in a lawyer and a man of letters, described rather its theory than its practice, and its theory was many years behind its practice. The powers and functions of the cabinet, the overmastering force of the House of Commons, the intimate connection between legislation and administration, these which are to us now the main charac- teristics of the English Constitution were still far from fully de- veloped. But in other points of fundamental importance they appreciated and turned to excellent account its spirit and methods.
They had for their oracle of political philosophy the treatise of Montesquieu on the Spirit of Laws, which, published anony- mously at Geneva forty years before, had won its way to an immense authority on both sides of the ocean.? Montesquieu, contrasting the private as well as public liberties of Englishmen with the despotism of Continental Europe, had taken the Consti- tution of England as his model system, and had ascribed its merits to the division of legislative, executive, and judicial func- tions which he discovered in it, and to the system of checks and balances whereby its equilibrium seemed to be preserved. No general principle of politics laid such hold on the constitution-
1 There is always a tendency in colonists (perceptible even now in the works of such a writer as the Canadian publicist, Mr. Todd) to over-estimate the import- ance of the Crown, whose conspicuous position as the authority common to the whole empire makes it an object of special interest and respect to persons living at a distance. It touches their imagination, whereas assemblies excite their criticism.
2 Montesquieu is repeatedly quoted by the speakers in the various State con- ventions, whose discussions have come down to us. See post, Chapter XXV.
onar. ur THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 27
makers and statesmen of America as the dogma that the separa- tion of these three functions is essential to freedom. It had already been made the groundwork of several State constitutions. It is always reappearing in their writings: it was never absent from their thoughts. Of the supposed influence of other conti- nental authors, such as Rousseau, or even of English thinkers such as Burke, there are few direct traces in the Federal Consti- tution or in the classical contemporaneous commentary on and defence of it! which we owe to the genius of Hamilton and his hardly less famous coadjutors, Madison and Jay. But we need only turn to the Declaration of Independence and the original constitutions of the States, particularly the Massachusetts Consti- tution of 1780, to perceive that abstract theories regarding human rights had laid firm hold on the national mind. Such theories naturally expanded with the practice of republican government. But the influence of France and her philosophers belongs chiefly to the years succeeding 1789, when Jefferson, who was fortunately absent in Paris during the Constitutional Con- vention, headed the democratic propaganda.
Further, they had the experience of their colonial and State governments, and especially, for this was freshest and most in point, the experience of the working of the State Constitutions, framed at or since the date when the colonies threw off their English allegiance. Many of the Philadelphia delegates had joined in preparing these instruments: all had been able to watch and test their operation. They compared notes as to the merits, tested by practice, of the devices which their States had respec- tively adopted.2 They had the inestimable advantage of know- ing written or rigid constitutions in the concrete; that is to say, of comprehending how a system of government actually moves and plays under the control of a mass of statutory provisions defining and limiting the powers of its several organs. ‘The so- called Constitution of England consists largely of customs, prece- dents, traditions, understandings, often vague and always flexible. It was quite a different thing, and for the purpose of making a
1 The Federalist, a series of papers published in the New York newspapers in advocacy of the Federal Constitution when the question of accepting it was coming before the New York State Convention.
* There are frequent references in the Federalist to the State Constitutions (see especially Letters xlvii. and xvliii.), and the record of the debates in the Convention shows that many of the proposals made were directly drawn from
these Constitutions,
28 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
constitution for the American nation an even more important thing, to have lived under and learnt to work {systems deter- mined by the hard and fast lines of a single document having the full force of law, for this experience taught them how much might safely be included in such a document and how far room must be left under it for unpredictable emergencies and unavoid- able development.!
Lastly, they had one principle of the English common law whose importance deserves special mention, the principle that an act done by any official person or law-making body in excess of his or its legal competence is simply void. Here lay the key to the difficulties which the establishment of a variety of authorities not subordinate to one another, but each supreme in its own de- fined sphere, necessarily involved. The application of this prin- ciple made it possible not only to create a national government which should leave free scope for the working of the State governments, but also so to divide the powers of the national government among various persons and bodies as that none should absorb or overbear the others. By what machinery these objects were attained will sufficiently appear when we come to consider the effect of a written or rigid constitution embodying a. fundamental law, and the functions of the judiciary in expound- ing and applying such a law.”
1 The novelty of written constitutions is dwelt upon with great force by James
Wilson in the Pennsylvania Convention. —Elliot’s Debates, vol. ii. 2 See post, Chapters XXIII. and XXXIII.
CHAPTER IV NATURE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
THE acceptance of the Constitution of 1789 made the American people a nation. It turned what had been a League of States into a Federal State,! by giving it a National Government with a direct authority over all citizens. But as this national govern- ment was not to supersede the governments of the States, the problem which the Constitution-makers had to solve was two-fold. They had to create a central government. They had also to de- termine the relations of this central government to the States as well as to the individual citizen. An exposition of the Constitu- tion and criticism of its working must therefore deal with it in these two aspects, as a system of national government built up of executive powers and legislative bodies, like the monarchy of England or the republic of France, and as a Federal system link- ing together and regulating the relations of a number of common- wealths which are for certain purposes, but for certain purposes only, subordinated to it. It will conduce to clearness if these two aspects are kept distinct; and the most convenient course will be to begin with the former, and first to describe the Ameri- can system as a National system, leaving its Federal character for the moment on one side.
It must, however, be remembered that the Constitution does not profess to be a complete scheme of government, creating organs for the discharge of all the functions and duties which a civilized community undertakes. It presupposes the State governments. It assumes their existence, their wide and con- stant activity. It is a scheme designed to provide for the dis- charge of such and so many functions of government as the States do not already possess and discharge. It is therefore, so
i The distinction is happily expressed in German by the words Staatenbund and Bundesstaat. English has unfortunately no equally concise expressions,
\
30 © THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
to speak, the complement and crown of the State Constitutions, which must be read along with it and into it in order to make it cover the whole field of civil government, as do the Constitu-: tions of such countries as France, Belgium, Italy.
The administrative, legislative, and judicial functions for which the Federal Constitution provides are those relating to matters which must be deemed common to the whole nation, either because all the parts of the nation are alike interested in them, or because it is only by the nation as a whole that they can be satisfactorily undertaken. The chief of these common or national matters are —
War and peace : treaties and foreign relations generally.
Army and navy.
Federal courts of justice.
Commerce, foreign and domestic.
Currency.
Copyright and patents.
The post-office and post roads.
Taxation for the foregoing purposes, and for the general sup- port of the Government.
The protection of citizens against unjust or discrimating legislation by any State.”
This list includes the subjects upon which the national legisla- ture has the right to legislate, the national executive to enforce the Federal laws and generally to act in defence of national in- terests, the national judiciary to adjudicate. All other legislation and administration is left to the several States, without power of interference by the Federal legislature or Federal executive.3
Such then being the sphere of the National government, let us see in what manner it is constituted, of what departments it consists.
1 The full list will be found in the Constitution, Art. i. § 8 (printed in the Appendix), with which may be compared the British North America Act 1867 (80 and 31 Vict. cap. 8), and the Federal Council of Australasia Act 1885 (48 and 49 Vict. cap. 60), and the Swiss Constitution of 1874 (Arts. 8, 22, 30, 42, 54 64, 67-70). tg
2 Amendments xiv. and xv.
3 This list is not intended to be exhaustive, because the respective limits of Federal and State action are fully explained in subsequent chapters. It is given here as a provisional list, sufficient to show in a general way what are the main functions of the national government.
f. < — Blas é
Pied ae ¥ ! , i “ , poner tiet i ; 5 { at ae
enar. tv NATURE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 31
The framers of this government set before themselves four objects as essential to its excellence, viz.—
Its vigour and efficiency.
The independence of each of its departments (as being essential to the permanency of its form).
Its dependence on the people.
The security under it of the freedom of the individual.
The first of these objects they sought by creating a strong executive, the second by separating the legislative, executive, and judicial powers from one another, and by the contrivance of various checks and balances, the third by making all authorities elective and elections frequent, the fourth both by the checks and balances aforesaid, so arranged as to restrain any one depart- ment from tyranny, and by placing certain rights of the citizen under the protection of the written Constitution.
They had neither the rashness nor the capacity necessary for
’ constructing a Constitution a priori. There is wonderfully little
genuine inventiveness in the world, and perhaps least of all has been shown in the sphere of political institutions. These men, practical politicians who knew how infinitely difficult a business government is, desired no bold experiments. They preferred, so far as circumstances permitted, to walk in the old paths, to follow methods which experience had tested! Accordingly they started from the system on which their own colonial govern- ments, and afterwards their State governments, had been con- ducted. This system bore a general resemblance to the British Constitution; and in so far it may with truth be said that the British Constitution became a model for the new national government. They held England to be the freest and best- governed country in the world, but were resolved to avoid the weak points which had enabled King George III. to play the tyrant, and which rendered English liberty, as they thought, far inferior to that which the constitutions of their own States
1 Mr. Lowell has said with equal point and truth of the men of the Convention : ‘They had a profound disbelief in theory and knew better than to commit the
folly of breaking with the past. They were not seduced by the French fallacy
that a new system of Government could be ordered like a new suit of clothes. They would as soon have thought of ordering a suit of flesh and skin. It is only on the roaring loom of time that the stuff is woven for such a vesture of their thought and experience as they were meditating.”—Address on Democracy, delivered Oct. 6, 1884,
32 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT i PART 1 .
secured. With this venerable mother, and these children, better in their judgment than the mother, before their eyes, they created an executive magistrate, the President, on the model of the State Governor, and of the British Crown. They created a legislature of two Houses, Congress, on the model of the two Houses of their State legislatures, and of the British Parliament. And following the precedent of the British judges, irremovable except by the Crown and Parliament combined, they created a judiciary appointed for life, and irremovable save by impeach- ment.?
In these great matters, however, as well as in many lesser matters, they copied not so much the Constitution of England as the Constitutions of their several States, in which, as was natural, many features of the English Constitution had been embodied. It has been truly said that nearly every provision of the Federal Constitution that has worked well is one borrowed ° from or suggested by some State constitution; nearly every provision that has worked badly is one which the Convention, - for want of a precedent, was obliged to devise for itself. To insist on this is not to detract from the glory of that illustrious body, for if we are to credit them with less inventiveness than has sometimes been claimed for them, we must also credit them with a double portion of the wisdom which prefers experience to a priort theory, and the sagacity which selects the best materials from a mass placed before it, aptly combining them to form a new structure.”
Of minor divergences between their work and the British Constitution I shall speak subsequently. But one profound difference must be noted here. The British Parliament had always been, was then, and remains now, a sovereign and con- stituent assembly. It can make and unmake any and every
1 Minor differences between the English and American systems are that the American Federal judge is appointed by the President, “with the advice and consent of the Senate,” an English judge by the Crown alone: an American judge is impeachable by the House of Representatives, and tried by the Senate, an English judge is removable by the Crown on an address by both Houses.
In many States a State judge is removable by the legislature or by the governor on an address by the legislature, a provision which has obviously been borrowed from England. i
2 This truth has been worked out with much force and fulness by Mr. Alexander Johnson, in an article inthe New Princeton Review for September 1887 (published since the text of this chapter was written), some extracts from which will be found in a note at the end of this volume.
CHAP, Iv NATURE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 33
law, change the form of government or the succession to the crown; interfere with the course of justice, extinguish the most sacred private rights of the citizen. Between it and the people at large there is no legal distinction, because the whole plenitude _ of the people’s rights and powers resides in it, just as if the
_ whole nation were present within the chamber where it sits. In point of legal theory it is the nation, being the historical successor of the Folk Moot of our Teutonic forefathers. Both practically and legally, it is to-day the only and the sufficient depository of the authority of the nation; and is therefore, within the sphere of law, irresponsible and omnipotent.
In the American system there exists no such body. Not merely Congress alone, but also Congress and the President conjoined, are subject to the Constitution, and cannot move a step outside the circle which the Constitution has drawn around them. If they do, they transgress the law and exceed their powers. Such acts as they may do in excess of their powers are void, and may be, indeed ought to be, treated as void by the meanest citizen. The only power which is ultimately _ sovereign, as the British Parliament is always and directly sovereign, is the people of the States, acting in the manner prescribed by the Constitution, and capable in that manner of passing any law whatever in the form of a constitutional amend- ment.
This fundamental divergence from the British system is commonly said to have been forced upon the men of 1787 by the necessity, in order to safeguard the rights of the several States, of limiting the competence of the national government.! But even without this necessity, even supposing there had been no States to be protected, the jealousy which the American people felt of those whom they chose to govern them, their fear lest one power in the government should absorb the rest, their anxiety to secure the primordial rights of the citizens from attack, either by magistrate or by legislature, would doubtless have led, as happened with the earlier constitutions of revolu- tionary France, to the creation of a supreme constitution or
1 Tt is often assumed by writers on constitutional subjects that a Federal Government presupposes a written or rigid constitution. This is not necessarily so. There have been federations with no fundamental rigid constitution (the Achwan League had apparently none); and it is clear that in America such a
fundamental document would in any case have been created to define and limit the powers of each department of government.
VOL. I D
af IP had
~
34 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
fundamental instrumént of government, placed above and con- trolling the national legislature itself. They had already such fundamental instrument in the charters of the colonies, which had passed into the constitutions of the several States; and they would certainly have followed, in creating their national constitu- tion, a precedent which they deemed so precious.
The subjection of all the ordinary authorities and organs of government to a supreme instrument expressing the will of the sovereign people, and capable of being altered by them only, has been usually deemed the most remarkable novelty of the American system. But it is merely an application to the wider sphere of the nation, of a plan approved by the experience of the several States. And the plan had, in these States, been the outcome rather of a slow course of historical development than of con- scious determination taken at any one point of their progress. from petty settlements to powerful commonwealths. Neverthe- less, it may well be that the minds of the leaders who guided this development were to some extent influenced and inspired by recollections of the English Commonwealth of the seventeenth century, which had seen the establishment, though for a brief space only, of a genuine supreme or rigid constitution, in the form of the famous Instrument of Government of A.D. 1653, and some of whose sages had listened to the discourses in which James Harrington, one of the most prescient minds of that great age, showed the necessity for such a constitution, and laid down its principles. ;
We may now proceed to consider the several departments of the National Government. It will be simplest to describe each separately, and then to examine the relations of each to the others, reserving for subsequent chapters an account of the relations of the National Government as a whole to the several States.
1 A most interesting analysis of Harrington’s views and inquiry into their influence on the development of the American Constitutions may be found in an article by Professor Theodore W. Dwight in the American Political Science Quarterly for March 1887. Harrington suggested that the Constitution to be drawn up for England should be subscribed by the people themselves, so as to base it on their consent,
CHAPTER V THE PRESIDENT
EVERY one who undertakes to describe the American system of ~ government is obliged to follow the American division of it into the three departments—Executive, Legislative, Judicial. I begin with the executive, as the simplest of the three.
The President is the creation of the Constitution of 1789. Under the Confederation there was only a presiding officer of _ Congress, but no head of the nation.
Why was it thought necessary to have a President at all? The fear of monarchy, of a strong government, of a centralized government, prevailed widely in 1787. George III. was an ‘object of bitter hatred: he remained a bogey to succeeding generations of American children. The Convention found it extremely hard to devise a satisfactory method of choosing the President, nor has the method they adopted proved satisfactory. That a single head is not necessary to a republic might have been suggested to the Americans by those ancient examples to which they loved to recur. The experience of modern Switzerland has made it still more obvious to us now. Yet it was settled very early in the debates of 1787 that the central executive authority must be vested in one person; and the opponents of the draft Constitution, while quarrelling with his powers, did not accuse his existence.
The explanation is to be found not so much in the wish to reproduce the British Constitution as in the familiarity of the Americans, as citizens of the several States, with the office of State governor (in some States then called President) and in their disgust with the feebleness which Congress had shown under the Confederation in its conduct of the war, and, after peace was con- eluded, of the general business of the country. Opinion called for a man, because an assembly had been found to lack prompti-
36 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
tude and vigour. And it may be conjectured that the alarms felt as to the danger from one man’s predominance were largely allayed by the presence of George Washington. Even while the debates were proceeding, every one must have thought of him as the proper person to preside over the Union as he was then pre- siding over the Convention. The creation of the office would seem justified by the existence of a person exactly fitted to fill it, one whose established influence and ripe judgment would repair the faults then supposed to be characteristic of democracy, its impulsiveness, its want of respect for authority, its incapacity for consistent policy.
Hamilton felt so strongly the need for having a vigorous exe- cutive who could maintain a continuous policy, as to propose that the head of the state should be appointed for good behaviour, 1.¢. for life, subject to removal by impeachment. The proposal was defeated, though it received the support of persons so demo- cratically-minded as Madison and Edmund Randolph ; but nearly all sensible men, including many who thought better of democracy than Hamilton himself did,1 admitted that the risks of foreign war, risks infinitely more serious in the infancy of the Republic than they have subsequently proved, required the concentration of executive powers into a single hand. And the fact that in every one of their commonwealths there existed an officer in whom the State constitution vested executive authority, balancing him against the State legislature, made the establishment of a Federal chief magistrate seem the obvious course.
Assuming that there was to be such a magistrate, the states- men. of the Convention, like the solid practical men they were, did not try to construct him out of their own brains, but looked to some existing models. They therefore made an enlarged copy of the State Governor, or to put the same thing differently, a reduced and improved copy of the English king. He is George III. shorn of a part of his prerogative by the intervention of the Senate in treaties and appointments, of another part by the restriction of his action to Federal affairs, while his dignity as well as his influence are diminished by his holding office for four years instead of for life.2 His salary is too small to permit him
1 “The disease we are suffering from is democracy,” says Hamilton in one of his later letters, :
2 When the Romans got rid of their king, they did not really extinguish the office, but set up in their consul a sort of annual king, limited not only by the short duration of his power, but also by the existence of another consul with
CHAP. V THE PRESIDENT 37
either to maintain a Court or to corrupt the legislature ; nor can he seduce the virtue of the citizens by the gift of titles of nobility, for such titles are altogether forbidden. Subject to these pre- cautions, he was meant by the constitution-framers to resemble the State governor and the British king, not only in being the head of the executive, but in standing apart from and above political parties. He was to represent the nation as a whole, as the governor represented the State commonwealth. The inde- pendence of his position, with nothing either to gain or to fear from Congress, would, it was hoped, leave him free to think only of the welfare of the people.
This idea appears in the method provided for the election of a President. To have left the choice of the chief magistrate to a direct popular vote over the whole country would have raised a dangerous excitement, and would have given too much encour- agement to candidates of merely popular gifts. To have entrusted it to Congress would have not only subjected the executive to the legislature in violation of the principle which requires these departments to be kept distinct,’ but have tended to make him the creature of one particular faction instead of the choice of the nation. Hence the device of a double election was adopted, perhaps with a faint reminiscence of the methods by which the Doge was then still chosen at Venice and the Emperor in Ger- many. ‘The Constitution directs each State to choose a number of presidential electors equal to the number of its representatives in both Houses of Congress. Some weeks later, these electors meet in each State on a day fixed by law, and give their votes in writing for the President and Vice-President.2 The votes are transmitted, sealed up, to the capital and there opened by the president of the Senate in the presence of both Houses and counted. ‘To preserve the electors from the influence of faction,
equal powers. The Americans hoped to restrain their President not merely by the shortness of his term, but also by diminishing the power which they left to him ; and this they did by setting up another authority to which they entrusted certain executive functions, making its consent necessary to the validity of certain classes of the President’s executive acts. This is the Senate, whereof more anon.
' 1 See the remarks of Mr. Wilson in the Pennsylvania Convention. Elliot’s Debates, vol. ii. p. 511.
2 Originally the person who received most votes was deemed to have been chosen President, and the person who stood second, Vice-President. This led to confusion, and was accordingly altered by the twelfth constitutional amendment, ‘adopted in 1804, which provides that the President and Vice-President shall be
voted for separately.
38 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
it is provided that they shall not be members of Congress, nor holders of any Federal office. This plan was expected to secure the choice by the best citizens of each State, in a tranquil and deliberate way, of the man whom they in their unfettered discre- tion should deem fittest to be chief magistrate of the Union. Being themselves chosen electors on account of their personal merits, they would be better qualified than the masses to select an able and honourable man for President. Moreover, as the votes are counted promiscuously, and not by States, each elector’s voice would have its weight. He might be in a minority in his own State, but his vote would nevertheless tell because it would be added to those given by electors in other States for the same candidate.
No part of their scheme seems to have been regarded by the constitution-makers of 1787 with more complacency than this,! although no part had caused them so much perplexity. No part had so utterly belied their expectations. The presidential electors have become a mere cog-wheel in the machine; a mere ~ contrivance for giving effect to the decision of the people. Their personal qualifications are a matter of indifference. They have no discretion, but are chosen under a pledge—a pledge of honour merely, but a pledge which has never (since 1796) been violated —to vote for a particular candidate. In choosing them the people virtually choose the President, and thus the very thing which the men of 1787 sought to prevent has happened,—the President is chosen by a popular vote. Let us see how this happened.
In the first two presidential elections (in 1789 and 1792) the independence of the electors did not come into question, because everybody was for Washington, and parties had not yet been fully developed. Yet in the election of 1792 it was generally understood that electors of one way of thinking were to vote for Clinton as their second candidate (i.e. for Vice-President) and those of the other side for John Adams. In the third election (1796) no pledges were exacted from electors, but the election con- test in which they were chosen was conducted on party lines, and although, when the voting by the electors arrived, some few votes
1 “The mode of appointment of the chief magistrate of the United States is almost the only part of the system which has escaped without some censure, or which has received the slightest mark of approbation from its opponents.” —Feder- alist, No, Ixvii., cf. No, 1, and the observations of Mr, Wilson in the Convention of Pennsylvania.
CHAP, V THE PRESIDENT 39
were scattered among other persons, there were practically only two presidential candidates before the country, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, for the former of whom the electors of the Federalist party, for the latter those of the Republican (Democratic)! party were expected to vote. The fourth election was a regular party struggle, carried on in obedience to party arrangements. Both Federalists and Republicans put the names of their candidates for President and Vice-President before the country, and round these names the battle raged. The notion of leaving any freedom or ' discretion to the electors had vanished, for it was felt that an “issue so great must and could be decided by the nation alone. ‘From that day till now there has never been any question of reviving the true and original intent of the plan of double elec- tion,” and consequently nothing has ever turned on the personality of the electors. They are now so little significant that to enable _the voter to know for which set of electors his party desires him - to vote, it is found necessary to put the name of the presidential candidate whose interest they represent at the top of the voting ticket on which their own names are printed.
The completeness and permanence of this change has been assured by the method which now prevails of choosing the electors. The Constitution leaves the method to each State, and in the earlier days many States entrusted the choice to their legislatures. But as democratic principles became developed, the practice of choosing the electors by direct popular vote, originally adopted by Virginia, Pennsylvania, and Maryland, spread by degrees through the other States, till by 1832 South Carolina was the only State which retained the method of appointment by the legislature. She dropped it in 1868, and popular election now rules everywhere.? In some States the electors were for a time chosen by districts, like members of the House of Representatives. But the plan of choice by a single
1 The party then called Republican has for the last sixty years or so been called Democratic. The party now called Republican did not arise till 1854.
2 In 1876 the suggestion was thrown out that the disputed election ot that year might be settled by the exercise of free choice on the part of the electors ; but the idea found no favour with the politicians.
3 This, however, is merely matter of State law. Any State could go back to choice by the legislature. Colorado, not having time, after her admission to the Union in 1876, to provide by law for a popular choice of electors to vote in the election of a President in the November of that year, left the choice to the legislature, but now elects its presidential electors by popular vote like the other
States.
40 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
popular vote over the whole of the State found increasing favour, seeing that it was in the interest of the party for the time being dominant in the State. In 1828 Maryland was the only State which clung to district voting. She, too, adopted the “general ticket” system in 1832, since which year it has been . universal. Thus the issue comes directly before the people. The parties nominate their respective candidates, in manner to be hereinafter described,! a tremendous “campaign” of stump speaking, newspaper writing, street parades, and torchlight processions sets in and rages for about four months: the polling for electors takes place early in November, on the same day over the whole Union, and when the result is known the contest is over, because the subsequent meeting and voting of the electors in their several States is mere matter of form.
So far the method of choice by electors may seem to be merely a roundabout way of getting the judgment of the people.. It is more than this. It has several singular consequences, un- foreseen by the framers of the Constitution. It has made the election virtually an election by States, for the present system of choosing electors by “general ticket” over the whole State causes the whole weight of a State to be thrown into the scale of one candidate, that candidate whose list of electors is carried in the given State. Pennsylvania, for instance, with her popula- tion of four and a half millions, has thirty electoral votes. Each party runs its list or “ticket” of thirty presidential electors for that State, who are bound to vote for the party’s candidate, let us say Mr. Blaine or Mr. Cleveland. The Republican list (7.¢, that which includes the thirty Blaine electors) is carried by a majority of 473,000 against 392,000. It is of course carried entire, if carried at all, because it would be absurd for any partisans of Mr. Blaine to votu for some only and not for all of the electors whose only function is to vote for him. The Blaine list being thus carried, all the thirty electoral votes of Pennsyl- vania are secured for Mr. Blaine. The hundreds of thousands of votes given by the people for the Democratic list (i.e. for the Cleveland electors) do not go to swell the support which Mr. Cleveland obtains in other States, but are utterly lost. Hence in a presidential election, the struggle concentrates itself in the doubtful States, where the great parties are pretty equally divided, and is languid in States where a distinct majority either
1 See the chapter on National Nominating Conventions in Vol. IL.
CHAP, V THE PRESIDENT 41
way may be anticipated, because, since it makes no difference whether a minority be large or small, it is not worth while to struggle hard to increase a minority which cannot be turned into a majority. And hence also a man may be, and has been, elected President by a minority of popular votes.
When such has been the fate of the plan of 1787, it need hardly be said that the ideal President, the great and good man above and outside party, whom the judicious and impartial electors were to choose, has not been secured. The ideal was realized once and once only in the person of George Washington. His successor in the chair (John Adams) was a leader of one of the two great parties then formed, the other of which has, with some changes, lasted down to our own time. Jefferson, who came next, was the chief of that other party, and his election marked its triumph. Nearly every subsequent President has been elected as a party leader by a party vote, and has felt bound to carry out the policy of the men who put him in power.” Thus instead of getting an Olympian President raised above faction, America has, despite herself, reproduced the English system of executive government by a party majority, reproduced it in a more extreme form, because in England the titular head of
1 This happened in 1876, when Mr. Hayes received, on the showing of his own partisans, only 4,033,708 popular votes, against 4,285,992 given for Mr. Tilden, but was elected President by 185 electoral votes against 184 for Mr. Tilden. In 1880 Mr. Garfield was elected by 214 against 155 electoral votes, but had a popular majority of only 4,454,146 against 4,444,952, less than 10,000 out of the whole Union. In 1860 Abraham Lincoln received much less than half the total popular vote, but had an electoral majority among the presidential electors of 180 against 123 voting for his various rivals. So neither Polk in 1844, nor Taylor in 1848, nor Buchanan in 1856, had an absolute majority of the popular vote. In 1884 the whole thirty-six votes of New York State were cast for Mr, Cleveland, although his popular majority in that State, out of-a poll of more than 1,100,000, was just over 1100. And as these thirty-six votes turned the election, it was a majority of only 1100 that determined the issue of the struggle over the whole Union, in which nearly 10,000,000 votes were given.
It is an odd result of the system that the bestowal of the suffrage on the negroes has operated against the Republican party which bestowed it. The Southern States have in respect of this increase in their voting population received 87 additional presidential votes, and these have in the two last elections (1880 and 1884) been all thrown for the Democratic candidate.
2 John Tyler and Andrew Johnson, both of whom quarrelled with their party, were both elected as Vice-Presidents, and succeeded to the chair on the death of the persons who had been elected Presidents. James Monroe was chosen President in 1820 with practical unanimity; but this was because one of the two parties had for the time been crushed out and started no candidate. So also J. Q. Adams, Monroe’s successor, can hardly be called a party leader. After him the party-chosen Presidents go on without interruption.
42 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
oo —
the State, in whose name administrative acts are done, stands in
isolated dignity outside party politics. The disadvantages of
the American plan are patent; but in practice they are less- serious than might be expected, for the responsibility of a great
office and the feeling that he represents the whole nation have
tended to sober and control the President. Except as regards
patronage, he has seldom, at least since the War of Secession,
acted as a mere tool of faction, or sought to abuse his adminis-
trative powers to the injury of his political adversaries.
The Constitution prescribes no limit for the re-eligibility of the President. He may go on being chosen for one four year period after another for the term of his natural life. But tradi- tion has supplied the place of law. Elected in 1789, Washington submitted to be re-elected in 1792. But when he had served this second term he absolutely refused to serve a third, urging the risk to republican institutions of suffering the same man to continue constantly in office. Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, and Jackson obeyed the precedent, and did not seek, nor their friends for them, re-election after two terms. After them no President was re-elected, except Lincoln, down to General Grant. Grant was President from 1869 to 1873, and again from 1873 to 1877, then came Mr. Hayes; and in 1880 an attempt was made to break the unwritten rule in Grant’s favour. Each party, as will be more fully explained hereafter, nominates its candidates in a gigantic party assembly called the National Convention. In the Republican party Convention of 1880 a powerful group of the dele- gates put forward Grant for nomination as the party candidate, alleging his special services as a ground for giving him the honour’ of a third term. Had there not been among the Republicans themselves a section personally hostile to Grant, or rather to those who surrounded him, the attempt might have succeeded, though it would probably have involved defeat at the polls. But this hostile section found the prepossession of the people against a third term so strong that, by appealing to the established tradi- tion, they defeated the Grant men in the Convention, and obtained the nomination of Mr. Garfield, who was victorious at the ensuing election. This precedent has been taken as practically decisive for the future, because General Grant, though his administration had been marked by grave faults, was an exceptionally popular figure. A principle affirmed against him is not likely to be de- parted from in favour of any aspirant for many elections to come.
~ CHAP, V THE PRESIDENT 43
The Constitution (Amendment xii., which in this point repeats the original Art. xi. § 1) requires for the choice of a President ‘a majority of the whole number of electors appointed.” If no such majority is obtained by any candidate, i.e. if the votes of the electors are so scattered among different candidates, that out of the total number (which is now 401) no one receives an abso- lute majority (7.¢. at least 201 votes), the choice goes over to the House of Representatives, who are empowered to choose a Presi- dent from among the three candidates who have received the largest number of electoral votes. In the House the vote is taken by States, a majority of all the States: (i.e at present of twenty States out of thirty-eight) being necessary for a choice, As all the members of the House from a State have but one collective vote, it follows that if they are equally divided among themselves, eg. if half the members from a given State, say Pennsylvania, are Democratic and half Republican, the vote of that State is lost. Supposing this to be the case in half the total number of States, or supposing the States so to scatter their votes that no candidate receives an absolute majority, then no President is chosen, and the Vice-President becomes President.
Only twice has the election gone to the House. In 1800, when the rule still prevailed that the candidate with the largest number of votes became President, and the candidate who came second Vice-President, Jefferson and Aaron Burr received the same number. The Jeffersonian electors meant to make him President, but as they had also all voted for Burr, there was a tie. After a long struggle the House chose Jefferson.? Feeling ran high, and had Jefferson been kept out by the votes of the Federalist party, his partisans might possibly have taken up arms. In 1824 Andrew Jackson had 99 electoral votes, and his three competitors (J. Q. Adams, W. H. Crawford, and Henry Clay), 162 votes between them, so that Jackson wanted 32 of an absolute majority. The House chose J. Q. Adams by a vote of thirteen States against seven for Jackson and four for Crawford.*
1 As to the choice of the Vice-President by the Senate see Constit., Am. xii.
2 The votes of two States were for a long time divided; but Hamilton’s influence at last induced the Federalist members to vote for Jefferson as a person less dangerous to the country than Burr. His action—highly patriotic, for Jefferson was his bitter enemy—cost him his life at Burr’s hands.
3 Clay, unlucky throughout in his ambitions for the presidency, had stood
fourth in the electoral vote, and so could not be chosen by the House. Jackson had received the largest popular vote in those States where electors were chosen
by the people.
44 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
In this mode of choice, the popular will may be still less recog- nized than it is by the method of voting through presidential electors, for if the twenty smaller States were through their representatives in the House to vote for candidate A, and the eighteen larger States for candidate B, A would be seated, though the population of the twenty smaller States is, of course, very much below that of the eighteen larger.
The Constitution seems, though its language is not explicit, to have intended to leave the counting of the votes to the president of the Senate (the Vice-President of the United States) ; and in early days this officer superintended the count, and decided questions as to the admissibility of doubtful votes. However, Congress has. in virtue of its right to be present at the counting assumed the further right of determining all ques- tions which arise regarding the validity of electoral votes, and has, it need hardly be said, determined them on each occasion from party motives. This would be all very well were a decision by Congress always certain of attainment. But it often happens that one party has a majority in the Senate, another party in the House, and then, as the two Houses vote separately and each differently from the other, a deadlock results. I must pass by the minute and often tedious controversies which have arisen on these matters. But one case deserves special mention, for it illustrates an ingrained and formidable weakness of the present electoral system.
In 1876, Mr. Hayes was the Republican candidate for the presidency, Mr. Tilden the Democratic. The former carried his list of electors in seventeen States, whose aggregate electors numbered 163, and the latter carried his list also in seventeen States, whose aggregate electors numbered 184. Four States remained out of the total thirty-eight, and in each of these four two sets of persons had been chosen by popular vote, each set claiming, on grounds too complicated to be here explained, to be the duly chosen electors from those States respectively.! The electoral votes of these four States amounted to twenty-two, so that if in any one of them the Democratic set of electors had
1 In Oregon the question was whether one of the chosen electors was dis- qualified because he was a post master. In Florida there were complaints of fraud, in South Carolina of intimidation, in Louisiana two rival State govern- ments existed, each claiming the right to certify electoral returns. There had
avec been a good deal of fraud and some violence in several of the Southern tates,
~ ©
CHAP. V THE PRESIDENT 45
been found to have been duly chosen, the Democrats would have secured a majority of electoral votes (the total number of electors being then 369, so that 184 was within one of being a half of that number) whereas even if in all of them Republican electors had been chosen, the Republican electors would have had a majority of one only. In such circumstances the only course for the Republican leaders, as good party men, was to claim all these doubtful States. This they promptly did,—party loyalty is the last virtue that deserts politicians,—and the Democrats did the like.
Meanwhile the electors met and voted in their respective States. In the four disputed States the two sets of electors met, voted, and sent up to Washington, from each of these four, double returns of the electoral votes. The result of the election evidently depended on the question which set of returns should be admitted as being the true and legal returns from the four States respectively. The excitement over the whole Union was intense, and the prospect of a peaceful settlement remote, for the Constitution appeared to provide no means of determining the legal questions involved. Congress, as remarked above, had in some previous instances assumed jurisdiction, but seeing that the Republicans had a majority in the Senate, and the Demo- crats in the House of Representatives, it was clear that the majority in one House would vote for admitting the Republican returns, the majority in the other for admitting the Democratic. Negotiations between the leaders at last arranged a method of escape. A statute was passed creating an electoral commission of five Senators, five members of the House of Representatives, and five Justices of the Supreme Court, who were to determine all questions as to the admissibility of electoral votes from States sending up double returns. Everything now turned on the composition of the electoral Commission, a body such as had never before been created. The Senate appointed three Repub- licans and two Democrats. The House of Representatives appointed three Democrats and two Republicans. So far there was an exact balance. The statute had indicated four of the Justices who were to sit, two Republicans and two Democrats,
1 Power was reserved to Congress to set aside by a vote of both Houses the decisions of the Commission, but as the two Houses differed in every case, the Democrats of the House always voting against each determination of the Com-
mission, and the Republicans of the Senate supporting it, this provision made no difference,
46 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
and had left these four to choose a fifth. This fifth was the odd man whose casting vote would turn the scale as between the seven Republican members of the Commission and the seven Democrats. The four Justices chose a Republican Justice, and this choice practically settled the result, for every vote given by the members of the Commission was a strict. party vote.’ They were nearly all lawyers, and had all taken an oath of impar- tiality. The legal questions were so difficult, and for the most part so novel, that it was possible for a sound lawyer and honest man to take in each case either the view for which the Republicans or that for which the Democrats contended. Still it is interest- ing to observe that the legal judgment of every commissioner happened to coincide with his party proclivities” All the points in dispute were settled by a vote of eight to seven in favour of the returns transmitted by the Republican electors in the four disputed States, and Mr. Hayes was accordingly declared duly elected by a majority of 185 electoral votes against 184. The decision may have been right as matter of law,—it is still debated by lawyers,—and there had been so much force and fraud on both sides in Florida, Louisiana, and South Carolina, that no one can say on which side substantial justice lay. Mr. Tilden deserves the credit of having induced his friends both to agree to a compromise slightly to his own disadvantage, and to accept peaceably, though with long and loud complaints, a result which baffled their hopes. I tell the story here because it, points to a grave danger in the presidential system. The stake played for is so high that the temptation to fraud is immense; and as the ballots given for the electors by the people are received and counted by State authorities under State laws, an unscrupulous State faction has opportunities for fraud at its command. Ten years passed after the election of 1876, but Congress, although successive Presidents pressed the subject on its attention, did nothing till 1887 to provide against a recurrence of the danger described. It has now enacted a statute which to some extent meets the problem by providing that tribunals appointed in and by each State shall determine what electoral votes from the
1 The Commission decided unanimously that the Democratic set of electors ’ from South Carolina were not duly chosen, but they divided eight to seven as usual on the question of recognizing the Republican electors, of that State..
* The same phenomenon has. been observed in committees of the English
House of Commons appointed to deal with purely legal questions, or to sit in a virtually judicial capacity.
gl a ae a Oe ne ae ae it ake ; ee
| CHAP vt!) THE PRESIDENT 47
State are legal votes; and that if the State has appointed no such tribunal, the two Houses of Congress shall determine which votes (in case of double returns) are legal. If the Houses differ the vote of the State is lost.1 It is, of course, possible under this plan that the State tribunal may decide unfairly ; but the main thing is to secure some decision. Unfairness is better than uncertainty.
A President is removable during his term of office only by means of impeachment, a procedure familiar on both sides of the Atlantic in 1787, when the famous trial of Warren Hastings was still lingering on at Westminster. Impeachment, which had played no small part in the development of English liberties, was deemed by the Americans of those days a valuable element in their new constitution, for it enabled Congress to depose, and the fear of it might be expected to restrain, a treasonably ambitious President. In obedience to State precedents,” it is by the House of Representatives that the President is impeached, and by the Senate, sitting as a law court, with the chief justice of the Supreme court, the highest legal official of the country, as pre- siding officer, that he is tried. A two-thirds vote is necessary to conviction, the effect of which is simply to remove him from and disqualify him for office, leaving him “liable to indictment, trial, judgment, and punishment, according to law” (Constitution, Art. i. § 3, Art. ii. § 4). The impeachable offences are “ treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanours,” an expression which some have held to cover only indictable offences, while others extend it to include acts done in violation of official duty and against the interests of the nation, such acts, in fact, as were often grounds for the English impeachments of the seventeenth century. As yet, Andrew Johnson is the only President who has been impeached. His foolish and headstrong conduct made his removal desirable, but as it was doubtful whether any single offence justified a conviction, several of the senators politically opposed to him voted for acquittal. A two-thirds majority not
1 There are further provisions in the Act which need not be given here.
2 Impeachment was taken, not directly from English usage, but rather from the Constitutions of Virginia (1776), and Massachusetts (1780), which had, no doubt following the example of England, established this remedy against culpable
officials.
3 They may have questioned the expediency of turning him out at that moment ; or their political prepossessions against him may have been restrained by a doubt whether the evidence was quite sufficient to support a quasi-criminal charge.
48 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI
having been secured upon any one article (the numbers being thirty-five for conviction, nineteen for acquittal) he was declared acquitted.
In case of the removal of a President by his impeachment, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge his duties, the Vice-President steps into his place. The Vice-President is chosen ~ at the same time, by the same electors, and in the same manner as the President. His only functions are to preside in the Senate and to succeed the President. Failing both President and Vice-President it was formerly provided by statute, not by the Constitution, that the presiding officer for the time being of the Senate should succeed to the presidency, and, failing him, the Speaker of the House of Representatives. To this plan there was the obvious objection that it might throw power into the hands of the party opposed to that to which the lately deceased President belonged ; and it has therefore been now (by an Act of 1886) enacted that on the death of a President the secretary of state shall succeed, and after him other officers of the adminis- tration, in the order of their rank. Four Presidents (Harrison, Taylor, Lincoln, Garfield) have died in office, and been succeeded by Vice-Presidents, and in the first and third of these instances the succeeding Vice-President has reversed the policy of his pre- decessor, and become involved in a quarrel with the party which elected him, such as has never yet broken out between a man elected to be President and his party. In practice very little pains are bestowed on the election of a Vice-President. The convention which selects the party candidates usually gives the nomination to this post to a man in the second rank, sometimes as a consolation to a disappointed candidate for the presidential nomination, sometimes to a friend of such a disappointed candi- date in order to “placate” his faction, sometimes as a compli- ment to an elderly leader who is personally popular. If the party carries its candidate-for President, it also as a matter of course carries its candidate for Vice-President, and thus if the President happens to die, a man of small account may step into the chief magistracy of the nation.
CHAPTER VI PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES
THE powers and duties of the President as head of the Federal executive are the following :— Command of Federal army and navy and of militia of several States when called into service of the United States. Power to make treaties, but with advice and consent of the Senate, i.e. consent of two-thirds of senators present. to appoint ambassadors and consuls, judges of Supreme court, and all other higher Federal officers, but with advice and consent of Senate. ,, to grant reprieves and pardons for offences against the United States, except in cases of impeachment. ,, to convene both Houses on extraordinary occasions. to disagree with (1.¢. to send back for re-consideration) any bill or resolution passed by Congress, but subject to the power of Congress to finally pass the same, after re-con- sideration, by a two-thirds majority in each House. Duty to inform Congress of the state of the Union, and to re- commend measures to Congress. . ,, to receive foreign ambassadors. ,, to “take care that the laws be faithfully executed.” ,, to commission all the officers of the United States. These functions group themselves into four classes— Those which relate to foreign affairs. Those which relate to domestic administration. Those which concern legislation. The power of appointment. The conduct of foreign policy would be a function of the utmost importance did not America, happy America, stand apart in a world of her own, unassailable by European powers, easily superior to the other republics of her continent, but with no VOL, I E
~~ ~
50 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
present motive for aggression upon them. The President, how- ever, has not a free hand in foreign policy. He cannot declare war, for that belongs to Congress, though to be sure he may, as President Polk did in 1845-6, bring affairs to a point at which it is hard for Congress to refrain from the declaration. ‘Treaties require the approval of two-thirds of the Senate; and in order to secure this, itis usually necessary for the Executive to be in con- stant communication with the Foreign Affairs Committee of that body. The House of Representatives has no legal right to inter- fere, but it often passes resolutions enjoining or disapproving a particular line of policy ; and sometimes invites the Senate to coincide in these expressions of opinion, which then become weightier. The President is by no means bound by such resolu- tions, and has more than once declared that he does not regard them. But as some treaties, especially commercial treaties, cannot be carried out except by the aid of statutes, and as no war can be entered on without votes of money, the House of Representatives can sometimes indirectly make good its claim to influence. Many delicate questions, some of them not yet de- cided, have arisen upon these points, which the Constitution has, perhaps unavoidably, left in half-light.1 In all free countries it is most difficult to define the respective spheres of the legislature and executive in foreign affairs, for while publicity and parlia- mentary control are needed to protect the people, promptitude and secrecy are the conditions of diplomatic success. Practically, however, and for the purposes of ordinary business, the President is independent of the House, while the Senate, though it can prevent his settling anything, cannot keep him from unsettling everything. He, or rather his secretary of state, for the President has rarely leisure to give close or continuous attention to foreign policy, retains an unfettered initiative, by means of which he may embroil the country abroad or excite passion at home.
The domestic authority of the President is in time of peace very small, because by far the larger part of law and administra- tion belongs to the State governments, and because Federal ad- ministration is regulated by statutes which leave little discretion to the executive. In war time, however, and especially in a ' civil war, it expands with portentous speed. Both as commander- in-chief of the army and navy, and as charged with the “ faithful
? An acute discussion of some of these questions may be found in Dr. Von Holst’s Staatsrecht der Vereinigten Staaten, § 58.
CHAP. VI PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 51
execution of the laws,” the President is likely to be led to assume all the powers which the emergency requires. How much he can legally do without the aid of statutes is disputed, for the acts of President Lincoln during the earlier part of the War of Secession, including his proclamation suspending the writ of Hubeas Corpus, were subsequently legalized by Congress ; but it is at least clear that Congress can make him, as it did make Lincoln, almost a dictator. And how much the war power may include appears in this, that by virtue of it and without any previous legislative - sanction President Lincoln issued his emancipation proclamations of 1862 and 1863, declaring all slaves in the insurgent States to be thenceforth free, although these States were deemed to be in point of law still members of the Union.?
It devolves on the executive as well as on Congress to give effect to the provisions of the Constitution whereby a republican form of government is guaranteed to every State: and a State may, on the application of its legislature, or executive (when the legislature cannot be convened), obtain protection against domestic violence. Where, as in Louisiana in 1873, there are two govern- ments disputing by force the control of a State, or where an in- surrection breaks out, as in Rhode Island in 1840-2, this power becomes an important one, for it involves the employment of troops, and enables the President (since it is usually on him that the duty falls) to establish the government he prefers to recog- nize.? Fortunately the case has been one of rare occurrence.
1 The proclamation was expressed not to apply to States which had not seceded, nor to such parts of seceding States as had then already been reconquered by the northern armies, Slavery was finally legally extinguished everywhere by the thirteenth constitutional amendment of 1865.
2 In the Louisiana case Federal troops were employed: in the Rhode Island case the President authorized the sending in of the militia of Massachusetts and Connecticut, but the Rhode Island troops succeeded in suppressing the rebellion, whose leader was ultimately convicted of high treason against the State and im- prisoned. See as to the guarantee of order and republican government in the States, the case of Luther v. Borden (7 How. 42) and the instructive article of Judge T. M. Cooley in the International Review for January 1875. He observes: “The obligation to guarantee a republican form of government to the States, and and to protect them against invasion and domestic violence, is one imposed upon ‘the United States.’ The implication is that the duty was not to depend for its fulfilment on the legislative department exclusively, but that all departments of the government, or at least more than one, were or might be charged with some | duty in this regard, It has been Congress which hitherto has assumed to act upon the guarantee, while application for protection against domestic violence has, on the other hand, been made to the President. From the nature of the case the judiciary can have little or nothing to do with questions arising under this pro- vision of the Constitution,”
>
52 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
The President has the right of speaking to the nation by addresses or proclamations, a right not expressly conferred by the Constitution, but inherent in his position. Occasions requiring its exercise are uncommon. On entering office, it is usual for the new magistrate to issue an inaugural address, stating his views on current public questions. Washington also put forth a fare- well address, but Jackson’s imitation of that famous document. was condemned as a piece of vain-glory. It is thought bad taste for the President to deliver stump speeches, and Andrew Johnson injured himself by the practice. But he retains that and all other rights of the ordinary citizen, including the right of voting at Federal as well as State elections in his own State. And he has sometimes taken an active, though a covert, share in the councils of his own party.
The position of the President as respects legislation is a pecu- liar one. The King of England is a member of the English legislature, because Parliament is in theory his Great Council which he summons and in which he presides, hearing the com- plaints of the people, and devising legislative remedies. It is as a member of the legislature that he assents to the bills it pre- sents to him, and the term “veto power,” since it seems to suggest an authority standing outside to approve or reject, does not happily describe his right of dealing with a measure which has been passed by the council in which he is deemed to sit, though in point of fact he no longer does so except at the begin- ning and ending of a session. The American President is not a member of the legislature at all. He is an independent and separate power on whom the people, for the sake of checking the legislature and of protecting themselves against it, have specially conferred the function of arresting by his disapproval its acts. So again the King of England can initiate legislation. According to the older Constitution, statutes purported to be made by him, but “with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and of the Commons.”? According to ~
1 Tt need hardly be said that the actual separation of Parliament into two branches, each of which deliberates apart under the presidency of its own chair- man (the chairman of one House named by the sovereign, whom he represents, that of the other chosen by the House, but approved by the sovereign), does not exclude the theory that the King Lords and Commons constitute the common council of the nation. They are indeed deemed to be the whole nation, assembled for national purposes.
? In the fourteenth century English statutes are expressed to be made by the king, “ par conseil et par assentement” of the lords and the commonalty. The
CHAP. VI PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 53
the modern practice, neariy all important measures are brought into Parliament by his ministers, and nominally under his instruc- tions. The American President cannot introduce bills, either directly or through his ministers, for they do not sit in Congress. All that the Constitution permits him to do in this direction is to inform Congress of the state of the nation, and to recommend the measures which his experience in administration shows to be necessary. This latter function is discharged by the messages which the President addresses to Congress. The most important is that sent by the hands of his private secretary at the beginning of each session.
_ George Washington used to deliver his addresses orally, like an English king, and drove in a coach and six to open Congress with something of an English king’s state. But Jefferson, when his turn came in 1801, whether from republican simplicity, as he said himself, or because he was a poor speaker, as his critics said, began the practice of sending communications in writing; and this has been followed ever since. The message usually discusses the leading questions of the moment, indicates mischiefs needing a remedy, and suggests the requisite legislation. But as no bills are submitted by the President, and as, even were he to submit them, no one of his ministers sits in either House to explain and defend them, the message is a shot in the air without practical result. It is rather a manifesto, or declaration of opinion and policy, than a step towards legislation. Congress is not moved : members go their own ways and bring in their own bills. Pre- sident Cleveland, for instance, has recently (1887) in two succes- sive messages called attention to the necessity for dealing with the silver question, but Congress has not even attempted to handle the matter.
Far more effective is the President’s part in the last stage of legislation, for here he finds means provided for carrying out his will. When a bill is presented to him, he may sign it, and his signature makes it law. If, however, he disapproves of it, he returns it within ten days to the House in which it originated,
words “‘ by the authority ” of the Lords and Commons first appear in the eleventh year of Henry VI. (14383), and from the first of Henry VII. (1485) downwards a form substantially the same as the present is followed, viz. “Be it enacted by the Queen’s most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, and by the authority of the same.” See Stubbs, Constitutional History, vol. iii. chap. xx.; Anson, Law of the Constitution, vol. i.
ar 276
54 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
with a statement of his grounds of disapproval. If both Houses take up the bill again and pass it by a two-thirds majority in each House, it becomes law forthwith without requiring the President’s signature.! If it fails to obtain this majority it drops.
Considering that the arbitrary use, by George III. and his colonial governors, of the power of refusing bills passed by a colonial legislature had been a chief cause of the Revolution of 1776, it is to the credit of the Americans that they inserted this apparently undemocratic provision in the Constitution of 1789.? It has worked wonderfully well. Most Presidents have used it sparingly, and only where they felt either that there was a case for delay, or that the country would support them against the majority in Congress. Perverse or headstrong Presidents have been generally defeated by the use of the two-thirds vote to pass the bill over their objections. Washington vetoed (to use the popular expression) two bills only ; his successors down till 1830, seven ; and till the accession of President Cleveland in 1885 the total number vetoed was only seventy-seven (including the so- called pocket vetoes) in ninety-six years.? Mr. Cleveland had up to March 1887 vetoed a much larger number than this, the great majority being bills for granting pensions to persons who served in the northern armies during the War of Secession.* Though
‘1 If Congress adjourns within the ten days allowed the President for returning the bill, it is lost. His retaining it under these circumstances at the end of a session is popularly called a “ pocket veto.’’
2 At that time there was only one State, Massachusetts, whose constitution allowed the governor a veto. As to the veto power in the States, an interesting subject, see ost, Chapters XL. and XLI.
® Mr. Horace Davis (in Johns Hopkins University Studies, Third Series, Nos. ix. x.) gives the following particulars, up to 1885: “ Forty-three of the seventy- seven vetoes emanated from four Presidents, viz. Jackson, eleven; Tyler, ten ; Johnson, thirteen; Hayes, nine, All these administrations were periods of fierce conflict with a hostile Congress. Add Madison, six ; Pierce, five ; Buchanan, seven ; and Grant, six ; and we have sixty-seven out of seventy-seven vetoes, and only ten remain to the other twelve Presidents. Five subjects comprise the majority of all the vetoes, viz. Internal improvements, seventeen ; United States Bank, four; Reconstruction Acts, seven; Rebel claims, four; Interference at elections by marshals and soldiers, seven; in all, thirty-seven out of seventy- seven, ‘Ten bills have been passed over vetoes, viz. one under Tyler, seven under Johnson, one under Hayes, and one under Arthur.”
4 In 1886 Mr. Cleveland returned to Congress 115 bills in all, of which 101 were pension bills. It was attempted to pass a second time only eight of these, and only one was in fact repassed. His chief ground was that a regular bureau exists for dealing with and awarding pensions under the general law, that many of the claims recognized by these. bills had been reported against, and that others were open to suspicion. .
CHAP. VI PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 55
many of these bills had been passed with little or no opposition scarcely any were repassed against his veto. The only President who used the power in a reckless way was Andrew Johnson, who, in the course of his three years’ struggle with Congress, returned to them the chief bills they passed for carrying out their Southern Reconstruction policy. As the majority opposed to him was a large one in both Houses, these bills were promptly passed over his veto.
So far from exciting the displeasure of the people by resisting the will of their representatives, a President generally gains popularity by the bold use of his veto power. It conveys the impression of firmness ; it shows that he has a view and does not fear to give effect to it. The nation, which has often good grounds for distrusting Congress, a body liable to be moved by sinister private influences, or to defer to the clamour of some noisy section outside, looks to the man of its choice to keep Con- gress in order. By “killing” more bills than all his predecessors put together had done, Mr. Cleveland raised himself in, public opinion and improved the prospects of his re-election. The reasons why the veto provisions of the Constitution have suc- ceeded appear to be two. One is that the President, being an elective and not a hereditary magistrate, is deemed to act for the people, is responsible to the people, and has the weight of the people behind him. The people regard him as a check, an indis- pensable check, not only upon the haste and heedlessness of their representatives, the faults that the framers of the Constitution chiefly feared, but upon their tendency to yield either to pressure from any section of their constituents, or to temptations of a private nature. He is expected to resist these tendencies on behalf of the whole people, whose interests may suffer from the selfishness as well of sections as of individuals. The other reason is that a veto can never take effect unless there is a substantial minority of Congress, a minority exceeding one-third in one or other House, which agrees with the President. Should the majority threaten him he is therefore sure of considerable sup- port. Hence this arrangement is preferable to a plan, such as that of the French Constitution of 17911 (under which the king’s veto could be overridden by passing a bill in three succes-
1 As the majority in France was unable to attain its will by constitutional means without waiting three years, it was the more disposed to overthrow the
Constitution.
56 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
sive years), for enabling the executive simply to delay the passing of a measure which may be urgent, or which a vast majority of the legislature may desire. In its practical working the presi- dential veto power furnishes an interesting illustration of the tendency of unwritten or flexible constitutions to depart from, of written or rigid constitutions to cleave to, the letter of the law. The strict legal theory of the rights of the head of the State is in this point exactly the same in England and in America. But whereas it is now the undoubted duty of an English king to assent to every bill passed by both Houses of Parliament, how- ever strongly he may personally disapprove its provisions,’ it is the no less undoubted duty of an American President to exercise his independent judgment on every bill, not sheltering himself under the representatives of the people, or foregoing his own opinion at their bidding.”
As the President is charged with the whole Federal adminis- tration, and responsible for its due conduct, he must of course be allowed to choose his executive subordinates. But as he may abuse this tremendous power the Constitution associates the Senate with him, requiring the “advice and consent” of that body to the appointments he makes. It also permits Congress to vest in the courts of law, or in the heads of departments, the
1 Queen Elizabeth, in a.p. 1597, assented to forty-three bills passed in that session, and “advised herself upon” forty-eight. William III. refused to assent to five bills. The last instance of the use of the “veto power” in England was by Queen Anne in 1707 on a Scotch militia bill. Mr. Tod (Parliamentary Government in the English Colonies, ii. p. 319) mentions that in 1858 changes in a private railway bill were compelled by an intimation to its promoters that, if they were not made, the royal power of rejection would be exercised.
2 The practical disuse of the ‘‘ veto power” in England is due not merely to the decline in the authority of the Crown, but to the fact that, since the Revolu- tion, the Crown acts only on the advice of responsible ministers, who necessarily command a majority in the House of Commons, A bill therefore cannot be passed against the wishes of the ministry unless in the rare case of their being ministers on sufferance, and even in that event they would be able to prevent its passing by advising the Crown to prorogue or dissolve Parliament before it had gone through all its stages. In 1868 a bill (the Irish Church Suspension Bill) was carried through the House of Commons by Mr. Gladstone against the opposi- tion of the then Tory ministry which was holding office on sufferance ; but it was rejected on second reading by a large majority in the House of Lords. Had that House seemed likely to accept it the case would have arisen which I have referred to, and the only course for the ministry would have been to dissolve Parliament.
It was urged against the provision in the Constitution of 1789 for the Presi- dent’s veto that the power would be useless, because in England the Crown did not venture to use it. Wilson replied by observing that the English Crown had not only practically an antecedent negative, but also a means of defeating a bill in the House of Lords by creating new peers. —Elliot’s Debates, ii. p. 472.
=
CHAP. VI PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 57
right of appointing to “inferior offices.”! This last clause has been used to remove many posts from the nomination of the _ President. But a vast number, roughly estimated at 3500, and including for example nearly 600 places under the Treasury, and nearly 2000 post-masterships, still remain in his gift. The con- firming power entrusted to the Senate has become a political factor of the highest moment. The framers of the Constitution probably meant nothing more than that the Senate should check the President by rejecting nominees who were personally unfit, morally or intellectually, for the post to which he proposed to appoint them. The Senate ‘has always, except in its struggle with President Johnson, left the President free to choose his cabinet ministers. But it early assumed the right of rejecting a nominee to any other office on any ground which it pleased, as for instance, if it disapproved his political affiliations, or simply if it disliked him, or wished to spite the President. Presently the senators from the State wherein a Federal office to which the President had made a nomination lay, being the persons chiefly interested in the appointment, and most entitled to be listened to by the rest of the Senate when considering it, claimed to have a paramount voice in deciding whether the nomination should be confirmed. ‘This claim was substantially yielded, for it applied all round, and gave every senator what he wanted. The senators then proceeded to put pressure on the President. They insisted that before making a nomination to an office in any State he should consult the senators from that State who belonged to his own party, and be guided by their wishes. Such an arrangement benefited all senators alike, because each obtained the right of practically dictating the appointments to those Federal offices which he most cared for, viz. those within the limits of his own State; and each was therefore willing to support his colleagues in securing the same right for themselves as regarded their States respectively. Of course when a senator belonged to the party opposed to the President, he had no claim to interfere, because places are as a matter of course given to party adherents only. When both senators belonged to the President’s party they agreed among themselves as to the person whom they should require the President to nominate. By this
1 The Constitution also permits Congress to vest the appointment of such inferior offices as it thinks fit in the President alone, so as not to require the Senate’s concurrence.
58 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
system, which obtained the name of the Courtesy of the Senate, the President was practically enslaved as regards appointments, because his refusal to be guided by the senator or senators within whose State the office lay exposed him to have his nomination rejected. The senators, on the other hand, obtained a mass of patronage by means of which they could reward their partisans, control the Federal civil servants of their State, and build up a faction devoted to their interests.! Successive Presidents chafed under the yoke, and sometimes carried their nominees either by making a bargain or by fighting hard with the senators who sought to dictate to them. But it was generally more prudent to yield, for an offended senator could avenge a defeat by play-- ing the President a shrewd trick in some other matter ; and as the business of confirmation is transacted in secret session, intriguers have little fear of the public before their eyes. The senators might, moreover, argue that they knew best what would strengthen the party in their State, and that the men of their choice were just as likely to be good as those whom some private friend suggested to the President. Thus the system throve and — still thrives, though it received a blow from the conflict in 1881 between President Garfield and one of the New York senators, Mr. Roscoe Conkling. This gentleman, finding that Mr. Gar- field would not nominate to a Federal office in that State the person he proposed, resigned his seat in the Senate, inducing his co-senator Mr. Platt to do the same. Both then offered them- selves for re-election by the State legislature of New York, expecting to obtain from it an approval of their action, and thereby to cow the President. The State legislature, however, in which a faction hostile to the two senators had become powerful, rejected Mr. Conkling and Mr. Platt in favour of other candi- dates. So the victory remained with Mr. Garfield, while the nation, which had watched the contest eagerly, rubbed its hands in glee at the unexpected dénowement.
Before we quit this subject, to which I may return in a later chapter, it must be remarked that the “Courtesy of the Senate ” would never have attained its present strength but for the growth in and since the time of President Jackson, of the so-
1 As the House of Representatives could not allow the Senate to engross all. the Federal patronage, there has been a tendency towards a sort of arrangement, according to which the greater State offices belong to the senators, while as regards the lesser ones, lying within their respective Congressional districts, members of the House are recognized as entitled to recommend candidates.
CHAP. VI PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 59
called Spoils System, whereby holders of Federal offices have been turned out at the accession of a new President to make way for the aspirants whose services, past or future, he is ex- pected to requite or secure by the gift of places.
The right of the President to remove from office has given rise to long controversies on which I can only touch. In the Constitution there is not a word about removals ; and very soon after it had come into force the question arose whether, as regards those offices for which the confirmation of the Senate is required, the President could remove without its consent. _ Hamilton had argued in the Federalist that the President could not so remove, because it was not to be supposed that the Constitution meant to give him so immense and dangerous a reach of power. Madison argued soon after the adoption of the Constitution that it did permit him so to remove, because the head of the executive must have subordinates whom he can trust, and may discover in those whom he has appointed defects fatal to their usefulness. This was also the view of Chief- Justice Marshall.2 When the question came to be settled by Congress during the presidency of Washington, Congress, in- fluenced perhaps by respect for his perfect. uprightness, took the Madisonian view and recognized the power of removal as vested in the President alone. So matters stood till a conflict arose in 1866 between President Johnson and the Republican majority in both Houses of Congress. In 1867, Congress fearing that the President would dismiss a great number of officials who sided with it against him, passed an Act, known as the Tenure of Office Act, which made the consent of the Senate necessary to the removal of office-holders, even of the President’s (so-called) cabinet ministers, permitting him only to suspend them from office during the time when Congress was not sitting. The constitutionality of this Act has been much doubted, and its policy is now generally condemned.’ It was a blow struck in
1 See further as to the use of Federal patronage the chapter on the Spoils System in Vol. II.
2 Mr. Justice Story in his Commentaries on the Constitution, argues against the Madison doctrine, but he does so in view not of such questions as presented themselves in 1867, but of the conduct of President Jackson (who was in power when Story wrote) in making wholesale partisan removals. The whole subject of the President’s appointing power is elaborately and judiciously treated in an article in the Papers of the American Historical Association, vol. i., by. Lucy M. Salmon.
3 Mr. James G, Blaine, for instance, who was a member of the Congress which
60 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I -
the heat of passion. When President Grant succeeded in 1869, the Act was greatly modified, and it has now (1887) been with general approval repealed.
How dangerous it is to leave all offices tenable at the mere pleasure of a partisan Executive using them for party purposes, has been’ shown by the fruits of the Spoils system. On the other hand a President ought to be free to choose his chief advisers and ministers, and even in the lower ranks of the civil service it is hard to secure efficiency if a specific cause, such as could be proved to a jury, must be assigned for dismissal.
Although Congress has transferred many minor appointments to the courts and the heads of departments, and by the Civil Service Reform Act of 1883 has instituted competitive examina- tions for a number estimated at 14,000, many remain in the free gift of the President ; and even as regards those which lie with _ his ministers, he may be invoked if disputes arise between the minister and politicians pressing the claims of their respective friends. The business of nominating is in ordinary times so engrossing as to leave the chief magistrate of the nation little time for his other functions.
Artemus Ward’s description of Abraham Lincoln swept along from room to room in the White House by a rising tide of office seekers is hardly an exaggeration. From the 4th of March, when Mr. Garfield came into power, till he was shot in the July — following, he was engaged almost incessantly in questions of patronage. Yet the President’s individual judgment has little scope. He must reckon with the Senate; he must requite the supporters of the men to whom he owes his election: he must so distribute places all over the country as to keep the local wire-pullers in good humour, and generally strengthen the party by “doing something” for those who have worked or will work for it. Although the minor posts are practically left to the nomination of the senators or congressmen from the State or dis- trict, conflicting claims give infinite trouble, and the more lucra- tive offices are numerous enough to make the task of selection laborious as well as thankless and disagreeable. No one has
passed the Act, has in his Twenty Years im Congress expressed his disapproval of it.
1 Tt is related that a friend, meeting Mr. Lincoln one day during the war, observed, ‘‘ You look anxious, Mr. President ; is there bad news from the front?”
“No,” answered the President, “it isn’t the war: it’s that post-mastership at Brownsville, Ohio.” ‘
CHAP. VI PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 61
more to gain from a thorough scheme of civil service reform than the President. The present system makes a wire-puller of him. It throws work on him unworthy of a fine intel- lect, and for which a man of fine intellect may be ill qualified. On the other hand the President’s patronage is, in the hands of a skilful intriguer, an engine of far-spreading potency. By it he can oblige a vast number of persons, can bind their interests to his own, can fill important places with the men of his choice. Such authority as he has over the party in Congress, and there- fore over the course of legislation, such influence as he exerts on his party in the several States, and therefore over the selection of candidates for Congress, is due to his patronage. Unhappily, the more his patronage is used for these purposes, the more it is apt to be diverted from the aim of providing the country with the best officials.
In quiet times the power of the President is not great. He is hampered at. every turn by the necessity of humouring his party. He is so much engrossed by the trivial and mechanical parts of his work as to have little leisure for framing large schemes of policy, while in carrying them out he needs the co- operation of Congress, which may be jealous, or indifferent, or hostile. He has less influence on legislation,—that is to say, his individual volition makes less difference to the course legislation takes, than the Speaker of the House of Representatives. In troublous times it is otherwise, for immense responsibility is then thrown on one who is both the commander-in-chief and the head of the civil executive. Abraham Lincoln wielded more authority than any single Englishman has done since Oliver Cromwell. It is true that the ordinary law was for some purposes practically suspended during the War of Secession. But it will always have to be similarly suspended in similar crises, and the suspension enures to the benefit of the President, who becomes a sort of dictator.
Setting aside these exceptional moments, the dignity and power of the President have, except in respect to the increase in the quantity of his patronage, been raised but little during the last fifty years, that is, since the time of Andrew Jackson, the last President who, not so much through his office as by his per- sonal ascendency and the vehemence of his character, led and guided his party from the chair. Here, too, one sees how: a rigid or supreme Constitution serves to keep things as they were.
62 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
But for its iron hand, the office would surely, in a country where great events have been crowded on one another and opinion changes rapidly under the teaching of events, have either risen or fallen, have gained strength or lost it.
In no European country is there any personage to whom the President can be said to correspond. If we look at parliamentary countries like England, Italy, Belgium, he resembles neither the sovereign nor the prime minister, for the former is not a party chief at all, and the latter is palpably and confessedly nothing else. The President enjoys more authority, if less dignity, than a European king. He has powers for the moment narrower than a European prime minister, but these powers are more secure, for they do not depend on the pleasure of a parliamentary majority, but run on to the end of his term. One naturally compares him with the French president, but the latter has a prime minister and cabinet, dependent on the chamber, at once to relieve and to eclipse him: in America the President’s cabinet is a part of himself and has nothing to do with Congress. The president of the Swiss Confederation is merely the chairman for a year of the Administrative Federal Council (Bundesrath), and can hardly be called the executive chief of the nation.
The difficulty in forming a just estimate of the President’s power arises from the fact that it differs so much under ordinary and under extraordinary circumstances. This is a result which republics might seem specially concerned to prevent, and yet it is specially frequent under republics, as witness the cases of Rome and of the Italian commonwealths of the Middle Ages. In ordinary times the President may be compared to the senior or managing clerk in a large business establishment, whose chief function is to select his subordinates, the policy of the concern being in the hands of the board of directors. But when foreign affairs become critical, or when disorders within the Union | require his intervention,—when, for instance, it rests with him to put down an insurrection or to decide which of two rival State governments he will recognize and support by arms, everything may depend on his judgment, his courage, and his — hearty loyalty to the principles of the Constitution.
It used to be thought that hereditary monarchs were strong because they reigned by a right of their own, not derived from the people. A President is strong for the exactly opposite reason, because his rights come straight from the people. We
- OHAP, VI PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 63
shall have frequent occasion to observe that nowhere is the rule of public opinion so complete as in America, nor so direct, that is to say, so independent of the ordinary machinery of govern- ment. Now the President is deemed to represent the people no less than do the members of the legislature. Public opinion governs by and through him no less than by and through them, and makes him powerful even against the legislature. This is a fact to be remembered by those Europeans who seek in the strengthening of the monarchical principle a cure for the faults of government by assemblies. And it also suggests the risk that attaches to power vested in the hands of a leader directly chosen by the people. A high authority observes! :—
“Our holiday orators delight with patriotic fervour to draw distinctions between our own and other countries, and to declare that here the law is master and the highest officer but the ser- vant of the law, while even in free England the monarch is irre- sponsible and enjoys the most complete personal immunity. But such comparisons are misleading, and may prove mischievous.
_. In how many directions is not the executive authority in
America practically superior to what it is in England? And can we say that the President is really in any substantial sense any more the servant of the law than is the Queen? Perhaps if we were candid we should confess that the danger that the exe- cutive may be tempted to a disregard of the law may justly be believed greater in America than in countries where the chief magistrate comes to his office without the selection of the people ; and where consequently their vigilance is quickened by a natural distrust.”
Although recent Presidents have shown no disposition to strain their authority, it is still the fashion in America to be jealous of the President’s action, and to warn citizens against what is called “ the one man power.” General Ulysses S. Grant was hardly the man to make himself a tyrant, yet the hostility to a third term of office which moved many people who had not
1 Judge T. M. Cooley, in the International Review for Jan. 1875. He quotes the words of Edward Livingston: “The gloss of zeal for the public service is always spread over acts of oppression, and the people are sometimes made to con- sider that as a brilliant exertion of energy in their favour which, when viewed in its true light, would be found a fatal blow to their rights. In no government is this effect so easily produced as in a free republic ; party spirit, inseparable from its existence, aids the illusion, and a popular leader is allowed in many instances impunity, and sometimes rewarded with applause, for acts which would make a tyrant tremble on his throne,”
64 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
been alienated by the faults of his administration, rested not merely on reverence for the example set by Washington, but also on the fear that.a President repeatedly chosen would be- come dangerous to republican institutions. This particular alarm seems to a European groundless. I do not deny that a really great man might exert ampler authority from the presi- dential chair than its recent occupants have done. The same observation applies to the Popedom and even to the English throne. The President has a position of immense dignity, an unrivalled platform from which to impress his ideas (if he has any) upon the people. But it is hard to imagine a President overthrowing the existing Constitution. He has no standing army, and he cannot create one. Congress can checkmate him by stopping supplies. There is no aristocracy to rally round him. Every State furnishes an independent centre of resistance. If he were to attempt a coup d'état, it could only be by appealing to the people against Congress, and Congress could hardly, con- sidering that it is re-elected every two years, attempt to oppose the people. One must suppose a condition bordering on civil war, and the President putting the resources of the executive at
the service of one of the intending belligerents, already strong —
and organized, in order to conceive a case in which he will be formidable to freedom. If there be any danger, it would seem to lie in another direction. The larger a community becomes the less does it seem to respect an assembly, the more is it attracted by an individual man. A bold President who knew himself to be supported by a majority in the country, might be tempted to override the law, and deprive the minority of the protection which the law affords it. He might be a tyrant, not against the masses, but with the masses. But nothing in the present state of American politics gives weight to such appre- hensions.
1 Assuming his conduct to be such as to warrant this extreme step, to which Congress is loth to resort, for the reasons stated in Chapter XX. post. Contests between Congress and the President have tended to take the form of attaching riders to appropriation bills.
ie
CHAPTER VII OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY
ALTHOUGH the President has been, not that independent good citizen whom the framers of the Constitution contemplated, but, at least during the last sixty years, a party man, seldom much above the average in character or abilities, the office has attained the main objects for which it was created. Such mistakes as have been made in foreign policy, or in the conduct of the administrative departments, have been rarely owing to the constitution of the office or to the errors of its holder. This is more than one who should review the history of Europe during the last hundred years could say of any European monarchy. Nevertheless, the faults chargeable on hereditary kingship, faults more serious than Englishmen, who have watched with admiration the wisdom of the Crown during the present reign, can easily realize, must not make us overlook certain defects incidental to the American presidency, perhaps to any plan of vesting the headship of the State in a person elected for a limited period.
In a country where there is no hereditary throne nor hereditary aristocracy, an office raised far above all other oftices offers too great a stimulus to ambition. This glittering prize, always dangling before the eyes of prominent statesmen, has a power stronger than any dignity under a European crown to lure them (as it lured Clay and Webster) from the path of straight- forward consistency. One who aims at the presidency—and all prominent politicians do aim at it—has the strongest possible motives to avoid making enemies. Nowa great statesman ought to be prepared to make enemies. It is one thing to try to be popular—an unpopular man will be uninfluential—it is another to seek popularity by pleasing every section of your party. This is the temptation of presidential aspirants.
A second defect is that the presidential election, occurring once
VOL. I F
66 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
in four years, throws the country for several months into a state of turmoil, for which there may be no occasion. Perhaps there are no serious party issues to be decided, perhaps the best thing would be that the existing Administration should pursue the even tenor of its way. The Constitution, however, requires an election to be held, so the whole costly and complicated machinery of agitation is_put in motion; and if issues do not exist, they have to be created.! Professional politicians who have a personal interest in the result, because it involves the gain or loss of office to themselves, conduct what is called a “campaign,” and the country is forced into a factitious excitement from midsummer, when each party selects the candidate whom it will nominate, to the first week of November, when the contest is decided. There is some political education in the process, but it is bought dearly, not to add that business, and especially finance, is disturbed, and much money spent unproductively.
Again, these regularly recurring elections produce a discontin- uity of policy. Even when the new President belongs to the same party as his predecessor, he usually nominates a new cabinet, having to reward his especial supporters. Many of the inferior offices are changed ; men who have learned their work make way for others who have everything to learn. If the new President belongs to the opposite party, the change of officials is far more sweeping, and involves larger changes of policy. The evil would be more serious were it not that in foreign policy, where the need for continuity is greatest, the United States have little to do, and that the co-operation of the Senate in this department prevents the divergence of the ideas of one President from those of another from being so wide as it might otherwise be.
Fourthly. The fact that he is re-eligible once, but (practically) only once, operates unfavourably on the President. He is tempted to play his cards for a renomination by so pandering to active sections of his own party, or so using his patronage to conciliate influential politicians, as to make them put him forward at the next election. On the other hand, if he is in his second
1 In England, also, there is necessarily a campaign once at least in every six or seven years, when a general election takes place, and sometimes oftener. But note that in England (1) this is the only season of disturbance, whereas in America the Congressional elections furnish a second ; (2) the period is usually shorter (three to six weeks, not four months) ; (3) there have usually been real
and momentous issues, dividing the great parties, which the nation had to settle.
CHAP. VII OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY 67
term of office, he has no longer much motive to regard the interests of the nation at large, because he sees that his own . political death is near. It may be answered that these two evils will correct one another, that the President will in his first term be anxious to win the respect of the nation, in his second he will have no motive for yielding to the unworthy pressure of party wire-pullers.
But the fact is, as has been pointed out by some foreign observers, that if he were held ineligible for the next term, but eligible for any future term, both sets of evils might be avoided, and both sets of ~benefits secured. The argument against such a provision would be that it makes that breach in policy which may now happen only once in eight years, necessarily happen once in four years. It would, for instance, have prevented the re-election of Abraham Lincoln in 1864.1. The founders of the Southern Confederacy of 1861-65 were so much impressed by the objections to the present system that they provided that their President should hold office for six years, but not be re-eligible.
Fifthly. An outgoing President is a weak President. During the four months of his stay in office after his successor has been chosen, he declines, except in cases of extreme necessity, to take any new departure, to embark on any executive policy which cannot be completed before he quits office. This is, of course, even more decidedly the case if his successor belongs to the opposite party.”
Lastly. The result of an election may be doubtful, not from equality of votes, for this is provided against, but from a dispute as to the validity of votes given in or reported from the States. This difficulty arose in 1876, between Mr. Hayes and Mr. Tilden,
1 A more obvious and practically sufficient answer is that it would need the passing of an amendment to the Constitution, and it needs a very strong case to
induce three-fourths of the States to agree to change this time-honoured document.
2 Mr. E. A. Freeman (History of Federal Government, i. 302) adduces from Polybius (iv. 6, 7) a curious instance showing that the same mischief arose in the Achaian League: ‘‘ The Avtolians chose for an inroad the time when the official vear (of the Achaian General) was drawing to its close, as a time when the Achaian counsels were sure to be weak. Aratos, the General elect, was not yet in office ; Timoxenos, the outgoing General, shrank from energetic action so late in his year, and at last yielded up his office to Aratos before the legal time.” This effort of Timoxenos to escape from the consequences of the system could not have occurred in governments like those of Rome, England, or the United States, where “the reign of law” is far stricter than it was in the Greek republics.
68 - ‘THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
disclosing the existence of a set of cases for which the Constitution had not provided. It will not recur in quite the same form, for provision has now been made by statute for dealing with disputed returns! But cases may arise in which the returns from a State of its electoral votes will, because notoriously obtained by fraud or force, fail to be recognized as valid by the party whose candidate they prejudice. No presidential election passes without charges of this kind, and these charges are not always unfounded. Should manifest unfairness coincide with popular excitement over a really important issue,? the self-control of the people, which has hitherto restrained, as it did in 1877, the party passions of their leaders, may prove unequal to the strain such a crisis would put upon it.
Further observations on the President, as a part of the machinery of government, will be better reserved for the dis- cussion of the relations of the executive and legislative depart- ments. I will therefore only observe here that, even when we allow for the defects last enumerated, the presidential office, if not one of the conspicuous successes of the American Constitution, is nowise to be deemed a failure. The problem of constructing a stable executive in a democratic country is so immensely difficult that anything short of a failure deserves to be called a success. Now the President has, during ninety-nine years, carried on the internal administrative business of the nation with due efficiency. Once or twice, as when Jefferson purchased Louisiana, and Lincoln emancipated the slaves in the revolted States, he has courageously ventured on stretches of authority, held at the time to be doubtfully constitutional, yet necessary, and approved by the judgment of posterity. He has kept the machinery working quietly and steadily when Congress has been distracted by party strife, or paralyzed by the dissensions of the two Houses, or enfeebled by the want of first-rate leaders. The executive has been able, at moments of peril, to rise into a dictatorship, as during the War of Secession, and when peace returned, to sink back into its proper constitutional position. It has shown no tendency so to dwarf the other authorities of the State as to pave the way for a monarchy.
1 See above, p. 45.
2 It was a piece of singular good fortune that the contest between Tilden and
Hayes was only a contest between persons, between office-holders and office-
seekers, and that no really grave political issue, heating the public mind, was involved,
a
CHAP. VII OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY 69
Europeans are struck by the faults of a plan which plunges the nation into a whirlpool of excitement once every four years, and commits the headship of the State to a party leader chosen for a short period.1 But there is another aspect in which the presidential election may be regarded, and one whose importance is better appreciated in America than in Europe. The election is a solemn periodical appeal to the nation to review its condition, the way in which its business has been carried on, the conduct of the two great parties. It stirs and rouses the nation as nothing else does, forces every one not merely to think about public affairs but to decide how he judges the parties. It is a direct expression of the will of ten millions of voters, a force before which everything must bow. It refreshes the sense of national duty ; and at great crises it intensifies national patriotism. A presidential election is sometimes, as in 1800, and as again most notably in 1860 and 1864, a turning-point in history. In form it is nothing more than the choice of an administrator who cannot influence policy otherwise than by refusing his assent to bills. In reality it is the deliverance of the mind of the people upon all such questions as they feel able to decide. A curious parallel may in this-respect be drawn between it and a general election of the House of Commons in England. A general election is in form a choice of representatives, with reference primarily to their views upon various current questions. In substance it is often a national vote (what the French call a plebiscite), committing executive power to some one prominent statesman. Thus the elections of 1868, 1874, 1880, were practically votes of the nation to place Mr. Gladstone or Mr. Disraeli at the head of the government. So conversely -in America, a presidential election, which purports to be merely the selection of a man, is often in reality a decision upon issues of policy, a condemnation of the course taken by one party, a man- date to the other to follow some different course.
The choice of party leaders as Presidents has in America caused far less mischief than might havé been expected. Never- theless, those who have studied the scheme of constitutional monarchy as it works in England, or Belgium, or Italy, or the
1 Such faults as belong to the plan of popular election are not necessarily incident to the existence of a President ; for in France the chief magistrate is chosen by the Chambers, and the interposition between him and the legislature of a responsible ministry serves to render his position less distinctly partisan,
70 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART J
reproductions of that scheme in British colonies, where the Crown-appointed governor stands outside the strife of factions as a permanent official, will, when they compare the institutions of these countries with the American presidency, be impressed by the merits of a plan which does not unite all the dignity of office with all the power of office, and which, by placing the titular chief of the executive above and apart from party, makes the civil and military services feel themselves the servants rather of the nation than of any section of the nation, and suggests to them that their labours ought to be rendered with equal hearti- ness to whatever party may hold the reins of government. Party government may be necessary. So far as we can see, it is necessary. But it is a necessary evil; and whatever tends to diminish its mischievous influence upon the machinery of admin- istration, and to prevent it from obtruding itself upon foreign states ; whatever holds up a high ideal of devotion to the nation as a majestic whole, living on from century to century while parties form and dissolve and form again, strengthens and en- nobles the commonwealth and all its citizens.
Such an observation of course applies only to monarchy as a political institution. Socially regarded, the American presidency deserves nothing but admiration. The President is simply the first citizen of a free nation, depending for his dignity on no title, no official dress, no insignia of state. It was originally pro- posed, doubtless in recollection of the English Commonwealth of the seventeenth century, to give him the style of “ Highness,” and “Protector of the Liberties of the United States.” Others suggested “Excellency” ;1 and Washington is said to have had leanings to the Dutch style of “High Mightiness.” The head of the ruling President does not appear on coins, nor even on post- age stamps.? His residence at Washington called officially “the Executive Mansion,” and familiarly “the White House,” a build- ing with a stucco front and a portico supported by Doric pillars, said to have been modelled upon the Duke of Leinster’s house in Dublin, stands in a ‘shrubbery, and has the air of a.large suburban villa rather than of a palace. The rooms, though
1 Tn ridicule of this the more democratic members of Congress proposed to call that more ornamental than useful officer the Vice-President “His Superfluous Excellency.”
2 The portraits on American postage stamps are those of eminent past Presi-
dents—such as Washington, Jefferson, Lincoln, Grant, Garfield, and of a few famous statesmen, such as Benjamin Franklin and Alexander Hamilton,
KET ‘s
CHAP. VII OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY 71
spacious, are not spacious enough for the crowds that attend the public receptions. The President’s salary, which is only $50,000 (£10,000) a year, does not permit display, nor indeed is display expected from him.
Washington, which even so lately as the days of the war was a wilderness of mud and negroes, with a few big houses scattered here and there, has now become one of the handsomest capitals in the world, and cultivates the graces and pleasures of life with eminent success. Besides its political society and its diplomatic society, it is becoming a winter resort for men of wealth and leisure from all over the continent. It is a place where a court might be created, did any one wish to create it. No President has made the attempt; and as the earlier career of the chief magistrate and his wife has seldom qualified them to lead the world of fashion, none is likely to make it. However, the action of the wife of President Hayes, an estimable and energetic lady, whose ardent advocacy of temperance caused the formation of a great many total abstinence societies, called by her name (Lucy Webb), showed that there may be fields in which a President’s consort can turn her exalted position to good account, while of course such graces or charms as she possesses will tend to increase his popularity.
To a European observer, weary of the slavish obsequiousness and lip-deep adulation with which the members of reigning families are treated on the eastern side of the Atlantic, fawned on in public and carped at in private, the social relations of an American President to his people are eminently refreshing. There is a great respect for the office, and a corresponding respect for the man as the holder of the office, if he has done nothing to degrade it. There is no servility, no fictitious self- abasement on the part of the citizens, but a simple and hearty deference to one who represents the majesty of the nation, the sort of respect which the proudest Roman paid to the consulship, even if the particular consul was, like Cicero, a “new man.” The curiosity of the visitors who throng the White House on reception days is sometimes too familiar ; but this fault tends to disappear, and Presidents have now more reason to complain of the persecutions they endure from an incessantly observant journalism. After oscillating between the ceremonious state of George Washington, who drove to open Congress in his coach and six, with outriders and footmen in livery, and the osten-
72 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
tatious plainness of Citizen Jefferson, who rode up alone and hitched his horse to the post at the gate, the President has settled down into an attitude between that of the mayor of a great English town on a public occasion, and that of a European cabinet minister on a political tour. He is followed about and féted, and in every way treated as the first man in the company ; but the spirit of equality which rules the country has sunk too deep into every American nature for him to expect to be addressed with bated breath and whispering reverence. He has no military guard, no chamberlains or grooms-in-waiting; his everyday life is simple; his wife enjoys precedence over all other ladies, but is visited and received just like other ladies ; he is surrounded by no such pomp and enforces no such etiquette as that which belongs to the governors even of second-class English colonies, not to speak of the viceroys of India and Treland.
It begins to be remarked in Europe that monarchy, which used to be deemed politically dangerous but socially useful, has now, siuce its claws have been cut, become politically valuable, _ but of more doubtful social utility. In the United States the most suspicious democrat—and there are democrats who com- plain that the office of President is too monarchical—cannot accuse the chief magistracy of having tended to form a court, much less to create those evils which thrive in the atmosphere of European courts. No President dare violate social decorum as European sovereigns have so often done. If he did, he would be the first to suffer.
CHAPTER VIII WHY GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN PRESIDENTS
EUROPEANS often ask, and Americans do not always explain, how it happens that this great office, the greatest in the world, unless we except the Papacy, to which any man can rise by his own merits, is not more frequently filled by great and striking men? In America, which is beyond all other countries the country of a “career open to talents,” a country, moreover, in which political life is unusually keen and political ambition widely diffused, it might be expected that the highest place would always be won by a man of brilliant gifts. But since the heroes of the Revolution died out with Jefferson and Adams and Madison some sixty years ago, no person except General Grant has reached the chair whose name would have been remembered had he not been President, and no President except Abraham Lincoln has displayed rare or striking qualities in the chair. Who now knows or cares to know anything about the personality of James K. Polk or Franklin Pierce? The only thing remark- able about them is that being so commonplace they should have climbed so high.
Several reasons may be suggested for the fact, which Ameri- cans are themselves the first to admit.
One is that the proportion of first-rate ability drawn into politics is smaller in America than in most European countries. This is a phenomenon whose causes must be elucidated later : in the meantime it is enough to say that in France and Italy, where half-revolutionary conditions have made public life excit- ing and accessible; in Germany, where an admirably-organized civil service cultivates and develops statecraft with unusual suc- cess; in England, where many persons of wealth and leisure seek to enter the political arena, while burning questions touch the interests of all classes and make men eager observers of the
74 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
combatants, the total quantity of talent devoted to parliamentary or administrative work is far larger, relatively to the population, than in America, where much of the best ability, both for thought and for action, for planning and for executing, rushes into a field which is comparatively narrow in Europe, the busi- ness of developing the material resources of the country.
Another is that the methods and habits of Congress, and indeed of political life generally, seem to. give fewer opportunities for personal distinction, fewer modes in which a man may com- mend himself to his countrymen by eminent capacity in thought, in speech, or in administration, than is the case in the free countries of Europe. This is a point to be explained in later chapters. I merely note here in passing what will there be dwelt on.
A third reason is that eminent men make more enemies, and give those enemies more assailable points, than obscure men do. They are therefore in so far less desirable candidates. It is true that the eminent man has also made more friends, that his name is more widely known, and may be greeted with louder cheers. Other things being equal, the famous man is preferable. But other things never are equal. The famous man has pro- bably attacked some leaders in his own party, has supplantéd others, has expressed his dislike to the crotchet of some active section, has perhaps committed errors which are capable of being magnified into offences. No man stands long before the public and bears a part in great affairs without giving openings to cen- sorious criticism. Fiercer far than the light which beats upon a throne is the light which beats upon a presidential candidate, searching out all the recesses of his past life. Hence, when the choice lies between a brilliant man and a safe man, the safe man is preferred. Party feeling, strong enough to carry in on its back a man without conspicuous positive merits, is not always strong enough to procure forgiveness for a man with positive faults.
A European finds that this phenomenon needs in its turn to be explained, for in the free countries of Europe brilliancy, be it eloquence in speech, or some striking achievement in war or administration, or the power through whatever means of some- how impressing the popular imagination, is what makes a leader triumphant. Why should it be otherwise in America? Because in America party loyalty and party organization have been
CHAP. vilI WHY GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN | 75
hitherto so perfect that any one put forward by the party will get the full party vote if his character is good and his “record,” as they call it, unstained. The safe candidate may not draw in quite so many votes from the moderate men of the other side as the brilliant one would, but he will not lose nearly so ‘many from his own ranks. Even those who admit his medi- ocrity will vote straight when the moment for voting comes. Besides, the ordinary American voter does not object to medi- ocrity. He has a lower conception of the qualities requisite to make a statesman than those who direct public opinion in Europe have. He likes his candidate to be sensible, vigorous, and, above all, what he calls “magnetic,” and does not value, because he sees no need for, originality or profundity, a fine culture or a wide knowledge. Candidates are selected to be run for nomination by knots of persons who, however expert as party tacticians, are usually commonplace men; and the choice between those selected for nomination is made by a very large body, an assembly of over eight hundred delegates from the local party organizations over the country, who are certainly no better than ordinary citizens. How this process works will be seen more fully when I come to speak of those Nominating Conventions which are so notable a feature in American politics.
It must also be remembered that the merits of a President are one thing and those of a candidate another thing. An eminent American is reported to have said to friends who wished to put him forward, “Gentlemen, let there be no mistake. I should make a good President, but a very bad candidate.” Now to a party it is more important that its nominee should be a good candidate than that he should turn out a good President. A nearer danger is a greater danger. As Saladin says in The Talisman, “ A wild cat in a chamber is more dangerous than a lion in a distant desert.” It will be a misfortune to the party, as well as to the country, if the candidate elected should prove a bad President. But it is a greater misfortune to the party that it should be beaten in the impending election, for the evil of losing national patronage will have come four years sooner. ““B” (so reason the leaders), ‘who is one of our possible candi- dates, may be an abler man than A, who is the other. But we have a better chance of winning with A than with B, while X, the candidate of our opponents, is anyhow no better than A. We must therefore run A.” This reasoning is all the more
76 ; THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1 |
forcible because the previous career of the possible candidates has generally made it easier to say who will succeed as a candi- date than who will succeed as a President; and because the wire-pullers with whom the choice rests are better judges of the former question than of the latter.
After all, too, and this is a point much less obvious to Euro- peans than to Americans, a President need not be a man of brilliant intellectual gifts. Englishmen, imagining him as some- thing like their prime minister, assume that he ought to be a dazzling orator, able to sway legislatures or multitudes, pos- sessed also of the constructive powers that can devise a great policy or frame a comprehensive piece of legislation. They for- get that the President does not sit in Congress, that he ought not to address meetings, except on ornamental and (usually) non- political occasions, that he cannot submit bills nor otherwise influence the action of the legislature. His main duties are to be prompt and firm in securing the due execution of the laws and maintaining the public peace, careful and upright in the choice of the executive officials of the country. Eloquence, whose value is apt to be overrated in all free countries, imagination, profundity of thought or extent of knowledge, are all in so far a gain to him that they make him a bigger man, and help him to gain a greater influence over the nation, an influence which, if he be a true patriot, he may use for its good. But they are not necessary for the due dis- charge in ordinary times of the duties of his post. A man may lack them and yet make an excellent President. Four-fifths of his work is the same in kind as that which devolves on the chairman of a commercial company or the manager of a rail- way, the work of choosing good subordinates, seeing that they attend to their business, and taking a sound practical view of such administrative questions as require his decision. Firmness, common sense, and most of all, honesty, an honesty above all suspicion of personal interest, are the qualities which the country chiefly needs in its chief magistrate.
So far we have been considering personal merits. But in the selection of a candidate many considerations have to be regarded besides personal merits, whether they be the merits of a candi- date, or of a possible President. The chief of these considera- tions is the amount of support which can be secured from different States or from different regions, or, as the Americans say, “sections,” of the Union. State feeling and sectional feel-
as
‘CHAP, VIII WHY GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN il
ing are powerful factors in a presidential election. The North- west, including the States from Indiana to Minnesota, is now the most populous region of the Union, and therefore counts for most in an election. It naturally conceives that its interests will be best protected by one who knows them from birth and residence. Hence prima facie a North-western man makes the best candidate. A large State casts a heavier vote in the elec- tion ; and every State is of course more likely to be carried by one of its own children than by a stranger, because his fellow- citizens, while they feel honoured by the choice, gain also a ' substantial advantage, having a better prospect of such favours as the administration can bestow. Hence, cwteris paribus, a man from a large State is preferable as a candidate. New York casts thirty-six votes in the presidential election, Pennsylvania thirty, Ohio twenty-three, Illinois twenty-two, while Vermont and Rhode Island have but four, Delaware, Nevada, and Oregon only three votes each. It is therefore, parties being usually very evenly balanced, better worth while to have an inferior candidate from one of the larger States, who may carry the whole weight of his State with him, than a somewhat superior candidate from one of the smaller States, who will carry only three or four votes. The problem is further complicated by the fact that some States are already safe for one or other party, while others are doubtful. The North-western and New England States are most of them certain to go Republican: the Southern States are (at present) all of them certain to go Democratic. It is more important to gratify a doubtful State than one you have got already; and hence, ceteris paribus, a candidate from a doubtful State, such as New York or Indiana, is to be preferred.
Other minor disqualifying circumstances require less explana- tion. A Roman Catholic, or an avowed dishbeliever in Chris- tianity, would be an undesirable candidate. Since the close of the Civil War, any one who fought, especially if he fought with distinction, in the Northern army, has enjoyed great advantages, for the soldiers of that army, still numerous, rally to his name. The two elections of General Grant, who knew nothing of politics, and the fact that his influence survived the faults of his long administration, are the best evidence of the weight of this consideration. It told heavily in favour of both Hayes and Garfield. Similarly a person who fought in the Southern army would be a bad candidate, for he might alienate the North,
78 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
On a railway journey in the Far West in 1883 I fell in with two newspaper men from the State of Indiana, who were taking their holiday. The conversation turned on the next presidential election. They spoke hopefully of the chances for nomination
by their party of an Indiana man, a comparatively obscure |
person, whose name I had never heard. I expressed some surprise that he should be thought of. They observed that he had done well in State politics, that there was nothing against him, that Indiana would work for him. “But,” I rejoined, “ought you not to have a man of more commanding character. There is Senator A. Everybody tells me that he is the shrewd- est and most experienced man in your party, and that he has a perfectly clean record. Why not run him?” “Why, yes,” they answered, “that is all true. But you see he comes from a small State, and we have got that State already. Besides, he wasn’t in the war. Our man was. Indiana’s vote is worth having, and if our man is run, we can carry Indiana.”
“Surely the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill, but time and chance happeneth to them all.”
These secondary considerations do not always prevail.  In- tellectual ability and force of character must influence the choice of a candidate, and their influence is sometimes decisive. They count for more when times are so critical that the need for a strong man is felt. Reformers declare that their weight will go on increasing as the disgust of good citizens with the methods of professional politicians increases. But for many generations past it is not the greatest men in the Roman Church that have been chosen Popes, nor the most brilliant men in the Anglican Church that have been appointed Archbishops of Canterbury.
Although several Presidents have survived their departure from office by many years, only one, John Quincy Adams, has played a part in politics after quitting the White House.) It may be that the ex-President has not been a great leader before his accession to office; it may be that he does not care to exert himself after he has held and dropped the great prize, and found
1 J. Q. Adams was elected to the House of Representatives within three years from his presidency, and there became for seventeen years the fearless and formidable advocate of what may be called the national theory of the Constitu- tion against the slaveholders. ;
CHAP. VI | WHY GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN 79
(one may safely add) how little of a prize it is. Something, however, must also be ascribed to other features of the political system of the country. It is often hard to find a vacancy in the representation of a given State through which to re-enter Congress ; it is disagreeable to recur to the arts by which seats are secured. Past greatness is rather an encumbrance than a help to resuming a political career. Exalted power, on which the unsleeping eye of hostile critics was fixed, has probably dis- closed all a President’s weaknesses, and has either forced him to make enemies by disobliging adherents, or exposed him to censure for subservience to party interests. He is regarded as having had his day ; he belongs already to the past, and unless, like Grant, he is endeared to the people by the memory of some splendid service, he soon sinks into the crowd or avoids neglect by retirement. Possibly he may deserve to be forgotten; but more frequently he is a man of sufficient ability and character to make the experience he has gained valuable to the country, could it be retained in a place where he might turn it to account. They managed things better at Rome in the days of the republic, gathering into their Senate all the fame and experience, all the wisdom and skill, of those who had ruled and fought as consuls and preetors at home and abroad.
“What shall we do with our ex-Presidents?” is a question often put in America, but never yet answered. ‘The position of a past chief magistrate is not a happy one. He has been a species of sovereign at home. He is received—General Grant was—with almost royal honours abroad. His private income may be insufficient to enable him to live in ease, yet he cannot without loss of dignity, the country’s dignity as well as his own, go back to practice at the bar or become partner in a mercantile firm. If he tries to enter the Senate, it may happen that there is no seat vacant for his own State, or that the majority in the State legislature is against him. It has been suggested that he might be given a seat in that chamber as an extra member ; but to this plan there is the objection that it would give to the State from which he comes a third senator, and thus put other States at a disadvantage. In any case, however, it’ would seem only right to bestow such a pension as would relieve him from the necessity of re-entering business or a profession.
We may now answer the question from which we started. Great men are not chosen Presidents, firstly, because great men
80 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
are rare in politics ; secondly, because the method of choice does not bring them to the top; thirdly, because they are not, in quiet times, absolutely needed. Subsequent chapters will, I hope, further elucidate the matter. Meantime, I may observe that the Presidents, regarded historically, fall into three periods, the second inferior to the first, the third rather better than the second.
Down till the election of Andrew Jackson in 1828, all the Presidents had been statesmen in the European sense of the word, men of education, of administrative experience, of a certain largeness of view and dignity of character. All except the first two had served in the great office of secretary of state; all were well known to the nation from the part they had played. In the second period, from Jackson till the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861, the Presidents were either mere politicians, such as Van Buren, Polk, or Buchanan, or else successful soldiers,} such as Harrison or Taylor, whom their party found useful as figure-heads. They were intellectual pigmies beside the real leaders of that generation—Clay, Calhoun, and Webster. A new series begins with Lincoln in 1861. He and General Grant his successor, who cover sixteen years between them, belong to the history of the world. The other less distinguished Presidents of this period contrast favourably with the Polks and Pierces of the days before the war, but they are not, like the early Presidents, the first men of the country. If we compare the eighteen Presidents who have been elected to office since 1789 with the nineteen English prime ministers of the same hundred years, there are but six of the latter, and at least eight of the former whom history calls personally insignificant, while only Washington, Jefferson, Lincoln, and Grant can claim to belong to a front rank represented in the English list by seven or possibly eight names.? It would seem that the natural selec- tion of the English parliamentary system, even as modified by the aristocratic habits of that country, has more tendency to bring the highest gifts to the highest place than the more artificial selection of America.
1 Jackson himself was something of both politician and soldier, a strong character, but a narrow and uncultivated intellect.
2 The American average would be further lowered were we to reckon in the four Vice-Presidents who have succeeded on the death of the President. Yet the English system does not always secure men personally eminent. Addington, Perceval, and Lord Goderich are no bigger than Tyler or Fillmore, which is saying little enough,
CHAPTER IX THE CABINET
THERE is in the government of the United States no such thing as a Cabinet in the English sense of the term. But I use the term, not only because it is current in America to describe the chief ministers of the President, but also because it calls atten- tion to the remarkable difference which exists between the great officers of State in America and the similar officers in the free countries of Europe.
Almost the only reference in the Constitution to the ministers of the President is that contained in the power given him to “require the opinion in writing of the principal officer in each of the executive departments upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices.” All these departments have been created by Acts of Congress. Washington began in 1789 with four only, at the head of whom were the following four officials :—
Secretary of State. Secretary of the Treasury. Secretary of War. Attorney-General.
In 1798 there was added a Secretary of the Navy, in 1829 a Postmaster-General,! and in 1849 a Secretary of the Interior. These seven now make up what is called the Cabinet.2 Each
1 The postmaster-general had been previously deemed a subordinate in the Treasury department, although the office was organized by Act of Congress in 1794; he has been held to belong to the cabinet since Jackson in 1829 invited. him to cabinet meetings. :
2 There is also a commissioner of agriculture with a salary of $3000 a year, but his duties are confined to the collection and publication of information, and to the “ procuring and distributing of new and valuable seeds and plants.” And an Inter-state Coramerce Commission, with powers over railways, was created in February 1887 by Act of Congress.
VOL. I G
x
82 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT — PART 1
receives a salary of $8000 dollars (£1600). All are appointed by the President, subject to the consent of the Senate (which is _ practically never refused), and may be removed by the President alone. Nothing marks them off from any other officials who might be placed in charge of a department, except that they are summoned by the President to his private council.
None of them can vote in Congress, Art. xi. § 6 of the Con stitution providing that “no person holding any office under the United States shall be a member of either House during his con- tinuance in office.”
This restriction was intended to prevent the President not merely from winning over individual members of Congress by the allurements of office, but also from making his ministers agents in corrupting or unduly influencing the representatives of the people, as George III. and his ministers corrupted the English Parliament. ‘There is a passage in the Federalist (Letter xl.) which speaks of “Great Britain, where so great a proportion of the members are elected by so small a proportion of the people, where the electors are so corrupted by the representatives, and the representatives so corrupted by the. Crown.” The Fahters of the Constitution were so resolved to avert this latter form of corruption that they included in the Constitution the provision just mentioned. Its wisdom has sometimes been questioned. But it deserves to be noticed that the Constitution contains nothing to prevent ministers from being present in either House of Congress and addressing it,! as the ministers of the King of Italy or of the French President may do in either chamber of Italy or France.? It is entirely silent on the subject of com- munications between officials (other than the President) and the representatives of the people. In Washington’s days ministers did occasionally speak to Congress, but they soon ceased to do so, and now never appear before any body larger than a com- mittee. We shall presently see how this arrangement, while seeming to defend Congress against presidential intrigue, tends
' In February 1881 a committee of eight senators unanimously reported in favour of a plan to give seats (of course without the right to vote) in both Houses of Congress to cabinet ministers, they to attend on alternate days in the Senate and in the House. The committee recommended that the necessary modification in the rules should be made, adding that they had no doubt of the constitutionality of the proposal. Nothing has so far been done to carry out this report.
2 The Italian ministers usually are members of one or other House. Of course they cannot vote except in the House to which they have been chosen.
CHAP, ‘IX THE CABINET 83
to weaken its legislative efficiency and to embarrass its relations with the executive.
The President has the amplest range of choice for his mini- sters. He usually forms an entirely new cabinet when he enters office, even if he belongs to the same party as his predecessor. He may take, he sometimes does take, men who not only have never sat in Congress, but have not figured in politics at all, who may never have sat in a State legislature nor held the humblest office. For instance, in 1869 President Grant offered the post of secretary of the treasury to Mr. A. T. Stewart, the owner of a gigantic dry goods warehouse in New York, who had never so much as made a political speech.1 Generally of course the per- sons chosen have already made for themselves a position of at least local importance. Often they are those to whom the new President owes his election, or to whose influence with the party he looks for support in his policy.2, Sometimes they have been his most prominent competitors for the party nominations. Thus Mr. Lincoln in 1860 appointed Mr. Seward and Mr. Chase to be
his secretary of state and secretary of the treasury respectively,
they being the two men who had come next after him in the selection by the Republican party of a presidential candidate. The most dignified place in the cabinet is that of the Secre- tary of State. It is the great prize often bestowed on the man to whom the President is chiefly indebted for his election, or at any rate on one of the leaders of the party. In early days, it was regarded as the stepping-stone to the presidency. Jeffer- son, Madison, Monroe, and J. Q. Adams had all served as secre-
' taries to preceding presidents. The conduct of foreign affairs is
the chief duty of the State department: its head has therefore a larger stage to play on than any other minister, and more chances of fame. His personal importance is all the greater because the
1 The nomination was withdrawn because it was discovered that Mr. Stewart, being engaged in business, was ineligible by statute.
2 In Mr. Cleveland’s cabinet, formed in 1885, the secretary of state had been for sixteen years a senator, and recognized as one of the leaders of his party ; the secretary of the treasury was a leading politician in New York State who had never sat in Congress; the secretary of war had been a judge of the supreme court of Massachusetts, and candidate for the governorship of that State; the secretary of the navy was a lawyer, and a prominent politician in New York ; the secretary of the interior had sat in the House of Representatives, and had been for nine years a senator ; the postmaster-general was a lawyer practising in Wisconsin, and a political leader there ; the attorney-general had been governor of his State, and (for eight years) a senator.
¢
84 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART J
President is usually so much absorbed by questions of patronage as to be forced to leave the secretary to his own devices. Hence the foreign policy of the administration is practically that of the secretary, except so far as the latter is controlled by the Senate, and especially by the chairman of its committee on Foreign Relations. The State department has also the charge of the great seal of the United States, keeps the archives, publishes the statutes, and of course instructs and controls the diplomatic and consular services. It is often said of the President that he is ruled, or as the Americans express it, “run,” by his secretary ; but naturally this happens only when the secretary is the stronger or more experienced man, and in the same way it has been said of Presidents before now that they were, like sultans, ruled by their wives, or by their boon companions.
The Secretary of the Treasury is minister of finance. His function was of the utmost importance at the beginning of the government, when a national system of finance had to be built up and the Federal Government rescued from its grave embarrass- ments. Hamilton, who then held the office, effected both. During the War of Secession, it became again powerful, owing to the enormous loans contracted and the quantities of paper money issued, and it remains so now, because it has the manage- ment (so far as Congress permits) of the currency and the national debt. The secretary has, however, by no means the same range of action as a finance minister in European countries, for as he is excluded from Congress, although he regularly reports to it, he has nothing directly to do with the imposition of taxes, and very little with the appropriation of revenue to the various burdens of the State.
The Secretary of the Interior is far from being the omni- present power which a minister of the interior is in France or Italy, or even a Home Secretary in England, since nearly all the functions which these officials discharge belong in America to the State governments or to the organs of local government. He is chiefly occupied in the management of the public lands, still of immense value, despite the lavish grants made to railway companies, and with the conduct of Indian affairs, a troublesome and unsatisfactory department, which has always been a reproach
1 See post, chapter on Congressional Finance, where it will be shown that the. chairmen of the committees of Ways and Means and of Appropriations are prac- tically additional ministers of finance.
CHAP. 1x | THE CABINET 85
to the United States, and will apparently continue so till the Indians themselves disappear or become civilized. Patents and _ pensions, the latter a source of great expense and abuse, also belong to his province.
The duties of the Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Navy, and the Postmaster-General may be gathered from their names. But the Attorney-General is sufficiently different from his English prototype to need a word of explanation. He is not only public prosecutor and standing counsel for the United States, but also to some extent what is called on the European continent a minister of justice. He has a general oversight—it ean hardly be described as a control—of the Federal judicial departments, and especially of the prosecuting officers called dis- trict attorneys, and executive court officers, called United States marshals. He is the legal adviser of the President in those delicate questions, necessarily frequent under the Constitution of the United States, which arise as to the limits of the executive power and the relations of Federal to State authority, and generally in all legal matters. His opinions are frequently pub- lished officially, as a justification of the President’s conduct, and _ an indication of the view which the executive takes of its legal
position and duties in a pending matter.1 The attorney-general is always a lawyer of some position, but not necessarily in the front rank of the profession, for political considerations have much to do with determining the President’s choice.”
It will be observed that from this list of ministerial offices several are wanting which exist in Europe. Thus there is no colonial minister, because no colonies ; no minister of education, because that department of business belongs to the several States ;* no minister of public worship, because the United States Government has nothing to do with any particular form of religion ; no minister of commerce, because the activity of the Federal Government in that direction, although increasing, is - still limited; no minister of public works, because grants made for this purpose come direct from Congress without. the inter-
1 Another variance from the practice of England, where the opinions of the law officers of the Crown are always treated as confidential.
2 The solicitor-general is a sort of assistant to the attorney, and not (as in England) a colleague.
3 There was established twenty years ago a Bureau of Education, attached to the department of the Interior, but its function is only to collect and diffuse in- formation on educational subjects. This it does with assiduity and success.
86 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
vention of the executive, and are applied as Congress directs.! Much of the work which in Europe would devolve on members of the administration falls in America to committees of Congress, especially to committees of the House of Representatives. This happens particularly as regards taxation, public works, and the management of the Territories, for each of which matters there exists a committee in both Houses. ‘The well-meant attempt of the founders of the Constitution to keep the legislative and executive departments distinct has resulted in leading the legis- lature to interfere with ordinary administration more directly and frequently than European legislatures are wont to do. It interferes by legislation because it is debarred from interfering by interpellation.
The respective positions of the President and his ministers are, as has been already explained, the reverse of those which exist in the constitutional monarchies of Europe. There the sovereign is irresponsible and the minister responsible for the acts which he does in the sovereign’s name. In America the President is responsible because the minister is nothing more than his servant, bound to obey him, and independent of Con- eress. The minister’s acts are therefore legally the acts of the President. Nevertheless the minister is also responsible and liable to impeachment for offences committed in the discharge of his duties.2 The question whether he is, as in England, impeach- able for giving bad advice to the head of the State has never arisen, but upon the general theory of the Constitution it would rather seem that he is not, unless of course his bad counsel should amount to a conspiracy with the President to commit an impeachable offence. In France the responsibility of the Presi- | dent’s ministers does not in theory exclude the responsibility of the President himself, although practically of course it makes a great difference, because he, like the English Crown, chooses ‘ministers supported by a majority in the chambers.
1 Money voted for river. and harbour improvements is voted in sums appro- priated to each particular piece of work. ‘The work is supervised by officers of the Engineer corps of the United States army, under the general direction of the war department. Public buildings are erected under the direction of an official called the supervising architect, who is attached to the treasury department. The
signal service weather bureau is a branch of the war department, the coast survey of the navy department. :
2 Only once has a minister been impeached. He resigned just before the resolution of the House to impeach him was passed, and so was acquitted on the ground of want of jurisdiction.
CHAP, IX. ' THE CABINET 87
The position of a cabinet minister appears to carry with it rather less distinction than in England. Formerly he took pre- cedence of the senators, but now they have established their claim to walk before him on public occasions. The point is naturally of -more importance as regards the wives of the claimants than as regards the claimants themselves.
So much for the ministers taken separately. It remains to consider how an American Administration works as a whole, this being in Europe, and particularly in England, the most peculiar and significant feature of the parliamentary or so-called “ cabinet” system.
; In America the administration does not work as a whole. It
is not a whole. It is a group of persons, each individually dependent on and answerable to the President, but with no joint policy, no collective responsibility.!
When the Constitution was established, and George Wash- ington chosen first President under it, it was intended that the President should be outside and above party, and the method of choosing him by electors was contrived with this very view. Washington belonged to no party, nor indeed, though diverging tendencies were already manifest, had parties yet begun to exist. There was therefore no reason why he should not select his ministers from all sections of opinion. He was the executive magistrate, who had to conduct the administration of the country. _As he was responsible to the nation and not to a majority in Congress, he was not bound to choose persons who agreed with the majority in Congress. As he, and not as in England, the ministry, was responsible for executive acts done, he had to con- sider, not the opinions or associations of his servants, but their capacity and integrity only. Washington chose as secretary of state Thomas Jefferson, already famous as the chief draftsman of the Declaration of Independence, and as attorney-general another Virginian, Edmund Randolph, both men of extreme democratic leanings, disposed to restrict the action of the Federal Govern- ment within narrow limits. For secretary of the treasury he selected Alexander Hamilton of New York, and for secretary of war Henry Knox of Massachusetts. Hamilton was by far the
1 In America people usually speak of the President and his ministers as the ' “administration,” not as the ‘‘ government,” apparently because he and they are not deemed to govern in the European sense. The latter expression does not seem to be very old in England. Thirty years ago people usually said “the ministry” when they now say “the government.”
88 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
ablest man among those who soon came to form the Federalist party, the party which called for a strong executive, and desired to subordinate the States to the central authority. He soon became recognized as its leader. Knox was of the same way of thinking. Dissensions presently arose between Jefferson and Hamilton, ending in open hostility, but Washington retained them both as ministers till Jefferson retired in 1794 and Hamil- ton in 1795. The second ‘President, John Adams, kept on the ministers of his predecessor, being in accord with their opinions, for they and he belonged to the now full-grown Federalist party.
But before he quitted office he had quarrelled with most of them, —
having taken important steps without their knowledge and against their wishes. Jefferson, the third President, was a thorough-going party leader, who naturally chose his ministers from his own political adherents. As all subsequent Presidents have been seated by one or other party, all have felt bound to appoint a party cabinet. Their party expects it from them ; and they naturally prefer to be surrounded and advised by their own friends.
So far, an American cabinet resembles an English one. It is composed exclusively of members of one party. But now mark the differences. The parliamentary system of England and of those countries which like Belgium, Italy, and the self-governing British colonies, have more or less modelled themselves upon England, rests on four principles.
The head of the executive (be he king or governor) is irre- sponsible. Responsibility attaches to the cabinet, i.¢. to the body of ministers who advise him, so that if he errs, it is through their fault ; they suffer and he escapes. The ministers cannot allege, as a defence for any act of theirs, the command of the Crown. If the Crown gives them an order of which they disapprove, they ought to resign.
The ministers sit in the legislature, practically forming in England, as has been observed by the most acute of English con- stitutional writers, a committee of the legislature, chosen by the
majority for the time being. ~The ministers are accountable to the legislature, and must resign office? as soon as they lose its confidence.
The ministers are jointly as well as severally liable for their
1 In England and some other countries (e.g. the self-governing British colonies they have the alternative of dissolving Parliament,
CHAP. Ix THE CABINET 89
acts: 1.¢. the blame of an act done by any of them falls on the whole cabinet, unless one of them chooses to take it entirely on himself and retire from office. Their responsibility is collective.
None of these principles holds true in America. The Presi- dent is personally responsible for his acts, not indeed to Congress, but to the people, by whom he is chosen. No means exist of enforcing this responsibility, except by impeachment, but as his power lasts for four years only, and is much restricted, this is no serious evil. He cannot avoid responsibility by alleging the advice of his ministers, for he is not bound to follow it, and they are bound to obey him or retire. The ministers do not sit in Congress. They are not accountable to it, but to the President, their master. It may request their attendance before a com- mittee, as it may require the attendance of any other witness, but they have no opportunity of expounding and justifying to Congress as a whole their own, or rather their master’s, policy. Hence an adverse vote of Congress does not affect their or his position. If they propose to take a step which requires money, and Congress refuses the requisite appropriation, the step cannot be taken. But a dozen votes of censure will neither compel them to resign nor oblige the President to pause in any line of conduct which is within his constitutional rights. This, how- ever strange it may seem to a European, is a necessary con- sequence of the fact that the President, and by consequence his cabinet, do not derive their authority from Congress. Suppose (as befel in 1878-9) a Republican President, with a Democratic majority in both Houses of Congress. The President, unless of course he is convinced that the nation has changed its mind since it elected him, is morally bound to follow out the policy which he professed as a candidate, and which the majority of the nation must be held in electing him to have approved. That policy is, however, opposed to the views of the present majority of Con- gress. They are quite right to check him as far as they can. He is quite right to follow out his own views and principles in spite of them so far as the Constitution and the funds at his dis- posal permit. A deadlock may follow. But deadlocks may happen under any system, except that of an omnipotent sove- reign, be he a man or an assembly, the risk of deadlocks being indeed the price which a nation pays for the safeguard of con- stitutional checks.
In this state of things one cannot properly talk of the cabinet
90 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
apart from the President. An American administration re- sembles not so much the cabinets of England and France as the group of ministers who surround the Czar or the Sultan, or who executed the bidding of a Roman emperor like Constantine or Justinian. Such ministers are severally responsible to their master, and are severally called in to counsel him, but they have not necessarily any relations with one another, nor any duty of collective action. So while the President commits each depart- ment to the minister whom the law provides, and may if he ‘chooses leave it altogether to that minister, the executive acts done are his own acts, by which the country will judge him ; and still more is his policy as a whole his own policy, and not the policy of his ministers taken together. The ministers seldom meet. in council, and have comparatively little to settle when they do meet, since they have no parliamentary tactics to con- trive, no bills to prepare, few questions of foreign policy to dis- cuss. They are not a government, as Europeans understand the term; they are a group of heads of departments, whose chief, though he usually consults them separately, is sometimes glad to bring them together in one room for a talk about politics. A significant illustration of the contrast between the English and American systems may be found in the fact that whereas an English king never now sits in his own cabinet,! because if he did he would be deemed accountable for its decisions, an American President always does, because he is accountable, and really needs advice to help him, not to shield him.?
The so-called cabinet is unknown to the statutes as well as to the Constitution of the United States. So is the English cabinet unknown to the law of England. But then the English cabinet is a part, is, in fact, a committee, though no doubt an informal committee, of a body as old as Parliament itself, the Privy Council, or Curia Regis. Of the ancient institutions of England which reappear in the Constitution of the United States, the Privy Council is not one? It may have seemed to the Conven-
1 Queen Anne was the last English sovereign who sat in her own cabinet council, though indeed the cabinet had not yet then become the close body it is now.
2 Another illustration of the contrast may be found in the fact that when the head of one of the seven departments is absent from Washington the under secre- tary of the department is often asked to replace him in the cabinet council.
3 A privy council however appears in the original Constitution of Delaware. (See post, Chapter XXXVII.)
CRAP. IX THE CABINET : 91
tion of 1787 to be already obsolete. Even in England it was then already a belated survival from an earlier order of things, and now it lives on only in its committees, three of which, the Board of Trade, the Education department, and the Agricultural department, serve as branches of the administration, one, the Judicial Committee, is a law court, and one, the Cabinet, is the virtual executive of the nation. The framers of the American Constitution saw its unsuitability to their conditions. It was nominated, while with them a council must have been elective. Its only effect would have been to control the President, but for domestic administration control is scarcely needed, because the President has only to execute the laws, while in foreign affairs and appointments the Senate controls him already. <A third body, over and above the two Houses of Congress, was in fact superfluous. ‘The Senate may appear in some points to resemble the English Privy Council of the seventeenth century, because it advises the executive; but there is all the difference in the world between being advised by those whom you have yourself chosen and those whom election by others forces upon you. So it happens that the relations of the Senate and the President are seldom cordial, much less confidential, even when he and the majority of the Senate belong to the same party, because the Senate and the President are rival powers jealous of one another.
CHAPTER X THE SENATE
THE National Legislature of the United States, called Congress, consists of two bodies, sufficiently dissimilar in composition, ’ powers, and character to require a separate description. Their respective functions bear some resemblance to those of the two Houses of the English Parliament, which had before 1787 sug- gested the creation of a double-chambered legislature in all but three of the original thirteen States of the Confederation. Yet the differences between the Senate and the British House of Lords, and in a less degree between the House of Representa- tives and the British House of Commons, are so considerable that the English reader must be cautioned against applying his English standards to the examination of the American system.! The Senate consists of two persons from each State, who must be inhabitants of that State, and at least thirty years of age. They are elected by the legislature of their State for six years, and are re-eligible. One-third retire every two years, so that the whole body is renewed in a period of six years, the old members being thus at any given moment twice as numerous as the new members elected within the last two years. As there are now thirty-eight States, the number of senators, originally twenty-six, is now seventy-six. This great and unforeseen aug- mentation must be borne in mind when considering the purposes for which the Senate was created, for some of which a small body is fitter than a large one. As there remain only eight Territories? which can be formed into States, the number of +1 “How many bishops have you got in your Upper House ?” is the question
which an eminent Englishman is reported to have asked soon after his arrival in America.
» [reckon in neither the Indian territory, which lies west of Arkansas, nor Alaska, because these districts are not likely within an assignable time to contain a civilized population such as would entitle them to be formed into States,
‘CHAP. x THE SENATE 93
senators will not (unless, indeed, existing States are divided, or more than one State created out of some of the Territories) rise beyond ninety-two. This is of course much below the present nominal strength of the English House of Lords! (about 560), and below that of the French Senate (300), and the Prussian Herrenhaus (432). No senator can hold any office under the United States. The Vice-President of the Union is ea officio president of the Senate, but has no vote, except a casting vote when the numbers are equally divided. Failing him (if, for instance, he dies, or falls sick, or succeeds to the presidency), the Senate chooses one of its number to be president pro tempore. His authority in questions of order is very limited, the decision of such questions being held to belong to the Senate itself.?
The functions of the Senate fall into three classes—legisla- tive, executive, and judicial? Its legislative function is to pass, along with the House of Representatives, bills which become Acts of Congress on the assent of the President, or even without his consent if passed a second time by a two-thirds majority of each House, after he has returned them for reconsideration. Its executive functions are:—(a) To approve or disapprove the President’s nominations of Federal: officers, including judges, ministers of state, and ambassadors. (0) To approve, by a majority of two-thirds of those present, of treaties made by the President—i.e. if less than two-thirds approve, the treaty falls to the ground. Its judicial function is to sit as a court for the trial of impeachments preferred by the House of Representatives.
The most conspicuous, and what was at one time deemed the most important feature of the Senate, is that it represents the several States of the Union as separate commonwealths, and is thus an essential part of the Federal scheme. Every State, be it as great as New York or as small as Delaware, sends two
1 At the accession of George III. the House of Lords numbered only 174 members.
2 The powers of the Lord Chancellor as Speaker of the English House of Lords are much narrower than those of the Speaker in the House of Commons, It is worth notice that asthe Vice-President is not chosen by the Senate, but by the people, and is not strictly speaking a member of the Senate, so the Lord Chancellor is not chosen to preside by the House of Lords, but by the sovereign, and is not necessarily a peer. This, however, seems to be merely a coincidence, and not the result of a wish to imitate England.
3 To avoid prolixity, I do not give in the text all the details of the constitu- tional powers and duties of the Houses of Congress: these will be found in the text of the Constitution printed in the Appendix.
94 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
senators, no more and no less.1 This arrangement was long resisted by the delegates of the larger States in the Convention of 1787, and ultimately adopted because nothing less would reassure the smaller States, who feared to be overborne by the larger. It is now the provision of the Constitution most difficult to change, for “no State can be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate without its consent,” a consent most unlikely to be given. ‘There has never, in point of fact, been any division of interests or consequent contests between the great States and the small ones.2. But the provision for the equal representation of all States had the important result of making the slave-holding party, during the thirty years which preceded the Civil War, eager to extend the area of slavery in order that by creating new Slave States they might maintain at least an equality in the Senate, and thereby prevent any legislation hostile to slavery.
The plan of giving representatives to the States as common- wealths has had several useful results. It has provided a basis for the Senate unlike that on which the other House of Congress is chosen. Every nation which has formed a legislature with two houses has experienced the difficulty of devising methods of choice sufficiently different to give a distinct character to each house. Italy has a Senate composed of persons nominated by the Crown. The Prussian House of Lords is partly nominated, partly hereditary, partly elective. The Spanish senators are partly hereditary, partly official, partly elective. In the Germanic Empire, the Federal Council consists of delegates of the several kingdoms and principalities. France appoints her senators by indirect election. In England the members of the House of Lords now sit by hereditary right ; and those who propose to reconstruct that ancient body are at their wits’ end to discover - some plan by which it may be strengthened, and made practically
1 New York is twice as large as Scotland, and as populous as Scotland, North- umberland, and Durham taken together. Delaware is a little smaller than Norfolk, with about the population of Bedfordshire. It is therefore as if Bed- fordshire had in one House of a British legislature as much weight as all Scotland together with Northumberland and Durham, a state of things not very conform- able to democratic theory. Nevada has now a population about equal to that of Caithness (40,000), but is as powerful in the Senate as New York. This State, which consists of burnt-out mining camps, is really a sort of rotten borough for and controlled by the great “silver men.”
2 Hamilton perceived that this would be so ; see his remarks in the Constitu- tional Convention of New York in 1788.—Elliot’s Debates, p, 213.
A on ae reer al eee te eae 7 et Seer Po Tre ' >t lL a: meee PrP te et “ at ‘ al
in 7 ; 4 ( Ke. 2 : i he or : Wests
oe ee. Se
OMAP. x THE SENATE 95
useful, without such a direct election as that by which members are chosen to the House of Commons.1 The American plan, which is older than any of those in use on the European con- tinent, is also better, because it is not only simple, but natural, a.é. grounded on and consonant with the political conditions of America, It produces a body which is both strong in itself and different in its collective character from the more popular house.
It also constitutes, as Hamilton anticipated, a link between the State Governments and the National Government. It is a part of the latter, but its members derive their title to sit in it from their choice by State legislatures. In one respect this con- nection is no unmixed benefit, for it has helped to make the - national parties powerful, and their strife intense, in these last- named bodies. Every vote in the Senate is so important to the great parties that they are forced to struggle for ascendency in each of the State legislatures by whom the senators are elected. The method of choice in these bodies was formerly left to be fixed by the laws of each State, but as this gave rise to much uncertainty and intrigue, a Federal statute was passed in 1866: providing that each House of a State legislature shall first vote separately for the election of a Federal senator, and that if the choice of both Houses shall not fall on the same person, both Houses in joint meeting shall proceed to a joint vote, amajority of each House being present. Even under this arrangement, a senatorial election often leads to long and bitter struggles; the minority endeavouring to prevent a choice, and so keep the seat vacant. Quite recently in Illinois, Indiana, and New Jersey, the legislatures fought for months together over the election of a senator.
The method of choosing the Senate by indirect election has excited the admiration of foreign critics, who have found in it a sole and sufficient cause of the excellence of the Senate as a legislative and executive authority. I shall presently inquire whether the critics are right. Meantime it is worth observing that the election of senators has in substance almost ceased to be indirect. They are still nominally chosen, as under the letter of the Constitution they must be chosen, by the State legislatures.
1 Under a recent statute, two persons may be appointed by the Crown to sit in the House of Lords as Lords of Appeal, with the dignity of baron for life, The Scotch and Irish peers enjoy hereditary peerages, but are elected to sit in the House of Lords, the latter for life, the former for cach parliament.
96 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
The State legislature means, of course, the party for the time dominant, which holds a party meeting (caucus) and decides on the candidate, who is- thereupon élected, the party going solid for whomsoever the majority has approved. Now the deter- mination of the caucus has almost always been arranged before- hand by the party managers. Sometimes when a vacancy in a senatorship approaches, the aspirants for it put themselves before the people of the State. Their names are discussed at the State party convention held for the nomination of party candidates for State offices, and a vote in that convention decides who shall be the party nominee for the senatorship. This vote binds the party within and without the State legislature, and at the election of members for the State legislature, which immediately precedes the occurrence of the senatorial vacancy, candidates for seats in that legislature are generally expected to declare for which aspirani to the senatorship they will, if elected, give their votes.1 Sometimes the aspirant, who is of course a leading State’ politician, goes on the stump in the interest of those candidates for the legislature who are prepared to support him, and urges his own claims while urging theirs.? I do not say that things have, in all States, gone so far as to make the choice by the legislature of some particular person as senator a foregone conclusion when the legislature has been elected. Circumstances may change ; compromises may be necessary; still, it is now generally true that in most States little freedom of choice remains with the legislature, The people, or rather those wire- pullers who manage the people and act in their name, have practically settled the matter at the election of the State legislature. So hard is it to make any scheme of indirect election work according to its original design; so hard is it to keep even a written and rigid constitution from bending — warping under the actual forces of politics.?
1 The Constitution of the State of Nebraska (1875) allows the electors in voting for members of the State legislature to “express by ballot their preference for some person for the office of Us 8. senator. The votes cast for such candidates shall be canvassed and returned in the same manner as for State officers.” This is an attempt to evade and by a side wind defeat the provision of the Federal Constitution which vests the choice in the legislature.
2 This happened recently in Nebraska, and seems to be not uncommon. The famous struggle of Mr. Douglas and Mr. Lincoln for the Illinois senatorship in 1858 was conducted in a stump campaign.
° A proposal recently made to amend the Federal Constitution by taking the election of senators away from the legislatures in order to vest it in the people of
THE SENATE 97
Members of the Senate vote as individuals, that is to say, the vote a senator gives is his own and not that of his State. It was otherwise in the Congress of the old Confederation before 1789; it is otherwise in the present Federal Council of the German Empire, in which each State votes as a whole, though the number of her votes is proportioned to her population. Accordingly, in the American Senate, the two senators from a State may belong to opposite parties; and this often happens in the case of senators from States in which the two great parties are pretty equally balanced, and the majority oscillates between them.!_ Suppose Ohio to have to elect a senator in 1886. The Democrats have a majority in the State legislature; and a Democrat is therefore chosen senator. In 1888 the other Ohio senatorship falls vacant. But by this time the balance of parties
each State is approved by some judicious publicists, who think that bad candidates will haye less chance with the party at large and the people than they now have in bodies apt to be controlled by a knot of party managers. A nomination made for a popular election will at least be made publicly, whereas now a nomination for an election by a legislature may be made secretly. I subjoin the form which this proposal took in 1881 as a specimen of the form in which amendments to the Constitution may be submitted to Congress.
46th Congress, In THE House oF REPRESENTATIVES,
_ 8rd Session. 3lst January 1881. Read twice, referred to the Committee on the Judiciary, and ordered to be printed.
Mr. Weaver introduced the following joint resolution :—
JoInT RESOLUTION
Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, providing for the election of Senators by vote of the people.
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled (two-thirds of each House concurring therein), That the following is hereby proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, and when ratified by the Legislatures of three-fourths of the several States, shall be valid to all intents and purposes as a part of the Con- stitution, to wit :—
Article—
That so much of section third, article first, of the Constitution of the United States as provides that the Senators of the United States shall be chosen by the Legislatures thereof shall be amended so that the same shall read as follows :—
“The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each State, to be chosen by the vote of the qualified electors in said States . respectively, and at such time as shall be determined by Act of Congress.”
Similar proposals have been repeatedly made in subsequent Congresses, but never accepted by either House.
1 Tt was arranged from the beginning of the Federal Government that the two senatorships from the same State should never be vacant at the same time.
VOL. I oat
98 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
in Ohio has shifted. The Republicans control the legislature ; a Republican senator is therefore chosen, and goes to Washington to vote against his Democratic colleague. This fact has largely contributed to render the senators independent of the State legislatures, for as these latter bodies sit for short terms (the larger of the two houses usually for two years only), a senator has during the greater part of his six years’ term to look for re-election not to the present but to a future State legislature.1 The length of the senatorial term was one of the provisions of the Constitution which were most warmly attacked and defended in 1788. A six years’ tenure, it was urged, would turn the senators into dangerous aristocrats, forgetful of the legislature which had appointed them ; and some went so far as to demand that the legislature of a State should have the right to recall its senators.? Experience has shown that the term is by no means too long; and its length is one among the causes which have made it easier for senators than for members of the House to procure re-election, a result which, though it offends the doctrinaires of democracy, has worked well for the country. Senators from the smaller States are more frequently re-elected than those from the larger, because in the small States the com- petition of ambitious men is less keen, politics less changeful, the people perhaps more steadily attached to a man whom they have once honoured with their confidence. The senator from such a State generally finds it more easy to maintain his influence over his own legislature ; not to add that if the State should be amenable to the power of wealth, his wealth will tell far more than it could in a large State. Yet no small State was ever more controlled by one man than the great State of Pennsylvania by Mr. Simon Cameron, who represented it for eighteen years. In recent times it is the senators from the small States, such as Rhode Island, Vermont, and Delaware, who have been most
1 Tf a vacancy occurs in a senatorship at a time when the State legislature is not sitting, the executive of the State is empowered to fill it up until the next meeting of the State legislature. This is sometimes an important power, especially if the vacancy occurs at a time when parties are equally divided in the Senate.
2 This was recommended by a Pennsylvanian Convention, which met after the adoption of the Constitution to suggest amendments. See Hlliot’s Debates, ii. p. 545. It was also much pressed by some members of the New York Convention. A State legislature sometimes passes resolutions instructing its senators to vote
in a particular way, but the senators are of course in no way bound to regard such instructions.
“CHAP. X THE SENATE 99
)
frequently re-elected. The average age of the Senate is less than might be expected. Three-fourths of its members are under sixty. The importance of the State he represents makes no great difference to the influence which a senator enjoys; this depends on his talents, experience, and character; and as the small State senators have often the advantage of long service and a safe seat, they are often among the most influential.
The Senate resembles the Upper Houses of Europe, and differs from those of the British colonies, and of most of the States of the Union, in being a permanent body. It does not change all at once, as do bodies created by a single popular elec- _ tion, but undergoes an unceasing process of gradual change and renewal, .like a lake into which streams bring fresh water to replace that which the issuing river carries out. This provision was designed to give the Senate that permanency of composition which might qualify it to conduct or control the foreign policy of the nation. An incidental and more valuable result has been the creation of a set of traditions and a corporate spirit which have tended to form habits of dignity and self-respect. The new senators, being always in a minority, are readily assimilated ; and though the balance of power shifts from one party to another according to the predominance in the State legislatures of one or other party, it shifts more slowly than in bodies directly chosen all at once, and a policy is therefore less apt to be suddenly reversed.
The legislative powers of the Senate being, except in one point, the same as those of the House of Representatives, will be described later. That one point is a restriction as regards money bills. On the ground that it is only by the direct representa- tives of the people that taxes ought to be levied, and in obvious imitation of the venerable English doctrine, which had already found a place in several State constitutions, the Constitution (Art. i. § 7) provides that “All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives, but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments, as on other bills.” In practice, while the House strictly guards its right of origination, the Senate largely exerts its power of amendment, and wrangles with the House over taxes, and still more keenly over appropria- tions. Almost every session ends with a dispute, a conference,
1 See Federalist, No. lxi., and Hamilton’s argument in the New York State Convention. Elliot’s Debates, vol. ii. p. 307.
i; Ad a i aha ; , =%
ih ee mo =
100 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ; PART I
a compromise. The system of committees, which is the most remarkable feature of the Senate’s legislative procedure, will be considered in a subsequent chapter, while a note to the present chapter! presents an abstract of some of the more noteworthy of its rules. Among those rules there is none providing for a closure of debate, or limiting the length either of a debate or of a speech. The Senate is proud of having conducted its business without the aid of such regulations, and this has been due, not - ~ merely to the small size of the assembly, but to the sense of its dignity which has usually pervaded its members, and to the power which the opinion of the whole body has exercised on each. Where every man knows his colleagues intimately, each, if he has a character to lose, stands in awe of the others, and has so strong a sense of his own interest in maintaining the moral authority of the Chamber, that he is slow to resort to extreme methods which might lower it in public estimation. Till recently, systematic obstruction, or, as it is called in America, “filibustering,” familiar to the House, was almost unknown in the calmer air of the Senate. When it was applied some years ago by the Democratic senators to stop a bill to which they strongly objected, their conduct was not disapproved by the country, because the whole party, a minority very little smaller tham the Republican majority, supported it, and people believed that nothing but some strong reason would have induced the whole party so to act. Accordingly the majority yielded. Al- though the increased size of the body makes the despatch of business more difficult than formerly, it is hardly likely that the Senate will-adopt any regulation limiting debate, for it prides itself on its traditions, and likes to mark the contrast between its own good manners and the turbulence of the more numerous House. In the winter session of 1883, the rules of procedure were subjected to a thorough revision, but no proposal of this nature was made.
Divisions are taken, not by separating the senators into lobbies and counting them, as in the British Parliament, but by calling the names of senators alphabetically. The Constitution provides that one-fifth of those present may demand that the Yeas and Nays be entered in the journal. Every senator answers to his name with Aye or No. He may, however, ask the leave of the Senate to abstain from voting; and if he is
1 This note will be found at the end of this volume,
CHAD, x THE SENATE 101
paired, he states, when his name is called, that he has paired with such and such another senator, and is therefore excused. No one is permitted to speak more than twice to the same ques- tion on the same day.
When the Senate goes into executive session, the galleries are cleared and the doors closed, and the obligation of secrecy is supposed to be enforced by the penalty of expulsion to which a senator, disclosing confidential proceedings, makes himself liable. “Practically, however, newspaper men find little difficulty in ascer- taining what passes in secret session.! The threatened punish- ment has never been inflicted, and occasions often arise when senators feel it to be desirable that the public should know what their colleagues have been doing. There has been for some time past a movement within the Senate against maintaining secrecy, particularly with regard to the confirming of nominations to office ; and there is also a belief in the country that publicity would make for purity. But while some of the black sheep of the Senate love darkness because their works are evil, other members of undoubted respectability defend the present system because they think it supports the power and dignity of their body...
1 Secrecy is said to be better observed in the case of discussions on treaties than where appointments are in question. Some years ago a Western newspaper published an account of what took place in a secret session. A committee appointed to inquire into the matter questioned every senator. Each swore that he had not divulged the proceedings, and the newspaper people also swore that
their information did not come from any Senator. Nothing could be ascertained, and nobody was punished.
CHAPTER XI THE SENATE AS AN EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL BODY
THE Senate is not only a legislative but also an executive Chamber ; in fact in its early days the executive functions seem
to have been thought the more important ; and Hamilton went |
so far as to speak of the national executive authority as divided between two branches, the President and the Senate. These executive functions are two, the power of approving treaties, and that of confirming nominations to office submitted by the President.
To what has already been said regarding the functions of the President and Senate as regards treaties (see above, Chapter VI.) I need only add that the Senate through its right of confirming or rejecting engagements with foreign powers, secures a general control over foreign policy. It is in the discretion of the Presi- dent whether he will communicate current negotiations to it and take its advice upon them, or will say nothing till he lays a com- pleted treaty before it. One or other course is from time to time followed, according to the nature of the case, or the degree of friendliness existing between the President and the majority of the Senate. But in general, the President’s best policy is to keep the leaders of the senatorial majority, and in particular the committee on Foreign Relations, informed of the progress of any pending negotiation. He thus feels the pulse of the Senate, and foresees what kind of arrangement he can induce it to sanction, while at the same time a good understanding between himself and his coadjutors is promoted. It is well worth his while to keep the Senate in good humour, for, like other assemblies, it has a collective self-esteem which makes it seek to gain all the information and power it can draw in. The right of going into secret session enables the whole Senate to consider despatches communicated by the President ; and the more important ones,
cHAP. x1 SENATE: EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL BODY 103
having first been submitted to the Foreign Relations committee, are thus occasionally discussed without the disadvantage of pub- licity. Of course no momentous secret can be long kept, even by the committee, according to the proverb in the Elder Edda— “Tell one man thy secret, but not two; if three know, the world knows.”
This control of foreign policy by the Senate goes far to meet that terrible difficulty which a democracy, or indeed any free government, finds in dealing with foreign Powers. If every step to be taken must be previously submitted to the governing assembly, the nation is forced to show its whole hand, and precious opportunities of winning an ally or striking a bargain may be lost. If‘on the other hand the executive is permitted to conduct negotiations in secret, there is always the risk, either that the governing assembly may disavow what has been done, a risk which makes foreign states legitimately suspicious and unwilling to negotiate, or that the nation may have to ratify, because it feels bound in honour by the act of its executive agents, arrangements which its judgment condemns. ‘The fre- quent participation of the Senate in negotiations diminishes these difficulties, because it apprises the executive of what the judg- ment of the ratifying body is likely to be, and it commits that body by advance. The necessity of ratification by the Senate in order to give effect to a treaty, enables the country to retire from a doubtful bargain, though in a way which other Powers — find disagreeable, as England did when the Senate rejected the Reverdy Johnson treaty of 1869. European statesmen may ask what becomes under such asystem of the boldness and prompti- tude so often needed to effect a successful coup in foreign policy, or how a consistent attitude can be maintained if there is in the chairman of the Foreign Relations committee a sort of second foreign secretary. The answer is that America is not Europe. The problems which the Foreign Office of the United States has to deal with are far fewer and usually far simpler than those of the Old World. The republic keeps consistently to her own side of the Atlantic ; nor is it the least of the merits of the system of senatorial control that it has tended, by discouraging the execu- tive from schemes which may prove resultless, to diminish the taste for foreign enterprises, and to save the country from being entangled with alliances, protectorates, responsibilities of all sorts beyond its own frontiers. It is the easier for the Americans to
104 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
practise this reserve because they need no alliances, standing unassailable in their own hemisphere. The circumstances of England, with her powerful European neighbours, her Indian Empire, and her colonies scattered over the world, are widely different. Yet different as the circumstances of England are, the day may come when in England the question of limiting the at present all but unlimited discretion of the executive in foreign affairs will have to be dealt with;! and the example of the American Senate will then deserve and receive careful study. Yet it must be remembered that many of the most important acts done in the sphere of foreign relations are purely executive acts (as for instance, the movement of troops and ships) which the Senate cannot control.
The Senate may and occasionally does amend a treaty, and return it amended to the President. There is nothing to prevent it from proposing a draft treaty to him, or asking him to prepare one, but this is not the practice. For ratification a vote of two- thirds of the senators present is required. This gives great power to a vexatious minority, and increases the danger, evi- denced by several incidents in the history of the Union, that the Senate or a faction in it may deal with foreign policy in a narrow, sectional, electioneering spirit. When the interest of any group of States is, or is supposed to be, opposed to the making of a given treaty, that treaty may be defeated by the senators from those States. They tell the other senators of their own party that the prospects of the party in the district of the country whence they come will be improved if the treaty is rejected and a bold aggressive line is taken in further negotia- tions. Some of these senators, who care more for the party than for justice or the common interests of the country, rally to the ery, and all the more gladly if their party is opposed to the President in power, because in defeating the treaty they humiliate his administration. Supposing their party to command a majority, the treaty is probably rejected, and the settlement of the ques- tion at issue perhaps indefinitely postponed. It may be thought
1 Parliament may of course interfere, and sometimes does interfere ; but the parliamentary majority which supports the ministry of the day usually (and pro- bably wisely) forbears to press the Foreign Office for information which it is declared to be undesirable to furnish.
In 1886 a resolution was all but carried in the House of Commons, desiring all ae to be laid before Parliament for its approval before being finally concluded,
he eae iho a ‘ Cy Ae aa : J “i E aes ‘a aes se,
cHar. xr SENATE: EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL BODY 105
that the party acting so vexatiously will suffer in public esteem. This happens in extreme cases; but the public are usually so indifferent to foreign affairs, and so little skilled in judging of them, that offences of the kind I have described may be com- mitted with practical impunity. It is harder to fix responsibility on a body of senators than on the executive ; and whereas the executive has usually an interest in settling diplomatic troubles, whose continuance it finds annoying, the Senate has no such interest, but is willing to keep them open so long as there is a prospect of sucking some political advantage out of them. The habit of using foreign policy for electioneering purposes is not confined to America. We have seen it in England, we have seen it in France, we have seen it even in monarchical Germany. But in America the treaty-confirming power of the Senate opens a particularly easy and tempting door to such practices.
The other executive function of the Senate, that of confirming nominations submitted by the President, has been discussed in the chapter on the powers of that officer. It is there explained how senators have used their right of confirmation to secure for themselves a huge mass of Federal patronage, and how by means of this right, a majority hostile to the President can thwart and annoy him. Quite recently a patronage dispute arose between President Cleveland and the Republican majority in the Senate. They required the President to send to the Senate along with each nomination to a place vacant by the removal of the previous holder, not only a statement of reasons for the removal, but all the papers in the possession of the executive relating to the matter. The President seems to have been willing to state his reasons, while denying the legal right of the Senate to require them, but he refused to transmit such documents as he deemed confidential. The Senate complained and passed resolutions, but had of course no power to compel the President’s compliance. It was suggested by some senators that the true remedy for improper removals from partisan motives would be that the Senate should discuss nominations publicly, instead of, as now, in secret executive session. This would be the best way of putting the President in the wrong, if he made bad nominations, and of putting the Senate in the right if it refused to confirm nominations where no adequate ground for the removal of the prior incumbent had been shown. Public discussion certainly seems the plan most conformable to a democratic government ;
106 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT = PART 1
and a European observer is surprised that American opinion allows such important business to be transacted with closed ' doors.
Does the control of the Senate operate to prevent abuses of patronage by the President? To some extent it does, yet less completely than could be wished. When the majority belongs to the same party as the President, appointments are usually arranged, or to use a familiar expression, “squared,” between them, with a view primarily to party interests. When the majority is opposed to the President, they are tempted to agree to his worst appointments, because such appointments discredit him and his party with the country, and become a theme of hostile comment in the next electioneering campaign. As the initiative is his, it is the nominating President, and not the confirming Senate, whom public opinion will condemn. These things being so, it may be doubted whether this executive func- tion of the Senate is now a valuable part of the Constitution. It was designed to prevent the President from making himself a tyrant by filling the great offices with his accomplices or tools. That danger has passed away, if it ever existed ; and Congress has other means of muzzling an ambitious chief magistrate. The more fully responsibility for appointments can be concentrated upon him, and the fewer the secret influences to which he is exposed, the better will his appointments be. On the other hand, it must be admitted that the participation of the Senate causes in practice less friction and delay than might have been expected from a dual control. The appointments to the cabinet offices are confirmed as a matter of course. Those of diplomatic officers are seldom rejected. “Little tiffs” are frequent when the senatorial majority is in opposition to the executive, but the machinery, if it does not work smoothly, works well enough to carry on the ordinary business of the country.
The judicial function of the Senate is to sit as a High Court for the trial of persons impeached by the House of Representa- tives. The chief justice of the United States presides, and a vote of two-thirds of the senators voting is needed for a convic- tion. Of the process, as affecting the President, I have spoken in Chapter V. It is applicable to other officials, including Federal judges. Besides President Johnson, six persons in all have been impeached, viz. :—
Four Federal judges, of whom two were acquitted, and two
S= ‘
CHAP. x1 SENATE: EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL BODY 107
convicted, one for habitual drunkenness, and the other for having joined the Secessionists of 1861. We shall see presently that impeachment is the only means by which a Federal judge can be got rid of.
One senator, who was acquitted. for want of jurisdiction, the Senate deciding that a senatorship is not a “ civil office” within the meaning. of Art. ill. § 4 of the Constitution.
One minister, a secretary of war, who resigned before the impeachment was actually preferred, and escaped on the ground that being a private person he was not impeachable.
Rare as this method of proceeding is, it could not be dis- _ pensed with, and it is better that the Senate should try cases in which a political element is usually present, than that the impartiality of the Supreme court should be exposed to the criticism it would have to bear, did political questions come before it. Most senators are or have been lawyers of eminence, so that so far as legal knowledge goes they are competent mem- bers uf a court.
CHAPTER XII THE SENATE: ITS WORKING AND INFLUENCE
Tue Americans consider the Senate one of the successes of their Constitution, a worthy monument of the wisdom and foresight of its founders. Foreign observers have repeated this praise, and have perhaps, in their less perfect knowledge, sounded it even more loudly.
The aims with which the Senate was created, the purposes it was to fulfil, are set forth, under the form of answers to objec- tions, in five letters. (lxi.-lxv.), all by Alexander Hamilton, in the Federalist.1 These aims were the five following :—
To conciliate the spirit of independence in the several States, by giving each, however small, equal representation with every other, however large, in one branch of the national government.
To create a council qualified, by its moderate size and the experience of its members, to advise and check the President in the exercise of his powers of appointing to office and concluding treaties.
To restrain the impetuosity and fickleness of the popular House, and so guard against the effects of gusts of passion or sudden changes of opinion in the people.
To provide a body of men whose greater experience, longer term of membership, and comparative independence of popular election, would make them an element of stability in the govern- ment of the nation, enabling it to maintain its character in the eyes of foreign States, and to preserve a continuity of policy at home and abroad.
To establish a Court proper for the trial of impeachments, a remedy deemed necessary to prevent abuse of power by the executive.
1 See also Hamilton’s speeches in the New York Convention. —Elliot’s Debates, li. p. 301 sqq.
aoe
CHAP. XII SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 109
All of these five objects have been more or less perfectly attained ; and the Senate has acquired a position in the govern- ment of the nation which Hamilton scarcely ventured to hope for. In 1788 he wrote: “Against the force of the immediate representatives of the people nothing will be able to maintain even the constitutional authority of the Senate, but such a display of enlightened policy, and attachment to the public good, as will divide with the House of Representatives the affections and support of the entire body of the people them- selves.”
It may be doubted whether the Senate has excelled the House in attachment to the public good; but it has certainly shown greater capacity for managing the public business, and has won the respect, if not the affections, of the people, by its sustained intellectual power.
The Federalist did not think it necessary to state, nor have Americans generally realized, that this masterpiece of the Consti- tution-makers was in fact a happy accident. No one-in the Convention of 1787 set out with the idea of such a Senate as ultimately emerged from their deliberations. It grew up under the hands of the Convention, as the result of the necessity for reconciling the conflicting demands of the large and the small States. The concession of equal representation in the Senate induced the small States to accept the principle of representation according to population in the House of Representatives ; and a series of compromises between the advocates of popular power, as embodied in the House, and those of monarchical power, as embodied in the President, led to the allotment of attributes and functions which have made the Senate what it is. When the work which they had almost unconsciously perfected was fin- ished, the leaders of the Convention perceived its excellence, and defended it by arguments in which we feel the note of sincere conviction. Yet the conception they formed of it differed from the reality which has been evolved. Although they had created it as a branch of the legislature, they thought of it as being first and foremost a body with executive functions. And this, at first, it was. The traditions of the old Congress of the Con- federation, in which the delegates of the States voted by States, the still earlier traditions of the executive councils, which advised the governors of the colonies while still subject to the British Crown, clung about the Senate and affected the
=, he . bd ¥ oO” ae. . De aR Be So eee enc br iat etd PKs Pat ae a dali aS ES gan es sh Fes Ie
‘ey
110 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
minds of the senators! It was a small body, originally of twenty-six, even in 1810 of thirty-four members only, a body not ill fitted for executive work. Its members, regarding them- selves as a sort of congress of ambassadors from their respective States, were accustomed to refer for advice and instructions each to his State legislature. So late as 1828, a senator after arguing strongly against a measure declared that he would nevertheless vote for it, because he believed his State to be in its favour. For the first five years of its existence, the Senate sat with closed doors, occupying itself chiefly with the confidential busi- ness of appointments and treaties, and conferring in private with the ministers of the President. Not till 1816 did it create, in imitation of the House, those Standing Committees which the experience of the House had shown to be, in bodies where the executive ministers do not sit, the necessary organs for deal- ing with legislative business. Its present character as a legisla- tive body, not less active and powerful than the other branch of Congress, is the result of a long process of evolution, a process possible (as will be more fully explained hereafter) even under the rigid Constitution of the United States, because the language of the sections which define the competence of the Senate is very wide and general. But in gaining legislative authority, it has not lost its executive functions, although those which relate to treaties are largely exercised on the advice of the standing Committee on Foreign Relations. And as respects these execu- tive functions it stands alone in the world. No European state, no British colony, entrusts to an elective assembly that direct participation in executive business which the Senate enjoys.
What is meant by saying that the Senate has proved a success 4
It has succeeded by effecting that chief object of the Fathers of the Constitution, the creation of a centre of gravity in the government, an authority able to correct and check on the one hand the “democratic recklessness” of the House, on the other the “monarchical ambition” of the President. Placed between the two, it is necessarily the rival and generally the opponent of both. The House can accomplish nothing without its concur- rence. The President can be checkmated by its resistance. These are, so to speak, negative or prohibitive successes. It has
1 See upon this point the acute remarks of M. Boutmy, Etudes de Droit Con- stitutionel (Paris, 1885), p. 118 sqq.
\ - 40
“onary. XII SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 111
achieved less in the way of positive work, whether of initiating good legislation or of improving the measures which the House sends it. But the whole scheme of the American Constitution tends to put stability above activity, to sacrifice the productive energies of the bodies it creates to their power of resisting changes in the general fabric of the government. The Senate has succeeded in making itself eminent and respected. It has drawn the best talent of the nation, so far as that talent flows to politics, into its body, has established an intellectual supremacy, has furnished a vantage ground from which men of ability may speak with authority to their fellow-citizens.
To what causes are these successes to be ascribed ? Hamilton assumed that the Senate would be weaker than the House of Representatives, because it would not so directly spring from, speak for, be looked to by, the people. This was a natural view, especially as the analogy between the position of the Senate towards the House of Representatives in America, and that. of the House of Lords towards the House of Commons in Great: Britain, an analogy constantly present to the men of 1787, seemed to suggest that the larger and more popular chamber must dwarf and overpower the smaller one. But the Senate has proved no less strong, and morally more influential, than its sister House of Congress. The analogy was unsound, because the British House of Lords is hereditary and the Senate representa- tive. In these days no hereditary assembly, be its members ever so able, ever so wealthy, ever so socially influential, can speak with the authority which belongs to those who speak for the people. Mirabeau’s famous words in the Salle des Menus at Versailles, “We are here by the will of the people, and nothing but bayonets shall send us hence,” express the whole current of modern feeling; though it is only to-day that the belated political philosophers of England are awakening to perceive that the fault of their House of Lords is not that it is too strong, but that it is too weak, and that no assembly can now be strong unless it is representative. Now the Senate, albeit not chosen by direct popular election, does represent the people ; and what it may lose through not standing in immediate contact with the masses, it gains in representing such ancient and powerful com- monwealths as the States. A senator from New York or Penn- sylvania speaks for, and is responsible to, millions of men. No wonder he has an authority beyond that of the long-descended
112 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
nobles of Prussia, or the peers of England whose possessions stretch over whole counties.
This is the first reason for the strength of the Senate, as com- pared with the upper chambers of other countries. It is built on a wide and solid foundation of choice by the people and con- sequent responsibility to them. A second cause is to be found in its small size. A small body educates its members better than a large one, because each member is of more consequence, has more to do, sooner masters the business not only of his com- mittee but of the whole body, feels a livelier sense of the signi- ficance of his own action in bringing about collective action. There is less disposition to abuse the freedom of debate. Party spirit may be as intense as in great assemblies, yet it is mitigated by the disposition to keep on friendly terms with those whom, however much you may dislike them, you have constantly to meet, and by the feeling of a common interest in sustaining the authority of the body. A senator soon gets to know each of his colleagues—they were originally only twenty-five—and what each of them thinks of him; he becomes sensitive to their opinion ; he is less inclined to pose before them, however he may pose before the public. Thus the Senate formed, in its child- hood, better habits in discussing and transacting its business than could have been looked for in a large assembly ; and these habits its maturer age retains. Its comparative permanence has also worked for good. Six years, which seem a short term in Europe,! are in America a long term when compared with the two years for which the House of Representatives and the Assemblies of nearly all the States are elected, long also when compared with the swiftness of change in American politics. A senator has the opportunity of thoroughly learning his work, and of proving that he has learnt it. He becomes slightly more independent of his constituency,? which in America, where politicians catch at every passing breeze of opinion, is a clear gain. He is relieved a little, though only a little, of the duty of going on the stump in his State, and maintaining his influence among local politicians there.
1 Seven years are the full legal, and four to five years in practice the average, duration of a British House of Commons.
2 A few years ago, for instance, Mr. Justice Lamar, then senator for Missis- sippi, having incurred the displeasure of some leading local politicians, took the field in his State, and succeeded in convincing the people that he was right, and in securing his re-election,
aes eas oaatn eee rd - ; a WAY MT
: if Pits = f ts oy Pe eee . St y3 . a et & i
CHAP, XI1 SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 113
The smallness and the permanence of the Senate have how- ever another important influence on its character. They contri- bute to one main cause of its success, the superior intellectual quality of its members. Every European who has described it, has dwelt upon the capacity of those who compose it, and most have followed De Tocqueville in attributing this capacity to the method of double election. The choice of senators by the State legislatures is supposed to have proved a better means than direct
_ choice by the people of discovering and selecting the fittest men.
I have already remarked that practically the election of senators has become a popular election, the function of the legislatures being now little more than to register and formally complete a choice already made by the party managers, and perhaps ratified in the party convention. But apart altogether from this recent development, and reviewing the whole hundred years’ history of the Senate, the true explanation of its intellectual capacity is to be found in the superior attraction which it has for the ablest and most ambitious men. <A senator has more power than a member of the House, more dignity, a longer term of service, a more independent position. Hence every Federal politician aims at a senatorship, and looks on the place of representative as a stepping-stone to what is in this sense an Upper House, that it is the House to which representatives seek to mount. It is no more surprising that the average capacity of the Senate should surpass that of the House, than that the average cabinet minister of Europe should be abler than the average member of the legis- lature.
What is more, the Senate so trains its members as to improve their political efficiency. Several years of service in a small body, with important and delicate executive work, are worth twice as many years of jostling in the crowd of representatives at the other end of the Capitol. If the Senate does not find the man who enters it already superior to the average of Federal politicians, it makes him superior. But natural selection, as has been said, usually seats upon its benches the best ability of the country that has flowed into political life, and would do so no less were the election in form a direct one by the people at the polls.
Most of the leading men of the last sixty years have sat in the Senate, and in it were delivered most of the famous speeches which illumine, though too rarely, the wearisome debates over State rights and slavery from 1825 till 1860. One of these
VOL, I I
114 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
debates, that in the beginning of 1830, which called forth Daniel Webster’s majestic defence of the Constitution, was long called par eacellence “the great debate in the Senate.” *
Of the seventy-six senators who sat in the forty-eighth Con- gress (in 1884) 31 had sat in the other House of Congress, and 49 had served in State legislatures. In the fiftieth Congress (1888) 29 had sat in the House of Representatives, and 49 in State legislatures. Many had been judges or State governors ; many had sat in State conventions. Nearly all had held some public function. A man must have had considerable experience of affairs, and of human nature in its less engaging aspects, before he enters this august conclave. But experience is not all gain. Practice makes perfect in evil-doing no less than in well- doing. The habits of local politics and of work in the House of Representatives by which the senators have been trained, while they develop shrewdness and quickness in all characters, tell in- juriously on characters of the meaner sort, leaving men’s views narrow, and giving them a taste as well as a talent for intrigue.
The chamber in which the Senate meets is semicircular in form, the Vice-President of the United States, who acts as pre- siding officer, having his chair on a marble dais, slightly raised, in the centre of the chord, with the senators all turned towards him as they sit in concentric semicircles, each in a morocco leather covered arm-chair, with a desk in front of it. The floor is about as large as the whole superficial area of the British House of Commons, but as there are great galleries on all four sides, running back over the lobbies, the upper part of the chamber and its total air-space much exceeds that of the English house. One of these galleries is appropriated to the President of the United States; the others to ladies, the press, and the public. Behind the senatorial chairs and desks there is an open space into which strangers can be brought by the senators, who sit and talk on the sofas there placed. Members of foreign legislatures are allowed access to this outer “floor of the
1 In those days the Senate sat in that smaller chamber which is now occupied by the Supreme Federal Court.
2 I cannot be sure of the absolute actual accuracy of these figures, which I have compiled from the Congressional Directory, because some senators do not set forth the whole of their political career. It is worth remarking that the pro- portion of senators who have previously been members of the House of Represen-
tatives is larger among the senators from the older States than it is in the south and west.
CHAP, XII SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 115
Senate.”1 ‘There is, especially when the galleries are empty, a slight echo in the room, which obliges most speakers to strain their voices. Two or three pictures on the walls somewhat relieve the cold tone of the chamber, with its marble platform and sides unpierced by windows, for the light enters through glass compartments in the ceiling.
A senator always addresses the Chair “Mr. President,” and refers to other senators by their States, “The senator from Ohio,” “The senator from Tennessee.” When two senators rise at the same moment, the Chair calls on one, indicating him by his State, “‘The senator from Minnesota has the floor.” 2 Senators of the Democratic party sit, and apparently always have sat, on the right of the chair, Republican senators on the left; but, as _ already explained, the parties do not face one another. The impression which the place makes on a visitor is one of business- like gravity, a gravity which though plain is dignified. It has the air not so much of a popular assembly as of a diplomatic congress. The English House of Lords, with its fretted roof and windows rich with the figures of departed kings, its majestic throne,. its Lord Chancellor in his wig on the woolsack, its benches of lawn-sleeved bishops, its bar where the Commons throng at a great debate, is not only more gorgeous and pic- turesque in externals, but appeals far more powerfully to the historical imagination, for it seems to carry the middle ages down into the modern world. The Senate is modern, severe, and practical. So, too, few debates in the Senate rise to the level of the better debates in the English chamber. But the Senate seldom wears that air of listless vacuity and superannuated in- dolence which the House of Lords presents on all but a few nights of every session. The faces are keen and forcible, as of men who have learned to know the world, and have much to do in it; the place seems consecrated to great affairs.
As might be expected from the small number of the audience,
1 A graceful courtesy has extended the privilege to the distinguished historian of the United States, Mr. George Bancroft, who still pursues in extreme old age his patriotic labours.
2 A Jate President. of the Senate was in the habit of distinguishing the two senators from the State of Arkansas, by calling on one as the senator for “ Arkansas” (pronounced as written, with accent on the penult), and the other as the Senator for “ Arkansaw,’” with accent on the last syllable. As Europeans often ask which is the correct pronunciation, I may say that both are
in common use. But the legislature of Arkansas has lately by a “joint resolu- tion’”’ declared “ Arkansaw”’ to be right.
116 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART |
as well as from its character, discussions in the Senate are apt to be sensible and practical. Speeches are shorter and less fervid than those made in the House of Representatives, for the larger an assembly the more prone is it to declamation. The least useful debates are those on show-days, when a series of set discourses are delivered on some prominent question, because no one expects such discourses to have any persuasive effect. The question at issue is sure to have been already settled, either in a committee or in a “caucus” of the party which commands the majority, so that these long and sonorous harangues are mere rhetorical thunder addressed to the nation outside. The speakers, moreover, on such field days, seldom reply to the arguments of those who have preceded them, as men do in the English Parliament. Each senator brings down and fires off in the air, a carefully-prepared oration, which may have little bearing on what has gone before. In fact the speeches are made not to convince the assembly, for that no one dreams of doing, but to keep a man’s opinions before the public and sustain his fame.!
The Senate now contains many men of great wealth. Some, an increasing number, are senators because they are rich; a few are rich because they are senators, while in the remaining cases the same talents which have won success in law or commerce have brought their possessor to the top in politics also. The great majority are or have been lawyers ; some regularly practise before the Supreme Court. Complaints are occasionally levelled against the aristocratic tendencies which wealth is supposed to have bred, and sarcastic references are made to the sumptuous residences which senators have built on the new avenues of Washington. While admitting that there is more sympathy for the capitalist class among these rich men than there would be in a Senate of poor men, I must add that the Senate is far from being a class body like the upper houses of England or Prussia or Spain or Denmark. It is substantially representative, by its composition as well as by legal delegation, of all parts of American society ; it is far too dependent, and far too sensible that it is dependent, upon public opinion, to dream of legislating in the interest of the rich. The senators, however, indulge some social pretensions. They are the nearest approach to an official
1 One is told in Washington that it is at present thought “bad form” for a senator to listen to a set speech ; it implies that he is a freshman.
OHAP, XII SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE ally?
aristocracy that has yet been seen in America. They and their wives are allowed precedence at private entertainments, as well as on public occasions, over members of the House, and of course over private citizens. Jefferson might turn in his grave if he knew of such an attempt to introduce European distinctions of rank into his democracy ; yet as the office is temporary, and the rank vanishes with the office, these pretensions are harmless ; it is only the universal social equality of the country that makes them noteworthy. Apart from such petty advantages, the position of a senator, who can count on re-election, is the most desirable in the political world of America. It gives as much power and influence as a man need desire. It secures for him the ear of the public. It is more permanent than the presidency or any great ministerial office, requires less labour, involves less vexation, though still great vexation, by importunate office- seekers.
European writers on America have been too much inclined to idealize the Senate. Admiring its structure and function, they have assumed that the actors must be worthy of their parts. They have been encouraged in this tendency by the language of many Americans. As the Romans were never tired of repeating that the ambassador of Pyrrhus had called the Roman senate an assembly of kings, so Americans of refinement, who are ashamed of the turbulent House of Representatives, are wont to talk of the Senate as a sort of Olympian dwelling-place of statesmen and sages. It is nothing of the kind. It is a company of shrewd and vigorous men who have fought their way to the front by the ordinary methods of American politics, and on many of whom the battle has left its stains. There are abundant opportunities for intrigue in the Senate, because its most important business is done in the secrecy of committee rooms or of executive session ; and many senators are intriguers. There are opportunities for misusing senatorial powers. Scandals have sometimes arisen from the practice of employing as counsel before the Supreme Court, senators whose influence has contributed to the appoint- ment or confirmation of the judges.! There are opportunities for
1 In the session of 1886, an Act was passed forbidding members of either House of Congress to appear in the Federal courts as counsel for any railroad company or other corporation which might, in respect of its having received land grants, be affected by Federal legislation. The Act originated in the Senate,
which deserves in this instance the credit of seeking to cure its own faults, and remove temptation from the path of its weaker members,
118 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
corruption and blackmailing, of which unscrupulous men are well known to take advantage. Such men are fortunately few; but considering how demoralized are the legislatures of several southern and western States, their presence must be looked for ; and the rest of the Senate, however it may blush for them, is obliged to work with them and to treat them as equals. The contagion of political vice is nowhere so swiftly potent as in legislative bodies, because you cannot taboo a man who has got a vote. You may loathe him personally, but he is the people’s choice. He has a right to share in the government of the country ; you are grateful to him when he saves you on a critical division ; you discover that “he is not such a bad fellow when one knows him”; people remark that he gives good dinners, or has an agreeable wife; and so it goes on till falsehood and knavery are covered under the cloak of party loyalty.
As respects ability, the Senate cannot be profitably compared with the English House of Lords, because that assembly consists of some twenty eminent and as many ordinary men attending regularly, with a multitude of undistinguished persons who, though members, are only occasional visitors, and take no real share in the deliberations. Setting the Senate beside the House of Commons, one may say that the average natural capacity of its seventy-six members is not above that of the seventy-six best men in the English House. There is more variety of talent in the latter, and a greater breadth of culture. On the other hand, the Senate excels in legal knowledge as well as in practical shrewdness. The House of Commons contains more men who could give a good address on a literary or historical subject, the Senate more who could either deliver a rousing popular harangue or manage the business of a great trading company, these being the forms of capacity commonest among congressional politicians.
1 Americans now frequently accuse the Senate of timidity, and ascribe this fault to the fact that many of its members, being persons of great wealth but no great independence, are nervously alive to the fear of being thought deficient in popular sympathies. Recently when a proposal was made to bring the Federal army up to its nominal strength, 25,000 men, no extreme figure, the threat of one member that the working classes would think the army was being increased in order to be used by capital against labour, is said to have caused so much alarm that the plan was hastily dropped. So far as a stranger can judge, there is certainly less respect for the Senate collectively, and for most of the senators individually, now than there was eighteen years ago, though, of course, there are among its members men of an ability and character which would do honour to any assembly,
CHAP, XII SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 119
The fairest judgment I know on the Senate’s merits is contained in the following extract from an acute American writer, who says (writing in 1885):
“The Senate is just what the mode of its election and the conditions of public life in this country make it. Its members are chosen from the ranks of active politicians, in accordance with a law of natural selection to which the State legislatures are commonly obedient; and it is probable that it contains, consequently, the best men that our system calls into politics. If these best men are not good, it is because our system of government fails to attract better men by its prizes, not because the country affords or could afford no finer material. The Senate is in fact, of course, nothing more than a part, though a considerable part, of the public service ; and if the general con- ditions of that service be such as to starve statesmen and foster demagogues, the Senate itself will be full of the latter kind, simply because there are no others available. There cannot be a separate breed of public men reared specially for the Senate. It must be recruited from the lower branches of the representative system, of which it is only the topmost part. No stream can be purer than its sources. The Senate can have in it no better men than the best men of the House of Representatives ; and if the House of Representatives attracts to itself. only inferior talent, the Senate must put up with the same sort. Thus the Senate, though it may not be as good as could be wished, is as good as it can be under the circumstances. It contains the most perfect product of our politics, whatever that product may be.”?
The place which the Senate holds in the constitutional system: of America cannot be fully appreciated till the remaining parts of that system have been described. This much, however, may be claimed for it, that it has been and is, on the whole, a steadying and moderating power. One cannot say in the language of European politics that it has represented aristocratic principles, or anti-popular principles, or even conservative principles. Each of the great historic parties has in turn commanded a majority in it, and the difference between their strength has during the last decade been but slight. On none of the great issues that have divided the nation has the Senate been, for any long period, decidedly opposed to the other House of Congress. It showed no more capacity than the House for
1 Woodrow Wilson, Congressional Government, pp. 194, 195.
120 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT "pan tae
grappling with the problems of slavery extension. It was scarcely less ready than the House to strain the Constitution by supporting Lincoln in the exercise of the so-called war powers, or subsequently by cutting down presidential authority in the struggle between Congress and Andrew Johnson. All the fluctuations of public opinion tell upon it, nor does it venture, any more than the House, to confront a popular impulse, because it is, equally with the House, subject to the control of the great parties, which seek to use while they obey the dominant senti- ment of the hour.
But the fluctuations of opinion tell on it less energetically than on the House of Representatives. They reach it slowly and gradually, owing to the system which renews it by one-third every second year, so that it sometimes happens that before the tide has risen to the top of the flood in the Senate it has already begun to ebb in the country. The Senate has been a stouter bulwark against agitation, not merely because a majority of the senators have always four years of membership before them, within which period public feeling may change, but also because the senators have been individually stronger men than the repre- sentatives. They are less democratic, not in opinion, but in temper, because they have more self-confidence, because they have more to lose, because experience has taught them how fleeting a thing popular sentiment is, and how useful a thing continuity in policy is. The Senate has therefore usually kept its head better than the House of Representatives. It has ex- pressed more adequately the judgment, as contrasted with the emotion, of the nation. In this sense it does constitute a “ check and balance” in the Federal government. Of the three great functions which the Fathers of the Constitution meant it to perform, the first, that of securing the rights of the smaller States, is no longer important, because the extent of State rights has been now well settled; while the second, that of advising or controlling the Executive in appointments as well as in treaties, has given rise to evils almost commensurate with its benefits. But the third duty is still well discharged, for “the propensity of a single and numerous assembly to yield to the impulse of sudden and violent passions” is restrained.
CHAPTER XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
THE House of Representatives, usually called for shortness the House, represents the nation on the basis of population, as the Senate represents the States.
But even in the composition of the House the States play an important part. The Constitution provides! that “ representa- tives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several States according to their respective numbers,” and under this provision Congress allots so many members of the House to each State in proportion to its population at the last preceding decennial census, leaving the State to determine the districts within its own area for and by which the members shall be chosen. These districts are now equal or nearly equal in size ; but in laying them out there is ample scope for the process called ‘“‘ gerrymandering,” ? which the dominant party in a State
1 Constitution, Art. i. § 2, par. 3; cf. Amendment xiv. § 2.
2 So called from Elbridge Gerry, a leading Democratic politician in Massa- chusetts (a member of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, and in 1812 elected Vice-President of the United States), who when Massachusetts was being re-dis- tricted contrived a scheme which gave one of the districts a shape like that of a lizard. A noted artist entering the room of an editor who had a map of the new districts hanging on the wall over his desk observed, “* Why, this district looks like a salamander,” and put in the claws and eyes of the creature with his pencil. “‘ Say rather a Gerrymander,” replied the editor; and the name stuck. The aim of gerrymandering, of course, is so to lay out the one-membered districts as to secure in the greatest possible number of them a majority for the party which conducts the operation. This is done sometimes by throwing the greatest possible number of hostile voters into a district which is anyhow certain to be hostile, sometimes by adding to a district where parties are equally divided some place in which the majority of friendly voters is sufficient to turn the scale. There is a district in Mississippi (the so-called Shoe String district) 500 miles long by 40 broad, and another in Pennsylvania resembling a dumb- bell. South Carolina furnishes some beautiful recent examples. And in Missouri a district has been contrived longer, if measured along its windings, than the State itself, into which as large a number as possible of the negro voters have been thrown,
122 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
rarely fails to apply for its own advantage. Where a State legis- lature has failed to redistribute the State into congressional dis- tricts, after the State has received an increase of representatives, the additional member or members are elected by the voters of the whole State on a general ticket, and are called “ representa- tives at large.” Very recently one State (Maine) elected ali its representatives on this plan, while another (Kansas) elected three by districts and four by general ticket. Each district, of course, lies wholly within the limits of one State. When a seat becomes vacant the governor of the State issues a writ for a new election, and when a member desires to resign his seat he does so by letter to the governor.
The original House which met in 1789 contained only sixty- five members, the idea being that there should be one member for every 30,000 persons. As population grew and new States were added, the number of members was increased. Originally Congress fixed the ratio of members to population, and the House accordingly grew; but latterly, fearing a too rapid increase, it has fixed the number of members with no regard for any precise ratio of members to population. At present the total number of representatives is 325, being, according to the census of 1880, one member to 154,325 souls. Four States, Colorado, Dela- ware, Nevada, and Oregon, have only one representative each ; four others have two each; while New York has thirty-four, and Pennsylvania twenty-eight. Besides these full members there are also eight Territorial delegates, one from each of the Terri- tories, regions in the West enjoying a species of self-government, but not yet formed into States. These delegates sit and speak, but have no right to vote, being unrecognized by the Constitu- tion. They are, in fact, merely persons whom the House under a statute admits to its floor and permits to address it.
The electoral franchise on which the House is elected is for each State the same as that by which the members of the more numerous branch of the State legislature are chosen. Originally electoral franchises varied very much in different States: now a suffrage practically all but universal prevails everywhere. <A State, however, has a right of limiting the suffrage as it pleases, and many States do exclude persons convicted of crime, paupers, illiterates, etc. By the fifteenth amendment to the Constitution (passed in 1870) “the right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by any State on account of
CHAP, XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 123
race, colour, or previous condition of servitude,” while by the fourteenth amendment (passed in 1868) “ the basis of representa- tion in any State is reduced in respect of any male citizens ex- cluded from the suffrage, save for participation in rebellion or other crimes.” Each State has therefore a strong motive for keeping its suffrage wide, but the fact remains that the franchise by which the Federal legislature is chosen may differ vastly, and does in some points actually differ in different parts of the Union.!
Members are elected for two years, and the election always takes place in the even years, 1884, 1886, 1888, and so forth. Thus the election of every second Congress coincides with that of a President; and admirers of the Constitution find in this arrangement another of their favourite “checks,” because while it gives the incoming President a Congress presumably, though by no means necessarily, of the same political complexion as his ewn, it enables the people within two years to express their approval or disapproval of his conduct by sending up another House of Representatives which may support or oppose the policy he has followed. The House does not in the regular course of things meet until a year has elapsed from the time when it has been elected, though the President may con- voke it sooner, z.e. a House elected in November 1888 will not meet till December 1889, unless the President summons it in “ extraordinary session” some time after March 1889, when the previous House expires. This summons has been issued ten times only since 1789; and has so often brought ill luck to the summoning President that a sort of superstition against it has now grown up.” The question is often mooted whether a new Congress ought not by law to meet within six months after its election, for there are inconveniences in keeping an elected House unorganized and Speakerless for a twelvemonth. But the country is not so fond of Congress as to desire more of it. It is a singular result of the present arrangement that the old House continues to sit for nearly four months after the members of the new House have been elected.
1 Rhode Island still retains a certain small property qualification for electors, and in some States payment of a poll tax is made a condition to the exercise of electoral rights. See chapter XL. on State Legislatures.
2 This ill luck is supposed, (says Mr. Blaine in his Zwenty Years in Congress) to attach especially to May sessions, which reminds one of the superstition against May marriages mentioned by John Knox apropos of the marriage of Mary Queen of Scots and Darnley.
124 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ; PART [
The expense of an election varies greatly from district to district. Sometimes, especially in great cities where illegitimate expenditure is more frequent and less detectible than in rural districts, it rises to a sum of $10,000 (£2000) or more: some- times it is trifling. No estimate of the average can be formed, because no returns of election expenses are required by law. I| fancy that a seat costs, as a rule, less than one for a county division does in England.! A candidate, unless very wealthy, is not expected to pay the whole expense out of his own pocket, but is aided often by the local contributions of his friends, some- times by a subvention from the election funds of the party in the State. Most of the expenditure is legitimate, that is to say, it goes in paying for meetings, in printing, in advertisements, in agency. All the official expenses, such as for clerks, polling booths, etc., are paid by the public. Bribery is not rare in the urban districts, nor in some of the country districts: but elec- tions are seldom impeached on that ground, for the difficulty of proof is increased by the circumstance that the House, which is of course the investigating and deciding authority, does not meet till a year after the election. As a member is elected for two years only, and the investigation would probably drag on during the whole of the first session, it is scarcely worth while to dispute the return for the sake of turning him out for the second session.2, Systematic treating is uncommon. Sometimes in country places a voter who has come from a distance to vote, expects a free dinner, and no one complains if he gets it. In some States, drinking places are closed on the election day.
Among the members of the House there are few young men,
1 In England the Act 46 and 47 Vict. c. 51, Schedule I., fixes the maximum expenditure of a candidate, exclusive of personal expenses and returning officer’s charges, as follows :—In a borough £380, and an additional £30 for every complete 1000 electors above 2000. In a county £710, and an additional £60 for every complete 1000 electors above 2000. Expenses at borough elections are usually below the legal maximum, in counties not so often. The average expenditure, all
kinds of expense included, seems, in county constituencies, to be from £1100- £1200, and in boroughs from £400-£500.
2 That under these favouring conditions bribery is not common may be due to the great size of the congressional districts (average population of a district (1888) at least 160,000). Bribery sprang up in England when constituencies were small —it was far more rife in boroughs than in counties—and its disappearance of late years is probably due to the enormous enlargement of the constituencies as well as to the severe and searching provisions of the present law. At Rome, however, candidates used to bribe large numbers of electors ; and I have heard of city dis. tricts in America in which thousands of electors were believed to have received a pecuniary consideration.
CHAP. X{II THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 125
and still fewer old men. The immense majority are between forty and sixty. Lawyers abound, including in that term both those who in Great Britain are called barristers or advocates, and those who are called attorneys, there being in America no dis- tinction between these two branches of the profession. An analysis of the House in the fiftieth Congress, that of 1887-89, showed that two hundred and three members, or nearly two- thirds of the whole number, had been trained or had practised as lawyers. Of course many of these had practically dropped law as a business, and given themselves wholly to politics. Next in number come the men engaged in manufactures or commerce, in agriculture, or banking, or journalism, but no one of these occupations counted as many as forty members.! No military or naval officer, and no person in the civil service of the United States, can sit. Scarcely any of the great railway men go into Congress, a fact of much significance when one considers that they are really the most powerful people in the country ; and of the numerous lawyer members very few are leaders of the bar in their respective States. The reason is the same in both cases. Residence in Washington makes practice at the bar of any of the great cities impossible, and men in lucrative practice would not generally sacrifice their profession in order to sit in the House, while railway managers or financiers are too much engrossed by their business to be able to undertake the duties of a member. The absence of railway men by no means implies the absence of railway influence, for it is as easy for a company to influence legislation from without Congress as from within.
Most members, including nearly all western men, have re- ceived their early education in the common schools, but one half or more of the whole number have also graduated in a university or college. This does not necessarily mean what it would mean in Europe, for some of the smaller colleges are no better than English grammar schools and not as good as German gymnasia. It is noticeable that in the accounts of their career which mem- bers prepare for the pages of the Congressional Directory, they usually dwell upon the fact of their graduation, or state that they
1 In the fiftieth Congress the number of persons stating themselves to be en- gaged in commerce was 39, in agriculture 25. In the forty-eighth Congress there were 205 lawyers. I take these numbers from the Congressional Directory, which I have carefully analyzed, but as some members do not state their occupations, the analysis is not quite complete, and there are probably more lawyers than the number I have given.
126 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
have “received an academic education.”! A good many, but apparently not the majority, have served in the legislature of their own State. Comparatively few are wealthy, and few are very poor, while scarcely any were at the time of their election working men. Of course no one could be a working man while he sits, for he would have no time to spare for his trade, and the salary would more than meet his wants. Nothing prevents an artisan from being returned to Congress, but there seems little disposition among the working classes to send one of them- selves.
A member of the House enjoys the title of Honourable, which is given to him no’ merely within the House (as in England), but in the world at large, as for instance in the addresses of his letters. As he shares it with members of State senates, all the higher officials, both Federal and State, and judges, the dis- tinction is not deemed a high one.
An estimate of the powers of Congress as a whole belongs to a later chapter. As regards those of the House in particular, it is enough to say that. they are in theory purely legislative. The House has no share in the executive functions of the Senate, nothing to do with confirming appointments or approving treaties. On the other hand, it has the exclusive right of initiating re- venue bills and of impeaching officials, features borrowed, through the State Constitutions, from the English House of Commons, and of choosing a President in case there should be no absolute majority of presidential electors for any one candidate. This very important power it exercised in 1801 and 1825.?
Setting extraordinary sessions aside, every Congress has two sessions, distinguished as the First or Long and the Second or Short. The long session begins in the fall of the year after the election of a Congress, and continues, with a recess at Christmas, till the July or August following. The short session begins in the December after the July adjournment, and lasts till the 4th of March following. The whole working life of a House is thus from
ten to twelve months. Bills do not, as in the English Parliament, .
expire at the end of each session ; they run on from the long session to the short one. All however that have not been passed when
1 In the Congressional Directory for the fiftieth Congress I find 209 members claiming to have received a “collegiate” or “academic” education, 84 owning to an elementary or common school education, and the remainder silent on the subject. 2 See above, Chapter V.
CHAP, XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 127
the fatal 4th March arrives perish forthwith, for the session being fixed by statute cannot be extended at pleasure! There is con- sequently a terrible scramble to get business pushed through in the last week or two of a Congress.
The House usually meets at noon, and sits till four or six o'clock, though towards the close of a session these hours are lengthened. Occasionally when obstruction occurs, or when at the very end of a session messages are going backwards and for- wards between the House, the Senate, and the President, it sits all night long.
The usages and rules of procedure of the House, which differ ‘in many respects from those of the Senate, are too numerous to be described here. It is said that an industrious member needs one whole session to learn them. I will advert only to a few points of special interest, choosing those which illustrate Ameri- can political ideas or bring out the points of likeness and unlike- ness between Congress and the English Parliament. The subject of committees will require a chapter to itself.
An oath or affirmation of fidelity to the Constitution of the United States is (as prescribed by the Constitution) taken by all members ;* also by the clerk, the sergeant-at-arms, the door- keeper, and the post-master.
The sergeant-at-arms is the treasurer of the House, and pays to each member his salary and mileage (travelling expenses). He has the custody of the mace, and the duty of keeping order, which in extreme cases he performs by carrying the mace into a throng of disorderly members. This symbol of authority, which, as in the House of Commons, is moved from its place when the House goes into committee, consists of the Roman fasces, in ebony, bound with silver bands in the middle and at the ends, each rod ending in a spear head, at the other end a globe of silver, and on the globe a silver eagle ready for flight. English
1 Senate bills do not die by effluxion of time.
A proposal recently made to extend the session till April and have the Presi- dent inaugurated then seems likely to be adopted.
2 The oath is administered by the Speaker, and in the form following: “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic ; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to enter, so help me God.” “ Allegi- ance” to a legal instrument would have seemed an odd expression to those ages in which the notion of allegiance arose,
fi A ¢ ? ; AoA t ten
128 ' THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
precedent suggests the mace, but as it could not be surmounted by a crown, Rome has prescribed its design.
The clerk of the last preceding House acts as a sort of tem- porary chairman till a Speaker is chosen; members then ad- dress him, and he decides questions of order.
The proceedings each day begin with prayers, which are con- ducted by a chaplain who is appointed by the House, not as in England by the Speaker, and who may, of course, be selected from any religious denomination.1_ Lots are drawn for seats at the beginning of the session, each member selecting the place he pleases according as his turn arrives. By courtesy the senior member is allowed to retain the seat he has appropriated before the drawing by putting his hat upon it. The places at the extreme right and left of the chair are the least desired. Mem- bers generally try to secure seats near their friends, or other members from the same State. Although the Democrats are mostly to the Speaker’s right hand, members do not sit strictly according to party, a circumstance which deprives invective of much of its dramatic effect. One cannot, as in England, point the finger of scorn at “hon. gentlemen opposite.” Every mem- ber is required to remain uncovered in the House.
Every member addresses the Speaker and the Speaker only, and refers to another member not by name but as the “ gentle- man from Pennsylvania,” or as the case may be, without any particular indication of the district which the person referred to: represents. As there are twenty-eight gentlemen from Pennsyl- vania, and the descriptives used in the English House of Com- mons (learned, gallant, right honourable) are not in use, facili- ties for distinguishing the member intended are not perfect. A member usually speaks from his seat, but may speak from the clerk’s desk or from a spot close to the Speaker’s chair. No one may pass between the Speaker and the member speaking, a curious bit of adherence to English usage.
Divisions were originally (rule of 17th April 1789) taken by going to the right and left of the chair, according to the old practice of the English House of Commons.” This having been
1 Sermons do not seem to have been ever preached before either House of Congress, as they still occasionally are before the House of Commons. A sermon was preached at the opening of the French States General in 1789.
2 It was not until 1836 (and in fact as a result of the change in the character
of the House of Commons made by the Reform Act of 1832) that the present system of recording the names of members who vote by making them pass
eI Ee oan ine ee pe °
AN Neale
et ay,
\ 6 1 ;
CHAP, XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 129
found inconvenient, a resolution of 9th June 1789 established the present practice, whereby members rise in their seats and are counted in the first instance by the Speaker, but if he is in doubt, or if a count be required by one-fifth of a quorum (i.e. by one-tenth of the whole House), then by two tellers named by the Speaker, between whom, as they stand in the middle gangway, members pass. If one-fifth of a quorum demand a call of yeas and nays, this is taken; the clerk calls the full roll of the House, and each member answers aye or no to his name, or says “no vote.” When the whole roll has been called, it is called over a second time to let those vote who have not voted in the first call. Members may now change their votes. Those who have entered the House after their names were passed on the second call can- not vote, but often take the opportunity of rising to say that they would, if then present in the House, have voted for (or against) the motion. All this is set forth in the Congressional fecord, which also contains a list of the members not voting and of the pairs. ’
When the question is an important one, it is obviously neces- sary that the names of members voting should be put on record. But the call is sometimes demanded in order to give people time to consider how they should vote, and while it is proceeding members may be seen running hither and thither to take the advice of friends or prominent men, not answering to their names on the first call, but awaiting the second call to vote. A process which consumes so much time, for it takes an hour and a quarter to call through the three hundred and twenty-five names, is an obvious and effective engine of obstruction. It is frequently so used, for it can be demanded not only on questions of substance, but on motions to adjourn. This is a rule which the House cannot alter, for it rests on an express provision of the Constitution, Art. i. § 5.
No one may speak more than once to the same question, unless he be the mover of the motion pending, in which case he is permitted to reply after every member choosing to speak has spoken. through lobbies was introduced at Westminster. ‘Till then one party remained in the House while the other retired into the lobby, and only the numbers were recorded. Much dislike was at first evinced to the new plan, and the tellers sometimes found it difficult to ascertain the names of members as they walked past them. At present the tellers merely count the numbers, and the names are taken by four division clerks.
VOL, I kK
130 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
Speeches are limited to one hour, subject to a power to extend this time by unanimous consent, and may, in committee of the whole House, be limited to five minutes. So far as I could learn, this hour rule works very well, and does not tend to bring speeches up to that length as a regular thing. A member is at liberty to give part of his time to other members, and this is in practice constantly done. The member speaking will say: “I yield the floor to the gentleman from Ohio for five minutes,” and so on. Thus a member who has once secured the floor has a large control of the debate.
The great remedy against prolix or obstructive debate is the so-called previous question, which is moved in the form, ‘Shall the main question be now put?” and when ordered closes forth- with all debate, and brings the House to a direct vote on that main question, On the motion for the putting of the main question no debate is allowed; but it does not destroy the right of the member “reporting the measure under consideration ” from a committee, to wind up the discussion by his reply. This closure of the debate may be moved by any member without the need of leave from the Speaker, and. requires only a bare majority of those present. When directed by the House to be applied in committee, for it cannot be moved after the House has gone into committee, it has the effect of securing five minutes to the mover of any amendment, and five minutes to the member who first “obtains the floor” (gets the chance of speaking) in opposi- tion to it, permitting no one else to speak. A member in propos- ing a resolution or motion usually asks at the same time for the previous question upon it, so as to prevent it from being talked out.
Closure by previous question is in almost daily use, and is considered so essential to the progress of business that I never found any member or official who thought it could be dispensed with. Even the senators, who object to its introduction into their own much smaller chamber, agree that it must exist in a large body like the House. To the inquiry whether it was abused, most of my informants answered that this rarely hap- pened, while one, a gentleman officially connected with the House for thirty years, during fourteen of which he had been clerk, went so far as to say that he had never known a case of abuse. This is attributed to the fear entertained of the dis- approval of the people, and to the sentiment within the House itself in favour of full and fair discussion, which sometimes in-
CHAP. x11 '§ THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 131
duces the majority to refuse the previous question when de- manded by one of their own party, or on behalf of a motion which they are as a whole supporting. ‘No one,” they say, “who is bond fide discussing a subject in a sensible way, would be stopped by the application of the previous question. On the other hand we should never get appropriation bills through without it.”
Notwithstanding this powerful engine for expediting business, obstruction, or, as it is called in America, filibustering, is by no means unknown. It is usually practised by making repeated motions for the adjournment of a debate, or for “taking a recess ” (suspending the sitting), or for calling the yeas and nays. Between one such motion and another some business must inter- vene, but as the making of a speech is “business,” there is no difficulty in complying with this requirement. No speaking is permitted on these obstructive motions, yet by them time may be wasted for many continuous hours, and if the obstructing minority is a strong one, it generally succeeds, if not in defeating a measure, yet in extorting a compromise. It must be remem- bered that owing to the provision of the Constitution above mentioned, the House is in this matter not sovereign even over its own procedure. That rules are not adopted, as they might be, which would do more than the present system does to ex- . tinguish filibustering, is due partly to this provision, partly to the notion that it is safer to leave some means open by which a minority can make itself disagreeable, and to the belief that adequate checks exist on any gross abuse of such means. These checks are two. One is the fact that filibustering will soon fail unless conducted by nearly the whole of the party which hap- pens to be in a minority, and that so large a section of the House will not be at the trouble of joining in it unless upon some really serious question. Some few years ago, seventeen or eighteen members tried to obstruct systematically a measure they objected to, but their number proved insufficient, and the attempt failed. But at an earlier date, during the Reconstruc- tion troubles which followed the war, the opposition of the solid Democratic party, then in a minority, succeeded in defeating a bill for placing five of the southern States under military govern- ment. The other check is found in the fear of popular dis- approval. If the nation sees public business stopped and necessary legislation delayed by factious obstruction, it will
ae Wa”
132 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
visit its displeasure both upon the filibustering leaders individu- ally, and on the whole of the party compromised. However hot party spirit may be, there is always a margin of moderate men in both parties whom the unjustifiable use of legally permissible modes of opposition will alienate. Since such men can make themselves felt at the polls when the next election arrives, re- spect for their opinion cools the passion of congressional politicians. Thus the general feeling is that as the power of filibustering is in extreme cases a safeguard against abuses of the system of closure by “previous question,” so the good sense of the community is in its turn a safeguard against abuses of the opportunities which the rules still leave open. One ex- Speaker, who had had large experience in leading both a majority and a minority of the House, observed to me that he thought ‘the rules, taken all in all, as near perfection as any rules could be. This savours of official optimism. We all know the attach- ment which those who have grown old in working a system show to its faults as well as to its merits. Still, true is it that con- gressmen generally complain less of the procedure under which they live, and which seems to an English observer tyrannical, than do members of the English House of Commons of the less rigid methods of their own ancient and famous body. I know no better instance of the self-control and good humour of Americans than the way in which the minority in the House generally submit to the despotism of the majority, consoling themselves with the reflection that it is all according to the rules of the game, and that their turn will come in due course. To use the power of closing debate as stringently at Westminster as it is used at Washington would revolutionize the life of the House of Commons. But the House of Representatives is an assembly of a very different nature. Like the House of Commons it is a legislating, if hardly to be deemed a governing, body. But it is not a debating body. It rules through and by its committees, in which discussion is unchecked by any closing power ; and the whole House does little more than register by its votes the conclusions which the committees submit. One subject alone, the subject of revenue, that is to say, taxation and appropriation, receives genuine discussion by the House at large. And although the “previous question” is often applied to expedite appropriation bills, it is seldom applied till oppor- tunity has been given for the expression of all relevant views.
CHAP. XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 133
The rules regarding the procedure in committee of the whole House are in the main similar to those of the British House of Commons; but the chairman of such a committee is not (as usually in England) a permanent chairman of Ways and Means, but a person nominated by the Speaker on each occasion. No member can speak twice to any question in Committee of the Whole until every member desiring to speak shall have spoken.
The House has a power of going into secret session whenever confidential communications are received from the President, or a member informs it that he has communications of a secret nature tomake. But this power seems to have been rarely used, certainly never of late years. Every word spoken is reported by official stenographers and published in the Congressional Record, and the huge galleries are never cleared.
The number of bills brought into the House every year is very large, averaging over 7000. In the thirty-seventh Congress (1861-63) the total number of bills introduced was 1026, viz.:— 613 House bills, and 433 Senate bills. In the forty-sixth it had risen to 9481, of which 7257 were House bills, 2224 Senate bills, showing that the increase has been much larger in the House than in the Senate. In the forty-ninth Congress (1885- 87) the number was rising still further, the number up to July 1886 being 12,906, exclusive of 277 joint resolutions. In the British House of Commons the total number of bills introduced was, in the session of 1885, 481, of which 202 were public and 279 private bills.1 America is, of course, a far larger country, but the legislative competence of Congress is incomparably smaller than that of the British Parliament, seeing that the chief part of the field both of public bill and private bill legisla- tion belongs in America to the several States. By far the larger number of bills in Congress are what would be called in England “private” or “local and personal” bills, i.e. they establish no general rule of law. but are directed to particular cases. Such are the numerous bills for satisfying persons with claims against the Federal Government, and for giving or restoring pensions to individuals alleged to have served in the Northern armies during the War of Secession. It is only to a very small extent that bills can attempt to deal with ordinary private law, since nearly the whole of that topic belongs to State legislation. It is need-
1 The session of 1886 was cut short by a dissolution, and therefore is not a typical case.
134 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
less to say that the proportion of bills that pass to bills that fail is a very small one, not one-thirtieth.1 As in England so even more in America, bills are lost less by direct rejection than by failing to reach their third reading, a mode of extinction which the good-nature of the House, or the unwillingness of its mem- bers to administer snubs to one another, would prefer to direct: rejection, even were not the want of time a sufficient excuse to the committees for failing to report them. One is told in Washington that few bills are brought in with a view to being passed. They are presented in order to gratify some particular persons or places, and it is well understood in the House that they must not be taken seriously. Sometimes a less pardonable motive exists. The great commercial companies, and especially the railroad companies, are often through their land grants and otherwise brought into relations with the Federal Government. Bills are presented in Congress which purport to withdraw some of the privileges of these companies, or to establish or favour rival enterprises, but whose real object is to levy blackmail on these wealthy bodies, since it is often cheaper for a company to buy off its enemy than to defeat him either by the illegitimate influence of the lobby, or by the strength of its case in open combat. Several great corporations have thus to maintain a permanent staff at Washington for the sake of resisting legisla- tive attacks upon them, some merely extortionate, some intended to win local popularity.
The title and attributions of the Speaker of the House are taken from his famous English original. But the character of the office has greatly altered from that original. The note of the Speaker of the British House of Commons is his impartiality. He has indeed been chosen by a party, because a majority means in England a party. But on his way from his place on the benches to the Chair he is expected to shake off and leave behind all party ties and sympathies. Once invested with the wig and gown of office he has no longer any political opinions, and must
1 In the British Parliamentary session of 1885, out of 202 public bills brought in, 144 passed the House of Commons, and several of these were rejected by the House of Lords. Of these 144 public bills 116 had originated in the House of Commons, 28 in the House of Lords, 54 were Government bills, 62 “provisional order” bills, only 28 bills of private members. Of the 279 private bills 203 passed. The number of public bills introduced is increasing in England, but not so rapidly as in America. In the session of 1888, 282 (besides 45 provisional order bills) had been introduced in the House of Commons up to 13th July, a few of them brought from the House of Lords.
ay
CHAP, XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 135
administer exactly the same treatment to his political friends and to those who have been hitherto his opponents, to the oldest or most powerful minister and to the youngest or least popular member. His duties are limited to the enforcement of the rules and generally to the maintenance of order and decorum in debate, including the selection, when several members rise at the same moment, of the one who is to carry on the discussion. These are duties of great importance, and his position one of great dignity, but neither the duties nor the position imply political power. It makes little difference to any English party in Parliament whether the occupant of the chair has come from their own or from the hostile ranks. 'The Speaker can lower or raise the tone and efficiency of the House as a whole by the way he presides over it: but a custom as strong as law forbids him to render help to his own side even by private advice. What- ever information as to parliamentary law he may feel free to give must be equally at the disposal of every member.
In America the Speaker has immense political power, and is permitted, nay expected, to use it in the interests of his party. In calling upon members to speak he prefers those of his own side. He decides in their favour such points of order as are not distinctly covered by the rules. His authority over the arrange- ment of business is so large that he can frequently advance or postpone particular bills or motions in a way which determines their fate. Although he does not figure in party debates in the House, he may and does advise the other leaders of his party privately ; and when they “go into caucus” (i.e. hold a party meeting to determine their action on some pending question) he is present and gives counsel. He is usually the most eminent member of the party who has a seat in the House, and is really, so far as the confidential direction of its policy goes, almost its leader. His most important privilege is, however, the nomina- tion of the numerous standing committees already referred to. In the first Congress (April 1789) the House tried the plan of appointing its committees by ballot ; but this worked so ill that in January 1790 the following rule was passed :—“ All com- mittees shall be appointed by the Speaker unless otherwise specially directed by the House.” This rule has been re-adopted by each successive Congress since then.1_ Not only does he, at
1 In England select committees on public matters are appointed by the House, ic, practically by the ‘‘ whips” of the several parties, though sometimes a dis-
136 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
the beginning of each Congress, select all the members of each of these committees, he even chooses the chairman of each, and thereby vests the direction of its business in hands approved by himself. The chairman is of course always selected from the party which commands the House, and the committee is so com- posed as to give that party a majority. Since legislation, and so much of the control of current administration as the House has been able to bring within its grasp, belong to these committees, their composition practically determines the action of the House on all questions of moment, and as the chairmanships of the more important committees are the posts of most influence, the disposal of them is a tremendous piece of patronage by which a Speaker can attract support to himself and his own section of the party, reward his friends, give politicians the opportunity of rising to distinction or practically extinguish their congressional career. The Speaker is, of course, far from free in disposing of these places. He has been obliged to secure his own election to the chair by promises to leading members and their friends ; and while redeeming such promises, he must also regard the wishes of important groups of men or types of opinion, must compli- ment particular States by giving a place on good committees to their prominent representatives, must avoid nominations which could alarm particular interests. These conditions surround the exercise of his power with trouble and anxiety. Yet after all it is power, power which in the hands of a capable and ambitious man becomes so far-reaching that it is no exaggeration to call him the second, if not the first political figure in the United States, with an influence upon the fortunes of men and the course of domestic events superior, in ordinary times, to the President’s, although shorter in its duration and less patent to the world.!
cussion in the House leads to the addition of other members. Hybrid committees are appointed partly by the House and partly by the committee of Selection. Private bill committees are appointed by the committee of Selection. This com- mittee is a small body of the older and more experienced members, intended to represent fairly all parties and sections of opinion.
1 <The appointment of the committees implies the distribution of work to every member. It means the determination of the cast business shall take. It decides for or against all large matters of policy, or may so decide ; for while Speakers will differ from each other greatly in force of character and in the wish to give positive direction to affairs, the weakest man cannot escape from the necessity of arranging the appointments with a view to the probable character of
measures which will be agitated. This, however, is far from the measure of the Speaker’s power, All rules are more or less flexible. The current of precedents
CHAP, XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 137
The Speaker’s distribution of members among the committees is, next to his own election, the most critical point in the history of a Congress, and that watched with most interest. He devotes himself to it for the fortnight after his installation with an in- tensity equalling that of a European prime minister constructing -a cabinet. The parallel goes further, for as the chairmanships of the chief committees may be compared to the cabinet offices of Europe, so the Speaker is himself a great party leader as well as the president of a deliberative assembly.
Although expected to serve his party in all possible direc- tions, he must not resort to all possible means. Both in the conduct of debate and in the formation of committees a certain measure of fairness to opponents is required from him. He must not palpably wrest the rules of the House to their disadvantage, though he may decide all doubtful points against them. He must give them a reasonable share of “the floor” (i.e. of debate). He must concede to them proper representation on committees. To define his duties on these points is impossible ; yet everybody knows when they have been neglected, as was the case with a recent Speaker, whom I heard universally condemned because he had usually “recognized” (i.e called on in debate) his own friends only, and had otherwise crossed the line which custom has drawn between ordinary and oppressive partisanship.
The dignity of the Speaker’s office is high. He receives a salary of $8000 a year (£1600), which is a large salary for America. In rank he stands next after the President and on a level with the justices of the Supreme Court. Washington society was lately agitated by a claim of his wife to take precedence over the wives of these judges, a claim so ominous in a democratic country that efforts were made to have it adjusted without a formal decision.
is never consistent or uniform. The bias of the Speaker at a critical moment will turn the scale. Mr. Randall as Speaker determined the assent of the House to the action of the Electoral Commission [of 1877]. Had he wished for a revolu- tionary attempt to prevent the announcement of Hayes’s election, no one who has had experience in Congress, at least, will doubt that he could have forced the collision.’—From an article in the New York Nation of April 4; 1878, by an experienced member of Congress.
CHAPTER XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK
AN Englishman expects to find his House of Commons repro- duced in the House of Representatives. He has the more reason for this notion because he knows that the latter was modelled on the former, has borrowed many of its rules and technical expres- sions, and regards the procedure of the English chamber as a storehouse of precedents for its own guidance. The notion is delusive. Resemblances of course there are. But an English parliamentarian who observes the American House at work is more impressed by the points of contrast than by those of similarity. The life and spirit of the two bodies are wholly different.
The room in which the House meets is in the south wing of the Capitol, the Senate and the Supreme Court being lodged in the north wing. It is more than thrice as large as the English House of Commons, with a floor about equal in area to that of Westminster Hall, 139 feet long by 93 feet wide and 36 feet high? Light is admitted through the ceiling. There are on all sides deep galleries running backwards over the lobbies, and cap- able of holding two thousand five hundred persons. The pro- portions are so good that it is not till you observe how small a man looks at the farther end, and how faint ordinary voices sound, that you realize its vast size. The seats are arranged in curved concentric rows looking towards the Speaker, whose handsome marble chair is placed on a raised marble platform
1 Both the Senate and the House of Representatives have recognized Jefferson’s Manual of Parliamentary Practice as governing the House when none of its own rules (or of the joint rules of Congress) is applicable. This manual, prepared by President Jefferson, is-based on English precedents.
2 Not reckoning in the staircase at the south end of Westminster Hall. The figure of the two halls is different, Westminster Hall being rather longer, and the House of Representatives wider. The English House of Commons is only 75 feet long by 45 broad.
CHAP, XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 139
projecting slightly forward into the room, the clerks and the mace below in front of him, in front of the clerks the official stenographers, to the right the seat of the sergeant-at-arms. Each member has a revolving arm-chair, with a roomy desk in front of it, where he writes and keeps his papers. Behind these chairs runs a railing, and behind the railing is an open space into which strangers may be brought, where sofas stand against the - wall, and where smoking is practised, even by strangers, though the rules forbid it.
When you enter, your first impression is of noise and turmoil, a noise like that of short sharp waves in a Highland loch, fretting under a squall against a rocky shore. The raising and dropping of desk lids, the scratching of pens, the clapping of hands to call the pages, keen little boys who race along the gangways, the pattering of many feet, the hum of talking on the floor and in the galleries, make up a din over which the Speaker with the sharp taps of his hammer, or the orators straining shrill throats, find it hard to make themselves audible. J never heard Ameri- can voices sound so harsh or disagreeable as they do here. Nor is it only the noise that gives the impression of disorder. Often three or four members are on their feet at once, each shouting to catch the Speaker’s attention. Others, tired of sitting still, rise to stretch themselves, while the Western visitor, long, lank, and imperturbable, leans his arms on the railing, chewing his cigar, and surveys the scene with little reverence. Less favourable conditions for oratory cannot be imagined, and one is not sur- prised to be told that debate was more animated and practical in the much smaller room which the House formerly occupied.
Not only is the present room so big that only a powerful and well-trained voice can fill it, but the desks and chairs make a speaker feel as if he were addressing furniture rather than men, while of the members few seem to listen to the speeches.. It is true that they sit in the House instead of. running out into the lobbies as people do in the British House of Commons, but they are more occupied in talking or writing, or reading newspapers, than in attending to the debate. To attend is not easy, for only a shrill voice can overcome the murmurous roar; and one some- times finds the newspapers in describing an unusually effective . speech, observe that ‘Mr. So-and-So’s speech drew listeners about him from all parts of the House.” They could not hear him where they sat, so they left their places to crowd in the
140 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
gangways near him. “Speaking in the House,” says an Ameri- can writer, “is like trying to address the people in the Broadway omnibuses from the kerbstone in front of the Astor House.
Men of fine intellect and of good ordinary elocution have ex- claimed in despair that in the House of Representatives the mere physical effort to be heard uses up all the powers, so that intel- lectual action becomes impossible. The natural refuge is in written speeches or in habitual silence, which one dreads more and more to break.”
It is hard to talk calm good sense at the top of your voice, hard to unfold a complicated measure. A speaker’s vocal organs react upon his manner, and his manner on the substance of his speech. It is also hard to thunder at an unscrupulous majority or a factious minority when they do not sit opposite to you, but all round you and behind you as is the case inthe House. The Americans think this an advantage, because it prevents scenes of disorder. They may be right; but what order gains oratory loses. It is admitted that the desks are a mistake, as encourag- ing inattention by enabling men to write their letters ; but though nearly everybody agrees that they would be better away, nobody supposes that a proposition to remove them would succeed. So too the huge galleries add to the area the voice has to fill; but the public like them, and might resent a removal to a smaller room. The smoking shocks an Englishman, but not more than the English practice of wearing hats in both Houses of Par- liament shocks an American. Interruption, cries of “ Divide,” interjected remarks, are not more frequent—when I have been present they seemed to be much less frequent—than in the House of Commons. Applause is given more charily, as is usually the case in America. Instead of ‘“ Hear, hear,” there is a clapping of hands and hitting of desks.
The method of taking a division by calling on each party to stand up, first the ayes and then the noes, is more expeditious than the English plan of sending men into opposite lobbies, but the calling of the roll, which one-fifth of half the House can and frequently does demand, is slower. Both methods of dividing are less dramatic than the English, and neither compels a man to vote, _ for if you wish to abstain, you need not rise ; and when the roll
1 The House decided in 1859, at the end of one Congress, that the desks should be removed from the Hall (as the House is called), but in the next succeeding session the old arrangement was resumed.
CHAP. XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 141
is called you may refrain from answering to your name, or may slip outside the bar.
There is little good speaking. I do not mean merely that fine oratory, oratory which presents valuable thoughts in eloquent words, is rare, for it is rare in all assemblies. But in the House of Representatives a set speech upon any subject of importance tends to become not an exposition or an argument but a piece of elaborate and high-flown declamation. Its author is often wise enough to send direct to the reporters what he has written out, having read aloud a small part of it in the House. When it has been printed im eatenso in the Congressional Record (leave to get this done being readily obtained), he has copies struck off and distributes them among his constituents. Thus everybody is pleased and time is saved.1
That there is not much good business debating, by which I mean a succession of comparatively short speeches addressed to a practical question, and hammering it out by the collision of mind with mind, arises not from any want of ability among the mem- bers, but from the unfavourable conditions under which the House acts. Most of the practical work is done in the standing committees, while much of the House’s time is consumed in pointless discussions, where member after member delivers him- self upon large questions, not likely to be brought to a definite issue. Many of the speeches thus called forth have a value as repertories of facts, but the debate as a whole is unprofitable and languid. On the other hand the five-minute debates which take place, when the House imposes that limit of time, in Committee of the Whole on the consideration of a bill reported from a standing committee, are often lively, pointed, and effective. The topics which excite most interest and are best discussed are those of taxation and the appropriation of money, more particularly to public works, the improvement of rivers and harbours, erection of Federal buildings, and so forth. This kind of business is indeed to most of its members the chief interest of Congress, the business which evokes the finest skill of a tactician and offers the severest temptations to a frail conscience. As a theatre or school either of political eloquence or political wisdom, the House has been inferior not only to the Senate but to most
1 [ was told that formerly speeches might be printed in the Record as a matter of course, but that, a member having used this privilege to print and circulate a poem, the right was restrained.
142 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
European assemblies. Nor does it enjoy much consideration at home. Its debates are very shortly reported in the Washington papers as well as in those in Philadelphia and New York. ‘They. are not widely read, and do little to instruct or influence public opinion.
This is of course only one part of a legislature’s functions. An assembly may despatch its business successfully and yet shine with few lights of genius. But the legislation on public matters which the House turns out is scanty in quantity and generally mediocre in quality. What is more, the House tends to avoid all really grave and pressing questions, skirmishing round them, but seldom meeting them in the face or reaching a decision which marks an advance. If one makes this observa- tion to an American, he replies that at this moment there are few such questions lying within the competence of Congress, and that in his country representatives must not attempt to move faster than their constituents. This latter remark is eminently true ; it expresses a feeling which has gone so far that Congress conceives its duty to be to follow and not to seek to lead public opinion. The harm actually suffered so far is not grave. But the European observer cannot escape the impression that Con- gress might fail to grapple with a serious public danger, and is at present hardly equal to the duty of guiding and instructing the political intelligence of the nation.
In all assemblies one must expect abundance of unreality and pretence, many speeches obviously addressed to the gallery, many bills meant to be circulated but not to be seriously proceeded with. However, the House seems to indulge itself more freely in this direction than any other chamber of equal rank. Its galleries are large, holding 2500 persons. But it talks and votes, I will not say to the galleries, for the galleries cannot hear it, but as if every section of American opinion was present in the room. It adopts unanimously resolutions which perhaps no single member in his heart approves of, but which no one cares to object to, because it seems not worth while to do so. This habit sometimes exposes it to a snub, such as that adminis- tered by Prince Bismarck in the matter of the resolution of con- dolence with the German Parliament on the death of Lasker, a resolution harmless indeed but certainly superfluous and possibly obtrusive. A practice unknown to other countries is of course misunderstood by them, and may provoke resentment. The
’ OHAP, XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 148
resolution requesting the British Government to suspend the execution of O'Donnell, the murderer of the informer Carey, was adopted by the House as a mere matter of form, nobody, except a few Irish members, desiring it, and not even they expecting it to produce any effect. A bill brought into the House in the session of 1886 requesting the President to summon a commer- cial Congress of all transatlantic republics to form a species of American commercial league, produced alarm in the British West Indies and led to solemn questions in the British House of Com- mons, while few people in America noticed it. American statesmen keep their pockets full of the loose cash of empty compliments and pompous phrases, and become so accustomed to scatter it among the crowd that they are surprised when a complimentary resolution or electioneering bill, intended to humour some section of opinion at home, is taken seriously abroad. The House is par- ticularly apt to err in this way, because having no responsibility in foreign policy, and little sense of its own dignity, it applies to international affairs the habits of election meetings.
Watching the House at work, and talking to the members in the lobbies, an Englishman naturally asks himself how the intel- lectual quality of the body compares with that of the House of Commons. His American friends have prepared him to expect a marked inferiority. ‘They are fond of running down congress- men. The cultivated New Englanders and New Yorkers do this out of intellectual fastidiousness, and in order to support the réle which they unconsciously fall into when talking to Euro- peans. The rougher Western men do it because they would not have congressmen either seem or be better in any way than themselves, since that would be opposed to republican equality. A stranger who has taken literally all he hears is therefore sur- prised to find so much character, shrewdness, and keen though limited intelligence among the representatives. Their average business capacity did not seem to me below that of members of the House of Commons of 1880-85. True it is that great lights, such as usually adorn the British chamber, are absent: true also that there are fewer men who have received a high education which has developed their tastes and enlarged their horizons. The want of such men depresses the average. It is raised, how- ever, by the almost total absence of two classes hitherto well re- presented in the British Parliament, the rich, dull parvenu, who has bought himself into public life, and the perhaps equally
144 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
unlettered young sporting or fashionable man who, neither know- ing nor caring anything about politics, has come in for a county or “(before 1885) a small borough, on the strength of his family estates. Few congressmen sink to so low an intellectual level as these two sets of persons, for congressmen have almost certainly made their way by energy and smartness, picking up a know- ledge of men and things “all the time.” In respect of width of view, of capacity for penetrating thought on political problems, representatives are scarcely above the class from which they came, that of second-rate lawyers or farmers, less often merchants or petty manufacturers. They do not pretend to be statesmen in the European sense of the word, for their careers, which have made them smart and active, have given them little opportunity for acquiring such capacities. As regards manners they are not polished, because they have not lived among polished people ; yet neither are they rude, for to get on in American politics one must be civil and pleasant. The standard of parliamentary lan- guage, and of courtesy generally, has been steadily rising during the last few decades ; I am not sure that it is now lower than in the British House of Commons, where those same decades appear to have witnessed a decline. Scenes of violence and confusion such as occasionally convulse the French chamber, and were common in Washington before the War of Secession, are now unknown.
On the whole, the most striking difference between the House of Representatives and European popular assemblies is its greater homogeneity. The type is marked; the individuals vary little from the type. In Europe all sorts of persons are sucked into the vortex of the legislature, nobles and landowners, lawyers, physicians, business men, artisans, journalists, men of learning, men of science. In America five representatives out of six are politicians pure and simple, members of a class as well defined as any one of the above-mentioned European classes. The American people, though it is composed of immigrants from every country and occupies a whole continent, tends to become more uniform than most of the great European peoples ; and this characteristic is palpable in its legislature.
Uneasy lies the head of an ambitious congressman, for the
1 The term “Congressman” is commonly used to describe a member of the House of Representatives, though of course it ought to include senators also. So in England “‘ Member of Parliament’ means member of the House of Commons, though it covers all persons who have seats in the House of Lords.
CHAP. XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 145
_ chances are about even that he will lose his seat at the next - election. It was observed in 1788 that half of the members of each successive State legislature were new members, and this average has been maintained in the Federal legislature. In the forty-eighth Congress, elected in 1882, only 148 out of the 325 members had sat in the forty-seventh Congress. In the fiftieth the proportion was slightly larger, but only 206 out of the 325 members had sat in any preceding Congress. In England the proportion of members re-elected from Parliament to Parliament is much higher. It was remarked as a novelty in the Parliament of 1885, elected after a sweeping measure for the redistribution of seats, that about one-third of the members had not sat in the Parliament of 1880. Any one can see how much influence this constant change in the composition of the American House must have upon its legislative efficiency.
I have kept to the last the feature of the House which an Englishman finds the strangest. é
It has parties, but they are headless. There is neither Government nor Opposition; neither leaders nor whips. No minister, no person holding any Federal office or receiving any Federal salary, can be a member of it. That the majority may be and often is opposed to the President and his cabinet, does not strike Americans as odd, because they proceed on the theory that the legislative ought to be distinct from the executive authority. Since no minister sits, there is no official representative of the party which for the time being holds the reins of the executive government. Neither is there any unofficial representative. And as there are no persons whose opinions expressed in debate are followed, so there are none whose duty it is to bring up members to vote, to secure a quorum, to see that people know which way the bulk of the party is going.
So far as the majority has a chief, that chief is the Speaker, who has been chosen by them as their ablest and most influential man; but as the Speaker seldom joins in debate (though he may do so by leaving the chair, having put some one else in it), the chairman of the most important committee, that of Ways and Means, enjoys a sort of eminence, and comes nearer than any one else to the position of leader of the House! But his authority does not always enable him to secure co-operation for
1 The Chairman of the Committee on Appropriations has perhaps as much real power. VOL. I L
‘ 7 IA
146 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI.
debate among the best speakers of his party, putting up now one now another, after the fashion of an English prime minister, and thereby guiding the general course of the discussion.
The minority do not formally choose a leader, nor is there usually any one among them whose career marks him out as practically the first man, but the person whom they have put forward as their party candidate for the Speakership, giving him what is called “the complimentary nomination,” has a sort of vague claim to be so regarded. This honour amounts to very » little. In the Congress which met in December 1883, Mr. Keifer of Ohio, Speaker in the last preceding Congress, received such a complimentary nomination from the Republican party against Mr. Carlisle of Kentucky, whom the Democratic majority elected. But the Republicans immediately afterwards refused to treat Mr. Keifer as leader, and left him, on some motion which he made, in a ridiculously small minority.
How then does the House work ?
If it were a Chamber, like those of France or Germany, divided into four or five sections of opinion, none of which com- mands a steady majority, it would not work at all. But parties are few in the United States, and their cohesion tight. There are usually two only, so nearly equal in strength that the majority cannot afford to dissolve into groups like those of France. Hence upon all large national issues, whereon the general sentiment of the party has been declared, both the majority and the minority know how to vote, and vote solid.
If the House were, like the English House of Commons, to some extent an executive as well as a legislative body—one by whose co-operation and support the daily business of government had to be carried on—it could not work without leaders and whips. This it is not. It neither creates, nor controls, nor destroys, the administration, which depends on the President, himself the offspring of a direct popular mandate.
“Still,” it may be replied, “the House has important functions to discharge. Legislation comes from it. Supply depends on it. It settles the tariff, and votes money for the civil and military services, besides passing measures to cure the defects which experience must disclose in the working of every govern- ment, every system of jurisprudence. How can it satisfy these calls upon it without leaders and organization ?”
To a European eye, it does not seem to satisfy them. It
a ee A oS 7, a tae aN” A arf 7 - . a - * * ‘ Peet eee eee tl ; Me kale. yk s
CHAP, XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 147
votes the necessary supplies, but not wisely, giving sometimes too much, sometimes too little money, and taking no adequate securities for the due application of the sums voted. For many years past it has fumbled over both the tariff problem and the currency problem. It produces few useful laws, and leaves on one side grave practical questions, such as the silver problem, international copyright, the establishment of a general bankrupt law. An Englishman is disposed to ascribe these failures to the fact that as there are no leaders, there is no one responsible for the neglect of business, the miscarriage of bills, the unwise appro- priation of public funds. “In England,” he says, “the ministry of the day bears the blame of whatever goes wrong in the House of Commons. Having a majority, it ought to be able to do what it desires. If it pleads that its measures have been obstructed, and that it cannot under the faulty procedure of the House of Commons accomplish what it seeks, it is met, and crushed, by the retort that in such case it ought to have the procedure changed. What else is its majority good for but to secure the efficiency of Parliament? In America there is no person against whom similar charges can be brought ; although conspicuous folly or perversity on the part of the majority tends to discredit them collectively with the public, and may damage them at the next presidential or congressional election. But responsibility, to be properly effective, ought to be fixed on a few conspicuous leaders. Is not the want of such men, men to whom the country can look, and whom the ordinary members will follow, the cause of some of the faults which are charged on Congress, of its hesitations, its inconsistencies and changes, its ignoble surrenders to some petty clique, its deficient sense of dignity, its shrinking from troublesome questions, its proclivity to jobs ?”
Two American statesmen to whom such a criticism was sub- mitted, replied as follows: “It is not for want of leaders that Congress has forborne to settle the questions mentioned, but because the division of opinion in the country regarding them has been faithfully reflected in Congress. The majority has not been strong enough to get its way ; and this has happened, not only because abundant opportunities for resistance arise from the methods of doing business, but still more because no distinct impulse or mandate towards any particular settlement of these questions has been received from the country. It is not for Congress to go faster than the people. When the country
tale
148 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 13)
knows and speaks its mind, Congress will not fail to act.” The significance of this reply lies in its pointing to a fundamental difference between the conception of the respective positions and duties of a representative body and of the nation at large enter- tained by Americans, and the conception which has hitherto pre- vailed in Europe. Europeans have thought of a legislature as belonging to the governing class. In America there is no such class. Europeans think that the legislature ought to consist of the best men in the country, Americans that it should be a fair average sample of the country. Europeans think that it ought to lead the nation, Americans that it ought to follow the nation.
Without some sort of organization, an assembly of three hundred and thirty men would be a mob, so necessity has pro- vided in the system of committees a substitute for the European party organization. This system of committees will be explained in next chapter ; for the present it is enough to observe that when a matter which has been (as all bills are) referred to a committee, comes up in the House to be dealt with there, the chairman of the particular committee is treated as a leader pro hac vice, and members who knew nothing of the matter are apt to be guided by his speech or his advice given privately. If his advice is not available, or is suspected because he belongs to the opposite party, they seek direction from the member in charge of the bill, if he belongs to their own party, or from some other member of the committee, or from some friend whom they trust. When a debate arises unexpectedly on a question of importance,
members are often puzzled how to vote. The division being -
taken, they get some one to move a call of yeas and nays, and while this slow process goes on, they scurry about asking advice as to their action, and give their votes on the second calling over if not ready on first. If the issue is one of serious consequence to the party, a recess is demanded by the majority, say for two hours. The House then adjourns, each party “ goes into caucus” (the Speaker possibly announcing the fact), and debates the matter with closed doors. Then the House resumes, and each party votes solid according to the determination arrived at in caucus. In spite of these expedients, surprises and scratch votes are not uncommon.
I have spoken of the din of the House of Representatives, of its air of restlessness and confusion, contrasting with the staid gravity of the Senate, of the absence of dignity both in its pro-
CHAP. XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 149 _ ceedings and in the bearing and aspect of individual members. _ All these things notwithstanding, there is something impressive ’ about it, something not unworthy of the continent for which it £ legislates.
; This hugh gray hall, filled with perpetual clamour, this
going of many feet, this irreverent public, watching from the galleries and forcing its way on to the floor, all speak to the
century to form one half of civilized mankind, whose affairs are here debated. If the men are not great, the interests and the - issues are vast and fateful. Here, as so often in America, one ' thinks rather of the future than of the present. Of what tremendous struggles may not this hall become the theatre in
a to insignificance ?
Sow Sh he s te OS
multitude of keen and eager faces, this ceaseless coming and_
beholder’s mind of the mighty democracy, destined in another |
ages yet far distant, when the parliaments of Europe have shrunk —
y
CHAPTER XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS
THE most abiding difficulty of free government is to get large assemblies to work promptly and smoothly either for legislative or executive purposes. We perceive this difficulty in primary assemblies of thousands of citizens, like those of ancient Athens. or Syracuse; we see it again in the smaller representative assemblies of modern countries. Three methods of overcoming it have been tried. One is to leave very few and comparatively simple questions to the assembly, reserving all others for a smaller and more permanent body, or for executive officers. This was the plan of the Romans, where the comitia (primary assemblies) were convoked only to elect magistrates and pass laws, which were short, clear, and submitted en bloc, without possibility of amendment, for a simple Yes or No. Another method is to organize the assemblies into well-defined parties, each recognizing and guided by one or more leaders, so that on most occasions and for most purposes the rank and file of members exert no volition of their own, but move like battalions at the word of command. This has been the English system since about the time of Queen Anne. It was originally worked by means of extensive corruption; and not till this phase was passing away did it become an object of admiration to the world. Latterly it has been reproduced in the parliaments of most modern European states and of the British colonies. The third method, which admits of being more or less combined with the second, is to divide the assembly into a number of smaller bodies to which legislative and administrative questions may be referred, either for final determination or to be examined and reported on to the whole body. This is the system of committees, applied to some small extent in England, to a larger extent in France under the name of bwreawa, and most of all in the United States.
CHAR, XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 161
Some account of its rules and working there is essential to a comprehension of the character of Congress and of the rela. tions of the legislative to the executive branch of the Federal Government.
When Congress first met in 1789, both Houses found them- selves, as the State legislatures had theretofore been and still are, without official members and without leaders! The Senate occupied itself chiefly with executive business, and appointed no standing committees until 1816. The House however had bills to discuss, plans of taxation to frame, difficult questions of ex- penditure, and particularly of the national debt, to consider. For want of persons whose official duty required them, like English ministers, to run the machine by drafting schemes and bringing the raw material of its work into shape, it was forced to appoint committees. At first there were few; even in 1802 we find only five. As the numbers of the House increased and more business flowed in, additional committees were appointed ; and as the House became more and more occupied by large political questions, minor matters were more and more left to be settled by these select bodies. Like all legislatures, the House con- stantly sought to extend its vision and its grasp, and the easiest way to do this was to provide itself with new eyes and new hands in the shape of further committees. The members were
‘not, like their contemporaries in the English House of Commons, well-to-do men, mostly idle; they were workers and desired to be occupied. It was impossible for them all to speak in the House; but all could talk in a committee. Every permanent body cannot help evolving some kind of organization. Here the choice was between creating one ruling committee which should control all business, like an English ministry, and distributing business among a number of committees, each of which should undertake a special class of subjects. The latter alternative was recommended, not only by its promising a useful division of labour, but by its recognition of republican equality. It therefore pre- vailed, and the present elaborate system grew slowly to maturity.
To avoid the tedious repetition of details, I have taken the House of Representatives and its committees for description, because the system is more fully developed there than in the
1 The Congress of the Confederation (1781-88) had been a sort of diplomatic congress of envoys from States, and furnished few precedents available for the Congress under the new constitution.
. 152 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART If
Senate. Buta very few words on the Senate may serve to pre- vent misconceptions.
There were in 1888 forty-one standing Senate committees, appointed for two years, being the period of a Congress.1_ They and their chairmen are chosen not by the presiding officer but by the Senate itself, voting by ballot. Practically they are selected by a caucus of the party majority meeting in secret conclave, and then carried wholesale by vote in the Senate. ach consists of from three to eleven members, the most common numbers being seven and nine, and all senators sit on more than one com- mittee, some upon four or more. The chairman is appointed by the Senate and not by the committees themselves. ‘There are also select committees appointed for a special purpose and lasting for one session only.? Every bill introduced goes after its first and second reading (which are granted as of course) to a standing committee, which examines and amends it, and reports it back to the Senate.
There were in the fiftieth Congress (1888) fifty-four standing committees of the House, 2.¢. committees appointed under stand- ing regulations, and therefore regularly formed at the beginning of every Congress. Each committee consists of from three to sixteen members, eleven and thirteen being the commonest numbers.? Every member of the House is placed on some one committee, and few on more than one. Besides these, select committees on particular subjects of current interest are ap- pointed from time to time. In the forty-ninth Congress there were seven such committees. A complete list of the committees will be found at the end of this chapter. The most important standing committees are the following:—Ways and means ; appropriations ; elections; banking and currency; accounts; rivers and harbours ; judiciary (including changes in private law as well as in courts of justice); railways and canals; foreign affairs ; naval affairs ; military affairs ; public lands ; agriculture ; claims ; and the several committees on the expenditures of the various departments of the administration (war, navy, ete.)
1 Although the Senate is a permanent body, its proceedings are for some pur- poses regulated with reference to the re-election every two years of the House ; just as in England the peers are summoned afresh at the beginning of each Parlia- ment, although they, except the Scotch representative peers, sit for life.
2 In January 1888 there were seven such committees,
3 The committee rooms are smaller than those of the British Parliament : they are carpeted and furnished like private apartments, 4
i 3 ee
CHAP, XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 153
The members of every standing committee are nominated by the Speaker at the beginning of each Congress, and sit through its two sessions ; those of a select committee also by the Speaker, after the committee has been ordered by the House. A select committee lasts only for the session. In pursuance of the rule that the member first named shall be chairman, the Speaker has also the selection of all the chairmen.
To some one of these standing committees each and every bill is referred. Its second as well as its first reading is granted as of course, and without debate, since there would be no time to discuss the immense number of bills presented. When read a second time it is referred under the general rules to a committee ; but doubts often arise as to which is the appropriate committee, because a bill may deal with a subject common to two or more jurisdictions, or include topics some of which belong to one juris- diction, others to another. The disputes which may in such cases arise between several committees lead to keen debates and divisions, because the fate of the measure may depend on which of two possible paths it is made to take, since the one may bring it before a tribunal of friends, the other before a tribunal of enemies. Such disputes are determined by the vote of the House itself.
Not having been discussed, much less affirmed in principle, by the House, a bill comes before its committee with no pre- sumption in its favour, but rather as a shivering ghost stands before Minos in the nether world. It is one of many, and for the most a sad fate is reserved. The committee may take evidence regarding it, may hear its friends and its opponents. They usually do hear the member who has introduced it, since it seldom happens that he has himself a seat on the committee. Members who are interested approach the committee and state their case there, not in the House, because they know that the House will have neither time nor inclination to listen. The committee can amend the bill as they please, and although they cannot formally extinguish it, they can practically do so by reporting adversely, or by delaying to report it till late in the session, or by not reporting it at all.
In one or other of these ways nineteen-twentieths of the bills introduced meet their death, a death which the majority doubt- less deserve, and the prospect of which tends to make members reckless as regards both the form and the substance of their pro-
154 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARE I
posals. A motion may be made in the House that the committee do report forthwith, and the House can of course restore the bill, when reported, to its original form. But these expedients rarely succeed, for few are the measures which excite sufficient interest to induce an impatient and over-burdened assembly to take addi- tional work upon its own shoulders or to overrule the decision of a committee.
The deliberations of committees are usually secret. Evidence is frequently taken with open doors, but the newspapers do not report it, unless the matter excite public interest ; and even the decisions arrived at are often noticed in the briefest way. It is out of order to canvass the proceedings of a committee in the House until they have been formally reported to it; and the ‘ report submitted does not usually state how the members have voted, or contain more than a very curt outline of what has passed. No member speaking in the House is entitled to reveal anything further.
A committee have technically no right to initiate a bill, but as they can either transform one referred to them, or, if none has been referred which touches the subject they seek to deal with, can procure one to be brought in and referred to them, their command of their own province is unbounded. Hence the char- acter of all the measures that may be passed or even considered by the House upon a particular branch of legislation depends on the composition of the committee concerned with that branch. Some committees, such as those on naval and military affairs, and those on the expenditure of the several departments, deal with administration rather than legislation. They have power to summon the officials of the departments before them, and to interrogate them as to their methods and conduct. Authority they have none, for officials are responsible only to their chief, the President ; but the power of questioning is sufficient to check if not to guide the action of a department, since imperative statutes may follow, and the department, sometimes desiring legislation and always desiring money, has strong motives for keeping on good terms with’those who control legislation and the purse. It is through these committees chiefly that the executive and legislative branches of government touch one another. Yet the contact, although the most important thing in a government, is the thing which the nation least notices, and has the scantiest means of watching,
we) FG
- Se
CHAP, XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 155
The scrutiny to which the administrative committees subject the departments is so close and constant as to occupy much of the time of the officials and seriously interfere with their duties. Not only are they often summoned to give evidence: they are required to furnish minute reports on matters which a member of Congress could ascertain for himself. Nevertheless the House committees are not certain to detect abuses or peculation, for special committees of the Senate have repeatedly unearthed dark doings which had passed unsuspected the ordeal of a House in- vestigation. After a bill has been debated and amended by the
_ committee it is reported back to the House, and is taken up when
that committee is called in its order. One hour is allowed to the member whom his fellow committee-men have appointed to report. He seldom uses the whole of this hour, but allots part of it to other members, opponents as well as friends, and usually concludes by moving the previous question. This precludes subsequent amendments and leaves only an hour before the vote is taken. As on an average each committee (excluding the two or three great ones) has only two hours out of the whole ten months of Congress allotted to it to present and have discussed all its bills, it is plain that few measures can be considered, and each but shortly, in the House. The best chance of pressing one through is under the rule which permits the suspension of stand- ing orders by a two-thirds majority during the last six days of the session.
What are the results of this system ?
It destroys the unity of the House as a legislative body. Since the practical work of shaping legislation is done in the committees, the interest of members centres there, and they care less about the proceedings of the whole body. It is as a com- mittee man that a member does his real work. In fact the House has become not so much a legislative assembly as a huge panel from which committees are selected.
It prevents the capacity of the best members from being brought to bear upon any one piece of legislation, however im- portant. The men of most ability and experience are chosen to be chairmen of the committees, or to sit on the two or three greatest. For other committees there remains only the rank and file of the House, a rank and file half of which is new at the beginning of each Congress. Hence every committee (except the aforesaid two or three) is composed of ordinary persons, and
156 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
it is impossible, save by creating a special select committee, to get together what would be called in England “a strong com- mittee,” i.e. one where half or more of the members are excep- tionally capable. The defect is not supplied by discussion in the House, for there is no time for such discussion.
It cramps debate. Every foreign observer has remarked how little real debate, in the European sense, takes place in the House of Representatives. The very habit of debate, the expectation of debate, the idea that debate is needed, have vanished, except as regards questions of revenue and expenditure, because the centre of gravity has shifted from the House to the committees.
It lessens the cohesion and harmony of legislation. Each committee goes on its own way with its own bills just as though it were legislating for one planet and the other committees for others. Hence a want of policy and method in congressional action. The advance is haphazard ; the parts have little relation to one another or to the whole.
It gives facilities for the exercise of underhand and even cor- rupt influence. In a small committee the voice of each member is well worth securing, and may be secured with little danger of a public scandal. The press cannot, even when the doors of committee rooms stand open, report the proceedings of fifty bodies ; the eye of the nation cannot follow and mark what goes on within them; while the subsequent proceedings in the House are too hurried to permit a ripping up there of suspicious bar- gains struck in the purlieus of the Capitol, and fulfilled by votes given in a committee. As will be seen subsequently, I do not think that corruption, in its grosser forms, is rife at Washington. When it appears, it appears chiefly in the milder form of re- ciprocal jobbing or (as it is called) “log-rolling.” But the arrangements of the committee system have produced and sus- tain the class of professional “lobbyists,” men, and women too, who make it their business to “see” members and procure, by persuasion, importunity, or the use of inducements, the passing of bills, public as well as private, which involve gain to their promoters.
It reduces responsibility. In England, if a bad Act is passed or a good bill rejected, the blame falls primarily upon the ministry in power whose command of the majority would have enabled them to defeat it, next upon the party which supported the ministry, then upon the individual members who are officially
t
CHAP, XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 157
recorded to have “backed” it and voted for it in the House. The fact that a select committee recommended it—and compar- atively few bills pass through a select committee—would not be held to excuse the default of the ministry and the majority. But in the United States there is no ministry to be blamed, for the cabinet officers do not sit in Congress ; the House cannot be blamed because it has only followed the decision of its com- mittee ; the committee is a comparatively obscure body, whose members are usually too insignificant to be worth blaming. The chairman is often a man of note, but the people have no leisure to watch fifty chairmen, they know Congress and Congress only ; they cannot follow the acts of those to whom Congress chooses to delegate its functions. No discredit attaches to the dominant party, because they could not control the acts of the eleven men in the committee room. Thus public displeasure rarely finds a victim, and everybody concerned is relieved from the wholesome dread of damaging himself and his party by negligence, perver- sity, or dishonesty. Only when a scandal has arisen so serious as to demand investigation is the responsibility of the member to his constituents and the country brought duly home.
It lowers the interests of the nation in the proceedings of Congress.! Except in exciting times, when large questions have to be settled, the bulk of real business is done not in the great hall of the House but in this labyrinth of committee rooms and the lobbies that surround them. What takes place in view of the audience is little more than a sanction, formal indeed but hurried and often heedless, of decisions procured behind the scenes, whose mode and motives remain undisclosed. Hence people cease to watch Congress with that sharp eye which every
1 “The doubt and confusion of thought which must necessarily exist in the minds of the vast majority of voters as to the best way of exerting their will in influencing the action of an assembly whose organization is so complex, whose acts are apparently so haphazard, and in which responsibility is spread so thin, throws constituencies into the hands of local politicians who are more visible and tangible than are the leaders of Congress, and generates the while a profound dis- trust of Congress as a body whose actions cannot be reckoned beforehand by any standard of promises made at elections or any programmes announced by conven- tions. Constituencies can watch and understand a few banded leaders who dis- play plain purposes and act upon them with promptness ; but they cannot watch or understand forty odd standing committees, each of which goes its own way in doing what it can without any special regard to the pledges of either of the parties from which its membership is drawn.”—Woodrow Wilson, Congressional Govern- ment, a lucid and interesting book from which I have derived much help in this and the two following chapters.
{
158 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
principal ought to keep fixed on his agent. Acts pass unnoticed, whose results are in a few months discovered to be so grave that the newspapers ask how it happened that they were allowed to pass.
The country of course suffers from the want of the light and leading on public affairs which debates in Congress ought to supply. But this is perhaps more fairly chargeable to defects of the House which the committees are designed to mitigate than to the committees themselves. The time which the committee work leaves for the sittings of the House is long enough to permit due discussion did better arrangements exist for conducting it.
It throws power into the hands of the chairmen of com- mittees, especially, of course, of those which deal with finance and with great material interests. They become practically a second set of ministers, before whom the departments tremble, and who, though they can neither appoint nor dismiss a post- master or a tide-waiter, can by legislation determine the policy of the branch of administration which they oversee. This power is not necessarily accompanied by responsibility, because like everything else about the committees, it is largely exercised in secret. Besides, as an able writer remarks, “the more power is divided, the more irresponsible it becomes. The petty character of the leadership of each committee contributes towards making its despotism sure by making its duties uninteresting.” 4
It enables the House to deal with a far greater number of measures and subjects than could otherwise be overtaken; and has the advantage of enabling evidence to be taken by those whose duty it is to re-shape or amenda bill. It replaces the system of interrogating ministers in the House which prevails in most European chambers; and enables the working of the administrative departments to be minutely scrutinized.
It sets the members of the House to work for which their previous training has fitted them much better than for either legislating or debating “in the grand style.” They are shrewd keen men of business, apt for talk in committee, less apt for wide views of policy and elevated discourse in an assembly. The committees are therefore good working bodies, but bodies which confirm congressmen in the intellectual habits they bring with them instead of raising them to the higher platform of national questions and interests.
1 Congressional Government, p. 94.
CHAP, XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 159
On the whole, it may be said that under this system the House despatches a vast amount of work and does the negative part of it, the killing off of worthless bills, in a thorough way. Were the committees abolished and no other organization sub- stituted, the work could not be done. But much of it, including most of the private bills, ought not to come before Congress at all; and the more important part of what remains, viz. public legislation, is dealt with by methods securing neither the press- ing forward of the measures most needed, nor the due debate of those that are pressed forward.
Why, if these mischiefs exist, is the system of committee legislation maintained ?
It is maintained because none better has been, or, as most people think, can be devised. “We have,” say the Americans, “three hundred and twenty-five members in the House, most of them eager to speak, nearly all of them giving constant attend- ance. The bills brought in are so numerous that in our two sessions, one of seven or eight months, the other of three months, not one-twentieth could be fairly discussed on second reading or in committee of the Whole. If even this twentieth were dis- cussed, no time would remain for supervision of the departments of State. That supervision itself must, since it involves the taking of evidence, be conducted by committees and not by the whole House. In England you have one large and strong com- mittee, viz. the ministry of the day, which undertakes all the more important business, and watches even the bills of private members. Your House of Commons could not work for a single sitting without such a committee, as is proved by the fact that when you are left for a little without a ministry, the House adjourns. We cannot have such a committee, because no office-holder sits in Congress. Neither can we organize the House under leaders, because prominent men have among us little authority, since they are unconnected with the executive, and derive no title from the people. Neither can we create a
1 In England the prime minister and the leader of the Opposition (often an ex- prime minister) have been recognized as leaders not only by the candidates who at the last preceding general election have declared their willingness to support one or other, but also by the rank and file of their respective parties. These leaders have thus a sort of right to the allegiance of their followers, though a right which they may forfeit. In America no candidate pledges himself to support a particular congressional leader. It would be thought unbecoming in him to do
go. His allegiance is to the party, and his constituents do not expect him to support any given person, however eminent.
160 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
ruling committee of the majority, because this would be disliked ag an undemocratic and tyrannical institution. Hence our only course is to divide the unwieldy multitude into small bodies capable of dealing with particular subjects. Each of them is no doubt powerful in its own sphere, but that sphere is so small that no grave harm can result. The Acts passed may not be the best possible ; the legislation of the year may resemble a patch- work quilt, where each piece is different in colour and texture from the rest. But as we do not need much legislation, and as nearly the whole field of ordinary private law lies outside the province of Congress, the mischief is slighter than you Europeans expect. If we made legislation easier, we might have too much of it; and in trying to give it the more definite character you suggest, we might make it too bold and sweeping. Be our pre- sent system bad or good, it is the only system possible under our Constitution, and the fact that it was not directly created by that instrument, but has been evolved by the experience of a hundred years, shows how strong must be the tendencies whose natural working has produced it.”
NOTE tro CHAPTER XY.
List of StanpinG ComMITTEES of the House in the Fiftieth Congress, First Session. (Corrected to Jan. 15, 1888.)
On Elections; Ways and Means; Appropriations; Judiciary ; Banking and Currency ; Coinage, Weights and Measures; Commerce; Rivers and Harbours ; Merchant Marine and Fisheries; Agriculture; Foreign Affairs; Military Affairs ; Naval Affairs; Post Office and Post Roads; Public Lands ; Indian Affairs; Territories; Railways and Canals; Manufactures; Mines and Mining; Public Buildings and Grounds ; Pacific Railroads ; Levees and Improvements of the Mississippi River; Education; Labour; Militia; Patents ; Invalid Pensions; Pensions; Claims; War Claims; Private Land Claims ; District of Columbia; Revision of the Laws; Expenditures in the State Department ; Do., Treasury Department ; Do., War Department; Do., Navy Department ; Do., Post Office Department ; Do., Interior Department ; Do., Department of Justice; Do., Public Buildings; Rules; Accounts - Mileage ; Library ; Printing; Enrolled Bills; Reform in the Civil Service ; Election of President, Vice-President, and Representatives ; Eleventh Census ; Indian Depredation Claims ; Ventilation and Acoustics; Alcoholic Liquor Traffic,
There were also in Jan. 1888 seven Select Committees,
Bee ee ee se : ee
—_
, ee. |
Te * 1 4 “an wf | A= \* ., "5 —-
a iG
my
a 3
é Si | :
( " # g ww ;
‘
CHAPTER XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION
LEGISLATION is more specifically and exclusively the business of Congress than it is the business of governing parliaments such as those of England, France, and Italy. We must therefore, in order to judge of the excellence of Congress as a working machine, examine the quality of the legislation which it turns out.
Acts of Congress are of two kinds, public and private. Pass-
_ing by private acts for the present, though they occupy a large
part of congressional time, let us consider public acts. These are of two kinds, those which deal with the law or its administra- tion, and those which deal with finance, that is to say, provide for the raising and application of revenue. I devote this chapter to the former class, and the next to the latter.
There are many points of view from which one may regard the work of legislation. I suggest a few only, in respect of which the excellence of the work may be tested ; and propose to ask: What security do the legislative methods and habits of Congress offer for the attainment of the following desirable objects ? viz. :—
1. The excellence of the substance of a bill, 2.¢. its tendency to improve the law and promote the public welfare.
2. The excellence of the form of a bill, 2.¢. its arrangement
and the scientific precision of its language.
3. The harmony and consistency of an act with the other acts of the same session.
4. The due examination and sifting in debate of a bill.
5. The publicity of a bill, ze. the bringing it to the knowledge of the country at large, so that public opinion may be fully ex- pressed regarding it. ;
1 Some remarks on private bills will be found in Note A to this chapter at the
end of this volume. VOL. I M
162 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
6. The honesty and courage of the legislative assembly in rejecting a bill, however likely to be popular, which their judg-, ment disapproves.
7. The responsibility of some person or body of persons for the enactment of a measure, i.e. the fixing on the right shoulders ~ of the praise for passing a good, the blame for passing a bad, act.
The criticisms that may be passed on American practice under the preceding heads will be made clearer by a comparison of English practice. Let us therefore first see how English bills and acts stand the tests we are to apply to the work of Congress.
In England public bills fall into two classes,—those brought in by the ministry of the day as responsible advisers of the sovereign, and those brought in by private members. In point of law and in point of form there is no difference between these classes, and the only way of ascertaining to which class a given bill belongs is by looking to see whether the names on the back of it are those of ordinary private members or of the official servants of the Crown.! Practically there is all the difference in the world, because a government bill has behind it the re- sponsibility of the ministry, and presumably the weight of the majority which keeps the ministry in office. The ministry dis- pose of a half or more of the working time of the House, and have therefore much greater facilities for pushing forward their bills. Nearly all the most important bills, which involve large political issues, are government bills, so that the hostile critic of a private member’s bill will sometimes argue that the House ought not to permit the member to proceed with it, because it is too large for any unofficial hands. This premised, we may proceed to the seven points above mentioned.
1. In England, as the more important bills are government bills, their policy is sure to have been carefully weighed. The ministry have every motive for care, because the fortunes of a first-class bill are their own fortunes. If it is rejected, they fall. A specially difficult bill is usually framed by a committee of the cabinet, and then debated by the cabinet as a whole before it appears in Parliament. Minor bills are settled in the depart- ments by the parliamentary head with his staff of permanent
1 Tf a private member after bringing in a bill accepts office under the Crown, custom requires that he should either induce his colleagues to take it up, in which case it becomes a government bill, or else relinquish the charge of it to some private member,
CHAP. XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION / 163
officials. A private member has not these advantages: but if he is wise he submits his bill before it is printed to three or four judicious friends, profits by their criticism, and obtains a promise of their support.
2. In England, government bills are prepared by the official government draftsmen, two eminent lawyers with, several assist- ants, who constitute an office for this purpose. Private members who are lawyers often draft their own bills; those who are not generally employ a barrister. The drafting of government bills has much improved of late years, and the faults of form observ- able in British Acts are chiefly due to amendments made in
committee of the whole House, which are often prepared and
inserted in a hurry.
3. The harmony of one government bill with others of the same session is secured by the care of the official draftsmen, as well as by the fact that all emanate from one and the same ministry. No such safeguards exist in the case of private mem- bers’ bills, but it is of course the duty of the ministry to watch these legislative essays, and get Parliament to strike out of any one of them whatever is inconsistent with another measure passed or intended to be passed in the same session.
4, Difficult and complicated bills which raise no political controversy are sometimes referred to a select committee, which goes through them and reports them as amended to the House. They are afterwards considered, and often fully debated, first in committee of the Whole, and then by the House on the stage of report (i.e. report from committee of the Whole to the House). Latterly such bills have begun to be referred to what are called Grand Committees, i.c. committees of at least fifty appointed in each session for the consideration of particular kinds of business. Discussion in these committees replaces the discussion in com- mittee of the Whole; but the bills come before the House on report for further debate. Many bills, however, never go before select or grand committees, but are dealt with by the House itself in the two last-mentioned stages. -While measures which excite political feeling or touch any powerful interest (such as that of landowners or railroads or liquor-dealers) are exhaustively debated, others may slip through unobserved. The enormous pressure of work and the prolixity with which some kinds of business are discussed, involve the hurrying other business through with scant consideration.
164 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT  pART IT
5. Except in the case of discussions at unseasonable hours, the proceedings of Parliament are so far reported in the leading newspapers and commented on by them that bills, even those of private members, generally become known to those whom they may concern. ‘There is usually a debate on the second reading, and this debate attracts notice. Members often receive from persons previously unknown to them suggestions regarding pending measures.
6. A government bill is, by the law of its being, exposed to the hostile criticism of the Opposition, who have an interest in discrediting the ministry by disparaging their work. As respects private members’ bills, it is the undoubted duty of some minister to watch them, and to procure their amendment or rejection if he finds them faulty. This duty is discharged less faithfully than might be wished, but perhaps as well as can be expected from weak human nature, often tempted to conciliate a supporter or an “interest” by allowing a measure to go through which ought to have been stopped.t Private members are generally alert in watching one another’s bills; and the rules of the House of Commons enable them to defeat a measure by objecting to its progress at certain hours.
Responsibility for everything done in the House rests upon the ministry of the day, because they are the leaders of the majority. If they allow a private member to pass a bad bill, if they stop him when trying to pass a good bill, they are in theory no less culpable than if they pass a bad bill of their own. Accordingly, when the second reading of a measure of any con- sequence is moved, it is the duty of some member of the ministry to rise, with as little delay as possible, and state whether the ministry support it, or oppose it, or stand neutral. Standing neutral is, so far as responsibility to the country goes, practically the same thing as supporting. The Opposition, as an organized body, are not expected to express their opinion on any bills except those of high political import. Needless to say, private mem- bers are also held strictly responsible for the votes they give, these votes being all recorded and published next morning. Of course both parties claim praise or receive blame from the country in respect of their attitude towards bills of moment, and
} Now and then a bill passes which sensible men of both parties disapprove, because its advocates are more strenuous than its opponents, and the notion that some popular sentiment favours it deters either party from resistance.
CHAP, XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION 165
when a session has produced few or feeble Acts the Opposition charge the Ministry with sloth or incompetence.
The rules and usages I have described constitute valuable aids to legislation, and the quality of English and Scottish legislation, take it all and all, is good ; that is to say, the statutes are such as public opinion demands, and are well drawn for the purposes they aim at. The chief complaints against the House of Commons as a legislative body are that it is too indulgent to tediousness, and that, owing to its vast and multifarious business, it leaves serious questions unsettled till they have grown more serious, and require remedies more violent than might have at first sufficed.
Let us now apply the same test to the legislation of Congress. What follows refers primarily to the House, but is largely true of the Senate, because in the Senate also the committees play an important part.
The first difference which strikes us between Parliament and Congress is that in neither House of Congress are there any government bills. All measures are brought in by private mem- bers because all members are private. The nearest approach to the government bill of England is one brought in by a leading member of the majority in pursuance of a resolution taken in the congressional caucus of that majority. This seldom happens. One must therefore compare the ordinary congressional bill with the English private member’s bill rather than with a government measure, and expect to find it marked by the faults that mark the former class. The second difference is that whereas in Eng- land the criticism and amendment of a bill takes place in com- mittee of the Whole, in the House of Representatives it takes place in a small committee of sixteen members or less, usually of eleven. In the Senate also the committees do most of the work, but the committee of the Whole occasionally debates a bill pretty fully.
Premising these dissimilarities, I go to the seven points before mentioned.
1. The excellence of the substance of a bill introduced in Congress depends entirely on the wisdom and care of its intro- ducer. He may, if self-distrustful, take counsel with his political
1 Of course there are: often blemishes of detail in Acts of Parliament, which might be removed in a second chamber, did England possess a second chamber well qualified for the duty of revision, and wishful to discharge it.
166 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
allies respecting it. But there is no security for its representing any opinion or knowledge but his own. It may affect the manage- ment of an executive department, but the introducing member does not command departmental information, and will, if the bill passes, have nothing to do with the carrying out of its provisions. On the other hand, the officials of the government cannot submit bills ; and if they find a congressman willing to do so for them, must leave the advocacy and conduct of the measure entirely in his hands.
2. The drafting of a measure depends on the pains taken and skill exerted by its author. Senate bills are usually well drafted because many senators are experienced lawyers: House bills are often crude and obscure. There does not exist either among the executive departments or in connection with Congress, any legal office charged with the duty of preparing bills, or of seeing that the form in which they pass is technically satisfactory.
3. The only security for the consistency of the various mea- sures of the same session is to be found in the fact that those which affect the same matter ought to be referred to the same committee. However, it often happens that there are two or more committees whose spheres of jurisdiction overlap, so that of two bills handling cognate matters, one may go to Committee A and the other to Committee B. Should different views of policy prevail in these two bodies, they may report to the House bills containing mutually repugnant provisions. There is nothing except unusual vigilance on the part of some member interested, to prevent both bills from passing. That mischief from this cause is not serious arises from the fact that out of the multi- tude of bills introduced, few are reported and still fewer become law.
4, The function of a committee of either House of Congress extends not merely to the sifting and amending of the bills referred to it, but to practically re-drawing them, if the committee desires any legislation, or rejecting them by omitting to report them till near the end of the session if it thinks no legislation needed. Every committee is in fact a small bureau of legislation for the matters lying within its jurisdiction. It has for this purpose the advantage of time, of the right to take evidence, and of the fact that some of its members have been selected from their knowledge of or interest in the topics it has to deal with. On the other hand, it suffers from the non-publication of its
e. A : : .
CHAP. XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION a 167
debates, and from the tendency of all small and secret bodies to intrigues and compromises, compromises in which general prin- ciples of policy are sacrificed to personal feeling or selfish interest. Bills which go in black or white come out gray. The member who has introduced a bill may not have a seat on the committee, and may therefore be unable to protect his offspring. Other members of the House, masters of the subject but not members of the committee, can only be heard as witnesses. Although therefore there are full opportunities for the discussion of the bill by the committee, it often emerges in an unsatisfactory form, or is quietly suppressed, because there is no impetus of the general opinion of the House or the public to push it through. When the bill comes back to the House the chairman or other reporting member of the committee generally moves the previous question, after which no amendment can be offered. Debate ceases and the bill is promptly passed or lost. In the Senate there is a better chance of discussion, for the Senate, having more time and fewer speakers, can review to some real purpose the findings of its committees.
5. As there is no debate on the introduction or on the second reading of a bill, the public is not necessarily apprised of the measures which are before Congress. An important measure is of course watched by the newspapers and so becomes known: minor measures go unnoticed.
6. The general good-nature of Americans, and the tendency of members of their legislatures to oblige one another by domg reciprocal good turns, dispose people to let any bill go through
- which does not injure the interest of a party or of a person.
Such good-nature counts for less in a committee, because a com- mittee has its own views and gives effect to them. But in the House there are few views, though much impatience. ‘The House has no time to weigh the merits of a bill reported back to it. Members have never heard it debated. They know no more of what passed in the committee than the report tells them. If the measure is palpably opposed to their party tenets, the majority will reject it: if no party question arises they usually adopt the view of the committee.
7. What has been said already will have shown that except as regards bills of great importance, or directly involving party issues, there can be little effective responsibility for legislation. The member who brings in a bill is not responsible, because the
168 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI
committee generally alters his bill. The committee is little observed and the details of what passed within the four walls of its room are not published. The great parties in the House are but faintly responsible, because their leaders are not bound to express an opinion, and a vote taken on a non-partisan bill is seldom a strict party vote. Individual members are no doubt responsible, and a member who votes against a popular measure, one for instance favoured by the working men, will suffer for it.? But the responsibility of individuals, most of them insignificant, half of them destined to vanish, like snow-flakes in a river, at the next election, gives little security to the people.
The best defence that can be advanced for this system is that it has been naturally evolved as a means of avoiding worse mis- chiefs. It is really a plan for legislating by a number of com- missions. Each commission, receiving suggestions in the shape of bills, taking evidence upon them, and sifting them in debate, frames its measures and lays them before the House in a shape which seemsdesigned to make amendment in details needless, while leaving the general policy to be accepted or rejected by a simple vote of the whole body. In this last respect the plan may be compared with that of the Romans during the Republic, whose general assembly of the people approved or disapproved of a bill as a whole, without power of amendment, a plan which had the advantage of making laws clear and simple. At Rome, however, bills could be proposed only by a magistrate upon his official re- sponsibility ; they were therefore comparatively few and sure to be carefully drawn. The members of American legislative com- missions have no special training, no official experience, little . praise or blame to look for, and no means of securing that the overburdened House will ever come to a vote on their proposals. There is no more agreement between the views of one commis- sion and another than what may result from the majority in both belonging to the same party. Hence, as Mr. Wilson observes, “The legislation of a session does not represent the policy of either the majority or the minority : it is simply an aggregate of the bills recommended by committees composed of members from both sides of the House, and it is known to be usually not
1 The member who has taken this course is the worse off, because he rarely has an opportunity of explaining by a speech in the House his reason for his vote, and is therefore liable to the imputation of having been “got at” by capi- talists. .
CHAP. XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION 169
the work of the majority men upon the committees, but compro- _ mise conclusions bearing some shade or tinge of each of the variously coloured opinions and wishes of the committee men of both parties. Most of the measures which originate with the committees are framed with a view of securing their easy passage by giving them as neutral and inoffensive a character as is pos- sible. The manifest object is to draw them to the liking of all factions. Hence neither the failure nor the success of any policy inaugurated by one of the committees can fairly be charged to the account of either party.” +
Add to the conditions above described the fact that the House in its few months of life has not time to deal with one-twentieth of the twelve thousand bills which are thrown upon it, that it therefore drops the enormous majority unconsidered, though some of the best may be in this majority, and passes many of those which it does pass by a suspension of the rules which leaves everything to a single vote,” and the marvel comes to be, not that legislation is faulty, but that an intensely practical people tolerates such defective machinery. Some reasons may be suggested tending to explain this phenomenon.
Legislation is a difficult business in all free countries, and per- haps more difficult the more free the country is, because the discordant voices are more numerous and less under control. America has sometimes sacrificed practical convenience to her dislike to authority.
The Americans surpass all other nations in their power of making the best of bad conditions, getting the largest results out of scanty materials or rough methods. Many things in that country work better than they ought to work, so to speak, or could work in any other country, because the people are shrewdly alert in minimizing such mischiefs as arise from their own haste or heedlessness, and have a great capacity for self-help.
Aware that they have this gift, the Americans are content to leave their political machinery unreformed. Persons who pro- pose comprehensive reforms are suspected as theorists and crotchet-mongers. The national inventiveness, active in the spheres of mechanics and money-making, spends little of its force on the details of governmental methods.
1 Congressional Government, pp. 99-101. 2 This can be done by a two-thirds vote during the last six days of a session and on the first and third Mondays of each month.
170 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
The want of legislation on topics where legislation is needed breeds fewer evils than would follow in countries like England or France where Parliament is the only law-making body. ‘The powers of Congress are limited to comparatively few subjects : its failures do not touch the general well-being of the people, nor the healthy administration of the ordinary law.
The faults of bills passed by the House are often cured by the Senate, where discussion is more leisurely and thorough. The committee system produces in that body also some of the same flabbiness and colourlessness in bills passed. But the blunders, whether in substance or of form, of the one chamber are frequently corrected by the other, and many bad bills fail owing to a division of opinion between the Houses.
The President’s veto kills off some vicious measures. He does not trouble himself about defects of form; but where a bill seems to him opposed to sound policy, it is his constitutional duty to disapprove it, and to throw on Congress the responsi- bility of passing it “over his veto” by a two-thirds vote. A good President accepts this responsibility.
CHAPTER XVII CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE
FINANCE is a sufficiently distinct and important department of legislation to need a chapter to itself; nor does any legislature devote a larger proportion of its time than does Congress to the consideration of financial bills. These are of two kinds: those ~ which raise revenue by taxation, and those which direct the application of the public funds to the various expenses of the government. At present Congress raises all the revenue it requires by indirect taxation,! and chiefly by duties of customs and excise ; so taxing bills are practically tariff bills, the excise duties being comparatively little varied from year to year.
The method of passing both kinds of bills is unlike that of most European countries. In England, with which, of course, America can be most easily compared, although both the levying and the spending of money are absolutely under the control of the House of Commons, the House of Commons originates no proposal for either. It never either grants money or orders the raising of money except at the request of the Crown. Once a year the Chancellor of the Exchequer lays before it, together with a full statement of the revenue and expenditure of the past twelve months, estimates of the expenditure for the coming twelve months, and suggestions for the means of meeting that expenditure by taxation or by borrowing. He embodies these suggestions in resolutions on which, when the House has accepted them, bills are grounded imposing certain taxes or authorizing the raising of a loan. The House may of course amend the bills in details, but no privatemember ever proposesa taxing bill, for it is no concernof any one’s except the ministry to fill the public treasury.? The estimates
1 During the Civil War, direct taxes were levied ; and many other kinds of taxes besides those mentioned in the text have been imposed at different times. ’ 2 Of course a private member may carry a resolution involving additional expenditure ; but even this is at variance with the stricter constitutional doctrine
172 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
prepared by the several administrative departments (Army, Navy, Office of Works, Foreign Office, ete.), and revised by the Treasury, specify the items of proposed expenditure with much particularity, and fill three or more bulky volumes, which are delivered to every member of the House. These estimates are debated in committee of the whole House, explanations being required from the ministers who represent the Treasury and the several departments, and are passed in a long succession of separate votes.1 Members may propose to reduce any particular grants, but not to increase them ; no money is ever voted for the public service except that which the Crown has asked for through its ministers. The Crown must never ask for more than it actually needs, and hence the ministerial proposals for taxation are carefully calculated to raise just so much money as will
cover the estimated expenses for the coming year. It is reckoned
almost as great a fault in the finance minister if he has need- lessly overtaxed the people, as if he has so undertaxed them as to be left with a deficit. If at the end of a year a substantial surplus appears, the taxation for next year is reduced in pro- portion, supposing that the expenditure remains the same. Every credit granted by Parliament expires of itself at the end of the financial year.
In the United States the Secretary of the Treasury sends annually to Congress a report containing a statement of the national income and expenditure and of the condition of the public debt, together with remarks on the system of taxation and suggestions for its improvement. He also sends what is called his Annual Letter, enclosing the estimates, framed by the various departments, of the sums needed for the public services of the United States during the coming year. So far the Secretary is like a European finance minister, except that he communicates with the chamber on paper instead of making his statement and
and practice ; a doctrine regarded by the statesmen of the last generation as extremely valuable, because it restrains the propensity of a legislature to yield to demands emanating from sections or classes, which may entail heavy and perhaps unprofitable charges on the country. See the observations of the First Lord of the Treasury in the House of Commons, March 22, 1886. 1 Complaints are sometimes made that these votes are not discussed with sufficient fulness and minuteness, and it has been proposed to create several special standing committees to examine each class of them more closely. This might be a desirable addition. Three such committees have recently been appointed. But even under the present system there are many useful financial debates, by which some abuses are checked and in which valuable suggestions are made. _
CHAP. XVII CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE 178
_proposals orally. But here the resemblance stops. Everything
that remains in the way of financial legislation is done solely by Congress and its committees, the executive having no further hand in the matter.
The business of raising money belongs to one committee only, the standing committee of Ways and Means, consisting of eleven members. Its chairman is always a leading man in the party which commands a majority in the House. This committee prepares and reports to the House the bills needed for imposing or continuing the various customs duties, excise duties, etc. The report of the Secretary has been referred by the House to this committee, but the latter does not necessarily base its bills upon or in any way regard that report. Neither does it in preparing them.start from an estimate of the sums needed to support the public service. It does not, because it cannot: for it does not know what grants for the public service will be proposed by the spending committees, since the estimates submitted in the Secretary’s letter furnish no trustworthy basis for a guess. It does not, for the further reason that the primary object of cus- toms duties has for many years past been not the raising of revenue, but the protection of American industries by subjecting foreign products to a very high tariff. At present there are enormous duties on many classes of raw materials, and on nearly all classes of manufactured goods, including even books and works of art. This tariff brings in an income far exceeding the current needs of the government. Nearly two-thirds of the war debt having been paid off, the fixed charges have shrunk to one- third of what they were when the present tariff was imposed, yet this tariff remains with few modifications, and surpluses accumu- late year after year in the national treasury. The committee of
_ Ways and Means has therefore no motive for adapting taxation
to expenditure. The former will be always in excess so long as the protective tariff stands, and the protective tariff stands for commercial or political reasons unconnected with national finance.’
1 Hitherto there has always been a means of getting rid of surpluses by paying off debt ; but as financiers are now beginning to hold that a certain portion of the debt ought to be kept on foot for banking and currency purposes, much discussion has arisen as to how the accumulating balance shall be disposed of. Hence the issues of commercial policy, issues affecting the great manufacturing industries, dwarf questions of revenue proper. The committee considers not which is the best and cheapest means of raising a given sum, but how the tariff will affect protected industries, Since there is no fear of a deficit, it drafts
174 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
When-the revenue bills come to be debated in committee of . the whole House similar causes prevent them from being scrutinized from the purely financial point of view. Debate turns on those items of the tariff which involve gain or loss to influential groups. Little inquiry is made as to the amount needed and the adaptation of the bills to produce that amount and no more. It is the same with ways and means bills in the Senate. Communications need not pass between the committees of either House and the Treasury. The person most responsible, the person who most nearly corresponds to an English Chancellor of the Exchequer, or a French Minister of Finance, is the chair- man of the House committee of Ways and Means. But he stands in no official relation to the Treasury, and is not required to exchange a word or a letter with its staff. Neither, of course, can he count on a majority in the House. Though he is a leading man he is not a leader, i.e. he has no claim on the votes of his own party, many of whom may (as happened to Mr. Morrison in 1886) disapprove of and cause the defeat of his pro- posals. That gentleman was chairman of the committee of Ways and Means, and perhaps, after the Speaker, the most considerable person in the Democratic majority. But he was beaten in his attempted reform of the tariff.
The business of spending money belongs primarily to two standing committees, the old committee on Appropriations and the new committee on Rivers and Harbours, created in 1883. The committee on appropriations starts from, but does not adopt, the estimates sent in by the Secretary of the Treasury, for the appropriation bills it prepares usually make large and often reckless reductions in these estimates. The Rivers and Harbours committee proposes grants of money for what are called ‘internal improvements,” nominally in aid of navigation, but practically in order to turn a stream of public money into the ~ State or States where each “improvement” is to be executed. More money is wasted in this way than what the parsimony of the appropriations committee can save. There are several committees on the departments, such as those on the navy, the army, the judiciary. There is the committee on pensions, a source of infinite waste.’ Each of these proposes grants of
its bills with no view to the raising of a particular sum, and does not care to cal- culate the exact income the taxes will produce.
1 The expenditure on pensions was in 1887 $75,000,000 (£15,000,000),
ae / Pian ok SP p i Ni
| CHAP, XVII CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE 175
money, not knowing nor heeding what is being proposed by other committees, and guided by the executive no further than the members choose. All the expenditures recommended must be met by appropriation bills, but into their propriety the appro- priations committee cannot inquire.
Every revenue bill must, of course, come before the House ; and the House, whatever else it may neglect, never neglects the discussion of taxation and money grants. These are discussed as fully as the pressure of work permits, and are often added to by the insertion of fresh items, which members interested in getting money voted for a particular purpose or locality suggest. These bills then go to the Senate, which forthwith refers them to its committees.. The Senate committee on finance deals with revenue-raising bills; the committee on appropriations with supply bills. Both sets then come before the whole Senate. Although it cannot initiate appropriation bills, the Senate has long ago made good its claim to amend them, and does so with- out stint, adding new items and often greatly raising the total of the grants. When the bills go back to the House, the House usually rejects the amendments; the Senate adheres to them, and a Conference committee is appointed, consisting of three senators and three members of the House, by which a compro- mise is settled, hastily and in secret, and accepted, generally in the last days of the session, by a hard-pressed but reluctant House.. Even as enlarged by this committee, the supply voted is usually found inadequate, so a Deficiency bill is introduced in the following session, including a second series of grants to the departments.
The European reader will ask how all this-is or can be done by Congress without frequent communication from or to the executive government. There are such communications, for the ministers, anxious to secure appropriations adequate for their respective departments, talk to the chairmen and appear before the committees to give evidence as to departmental needs. But in Congress itself they never now appear, nor does Congress look to them for guidance as in the early days it looked to Hamilton and Gallatin. If the House cuts down their estimates they turn to the Senate and beg it to restore the omitted items ; if the Senate fail them, the only resource left is a Deficiency bill in the next session. If one department is so starved as to be unable to do its work, while another obtains lavish grants which
176 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
invite jobbery or waste, it is the committees, not the executive, whom the people ought to blame. If, by a system of log-rolling, vast sums are wasted upon useless public works, no minister has any opportunity to interfere, any right to protest. A minister cannot, as in England, bring Congress to reason by a threat of resignation, for it would make no difference to Congress if the whole cabinet were to resign.?
What I have stated may be summarized as follows :
There is practically no connection between the policy of revenue raising and the policy of revenue spending, for these are left to different committees whose views may be opposed, and the majority in the House has no recognized leaders to remark the discrepancies or make one or other view prevail. In the forty-ninth Congress (1885-1887) a strong free-trader was chair- man of the tax-proposing committee on Ways and Means, while a strong protectionist was chairman of the spending committee on Appropriations.
There is no relation between the amount proposed to be spent in any one year, and the amount proposed to be raised. But for the fact that the high tariff produces a large annual surplus, a financial breakdown would speedily ensue.
The knowledge and experience of the permanent officials either as regards the productivity of taxes, and the incidental benefits or losses attending their collection, or as regards the nature of various kinds of expenditure and their comparative utility, can be turned to account only by interrogating these officials before the committees. Their views are not stated in the House by a parliamentary chief, nor tested in debate by arguments addressed to him which he must there and then answer.
Little check exists on the tendency of members to deplete the public treasury by securing grants for their friends or con- stituents, or by putting through financial jobs for which they are to receive some private consideration. If either the majority of the committee on Appropriations or the House itself suspects a job, the grant proposed may be rejected. But it is the duty of no one in particular to scent out a job, and to defeat it by public exposure.
The nation becomes so puzzled by a financial policy varying
1 Unless of course Congress should be so clearly in the wrong that the people were roused to vigorous disapproval of its conduct.
CHAP. XVII CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE 177
_ from year to year, and controlled by no responsible leaders, as to feel diminished interest in congressional discussions and diminished confidence in Congress.1
The result on the national finance is unfortunate. <A thoughtful American publicist remarks, “So long as the debit side of the national account is managed by one set of men, and the credit side by another set, both sets working separately and in secret without public responsibility, and without intervention on the part of the executive official who is nominally responsible ; so long as these sets, being composed largely of new men every two years, give no attention to business except when Congress is in session, and thus spend in preparing plans the whole time which ought to be spent in public discussion of plans already matured, so that an immense budget is rushed through without discussion in a week or ten days—just so long the finances will go from bad to worse, no matter by what name you call the party in power. No other nation on earth attempts such a thing, or could attempt it without soon coming to grief, our salvation thus far consisting in an enormous income, with practically no drain for military expenditure.”
It may be replied to this criticism that the enormous income, added to the fact that the tariff is imposed for protection rather than for revenue, is not only the salvation of the United States Government under the present system, but also the cause of that system. Were the tariff framed with a view to revenue only,
1 “The noteworthy fact that even the most thorough debates in Congress fail to awaken any genuine or active interest in the minds of the people has had its most striking illustrations in the course of our financial legislation, for though the discussions which have taken place in Congress upon financial questions have been so frequent, so protracted, and so thorough, engrossing a large part of the time of the House on their every recurrence, they seem in almost every instance to have made scarcely any impression upon the public mind. The Coinage Act of 1878, by which silver was demonetized, had been before the country many years ere it reached adoption, having been time and again considered by committees of Congress, time and again printed and discussed in one shape or another, and having finally gained acceptance apparently by sheer persistence and importunity. The Resumption Act of 1875, too, had had a like career of repeated considerations by committees, repeated printings and a full discussion by Congress, and yet when the Bland Silver Bill of 1878 was on its way through the mills of legislation, some of the most prominent newspapers of the country declared with confidence that the Resumption Act had been passed inconsider- ately and in haste ; and several members of Congress had previously complained that the demonetization scheme of 1878 had been pushed surreptitiously through the courses of its passage, Congress having been tricked into accepting it, doing it scarcely knew what.”—Woodrow Wilson, Congressional Government, p. 148,
VOL. I N
eg 2
178 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
no higher taxes would be imposed than the public service required, and a better method of balancing the public accounts would follow. This is true. The present state of things is evidently exceptional. America is the only country in the world whose difficulty is not to raise money but to spend it. Still, as our critic remarks, Congress is contracting lax habits, and ought to change them.
Considering these faults, and considering that it is by preaching an adoption of British methods that the wisest American reformers are trying to cure the defects in the financial administration of Congress, it is odd that English publicists should at the same moment be suggesting the American system as a model for imitation by the House of Commons. The present British plan is probably open to the charge of not securing a full parliamentary control either of the expenses or of the administrative methods of the spending departments. But the arrangements of Congress seem, so far as an English observer can judge, less conducive to economy as well as to efficiency than those of Parliament.
How comes it, if all this be true, that the finances of America are so flourishing, and in particular that the war debt has been paid off with such regularity and speed that from $3,000,000,000 (£600,000,000) in 1865, it had sunk to less than $1,200,000,000 (£240,000,000) in 1887% Does not so brilliant a result speak of a continuously wise and skilful management of the national revenue ?
The paying off of the debt seems to be due to the following causes :-—
To the prosperity of the country which, with one interval of trade depression, has for twenty years been developing its amaz- ing natural resources so fast as to produce an amount of wealth which is not only greater, but more widely diffused through the population, than in any other part of the world.
To the spending habits of the people, who allow themselves
1 The Report of the Secretary of the Treasury for 1887 states the surplus in the treasury on lst December of that year at $55,000,000, and estimates the sur- plus for the financial year ending 30th June 1888 under the law then in force at $140,000,000. For twenty-two years there have been surpluses, the smallest of $2,344,000 in 1874, the largest of $145,548,000 in 1882. The surplus taxation for the year ending 30th June 1888 was $113,000,000. The total estimated revenue of 1887-88 was $383,000,000. The receipts from customs alone were greater by $24,000,000 in 1887 than in 1886.
CHAP, XVII CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE 179
luxuries such as the masses enjoy in no other country, and therefore pay more than any other people in the way of indirect taxation. The fact that Federal revenue is raised by duties of customs and excise makes the people far less sensible of the pressure of taxation than they would be did they pay directly.
To the absence of the military and naval charges which press so heavily on European states.
To the maintenance of an exceedingly high tariff at the instance of numerous interested persons who have obtained the public ear and can influence Congress. Without expressing any opinion as to whether the policy of Protection be or be not sound, one may observe that to its acceptance, more perhaps than to any deliberate conviction that the debt ought to be paid off, has been due the continuance of a tariff whose huge and constant surpluses have enabled the debt to be reduced.
Europeans, admiring and envying the rapidity with which the war debt has been reduced, have been disposed to credit the Americans with brilliant financial skill. That, however, which was really admirable in the conduct of the American people was not their judgment in selecting particular methods for raising money, but their readiness to submit during and immediately after the war to unprecedentedly heavy taxation. The interests (real or supposed) of the manufacturing classes have caused the maintenance of the tariff then imposed; nature, by giving the people a spending power which has rendered the tariff marvel- lously productive, has done the rest.
Under the system of congressional finance here described America wastes millions annually. But her wealth is so great, her revenue s0 elastic, that she is not sensible of the loss. She has the glorious privilege of youth, the privilege of committing errors without suffering from their consequences.
CHAPTER XVIII THE RELATIONS OF THE TWO HOUSES
THE creation by the Constitution of 1789 of two chambers in the United States, in place of the one chamber which existed under the Confederation, has been usually ascribed by Europeans to mere imitation of England; and one learned writer goes so far as to suggest that if England had possessed three chambers, like the States General of France, or four, like the Diet of Sweden, a crop of three-chambered or four-chambered legisla- tures would, in obedience to the example of happy and successful England, have sprung up over the world. ‘There were, however, better reasons than deference to English precedents to justify the division of Congress into two houses and no more; and so many indubitable instances of such a deference may be quoted that there is no need to hunt for others. Not to dwell upon the fact that there were two chambers in all but two! of the thirteen original States, the Convention of 1787 had two solid motives for fixing on this number, a motive of principle and theory, a motive of immediate expediency.
The chief advantage of dividing a legislature into two branches is that the one may check the haste and correct the mistakes of the other. This advantage is purchased at the price of some delay, and of the weakness which results from a splitting up of authority. If a legislature be constituted of three or more branches, the advantage is scarcely increased, the delay ‘and weakness are immensely aggravated. Two chambers can be made to work together in a way almost impossible to more than two. As the proverb says, ““Two’s company, three’s none.” If there be three chambers, two are sure to intrigue and likely to combine against the third. The difficulties of carrying a
1 Pennsylvania and Georgia; the former of which added a Senate in 1789, the latter in 1790. See post, Chapter XXXIX. on State Legislatures,
cHAp. xvu1 RELATIONS OF THE TWO HOUSES 181
measure without sacrificing its unity of principle, of fixing responsibility, of securing the watchful attention of the public, serious with two chambers, become enormous with three or more.
To these considerations there was added the practical ground that the division of Congress into two houses supplied a means of settling the dispute which raged between the small and the large States. The latter contended for a representation of the States in Congress proportioned to their respective populations, the former for their equal representation as sovereign common- wealths. Both were satisfied by the plan which created two chambers in one of which the former principle, in the other of which the latter principle was recognized. The country re- mained a federation in respect of the Senate, it became a nation in respect of the House: there was no occasion for a third chamber.
The respective characters of the two bodies are wholly unlike those of the so-called upper and lower chambers of Europe. In Europe there is always a difference of political complexion, generally resting on a difference in personal com- position. ‘There the upper chamber represents the aristocracy of the country, or the men of wealth, or the high officials, or the influence of the Crown and Court; while the lower chamber represents the multitude. Between the Senate and the House there is no such difference. Both equally represent the people, the whole people, and nothing but the people. The individual members come from the same classes of the community ; and though there are more rich men (in proportion to numbers) in the Senate than in the House, the influence of capital is not markedly greater. Both have been formed by the same social influences: and the social pretensions of a senator expire with his term of office. Both are possessed by the same ideas, governed by the same sentiments, equally conscious of their dependence on public opinion. The one has never been, like the English House of Commons, a popular pet, the other never, like the English House of Lords, a popular bugbear.
What is perhaps stranger, the two branches of Congress have not exhibited that contrast of feeling and policy which might be expected from the different methods by which they are chosen. In the House the large States are predominant: nine out of thirty-eight (less than one-fourth) return an absolute majority of
182 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
the 325 representatives. In the Senate these same nine States have only eighteen members out of seventy-six, iess than a fourth of the whole. In other words, these nine States are more than sixteen times as powerful in the House as they are in the Senate. But as the House has never been the organ of the large States, nor prone to act in their interest, so neither has the Senate been the stronghold of the small States, for American politics have never turned upon an antagonism between these two sets of commonwealths. Questions relating to States’ rights and the greater or less extension of the powers of the national govern- ment have played a leading part in the history of the Union. But although small States might be supposed to be specially zealous for States’ rights, the tendency to uphold them has been no stronger in the Senate than in the House. In one phase of the slavery struggle the Senate happened to be under the control of the slaveholders while the House was not ; and then of course the Senate championed the sovereignty of the States. But this attitude was purely accidental, and disappeared with its transi- tory cause.
The real differences between the two bodies have been indi- cated in speaking of the Senate. They are due to the smaller size of the latter, to the somewhat superior capacity of its members, to the habits which its executive functions form in individual senators, and have formed in the whole body.
In Europe, where the question as to the utility of second chambers is actively canvassed, two objections are made to them, one that they deplete the first or popular chamber of able men, the other that they induce deadlocks and consequent stoppage of the wheels of government. On both arguments light may be expected from American experience.
Although the Senate does draw off from the House many of its ablest men, it is not clear, paradoxical as the observation may appear, that the House would be much the better for retaining those men. The faults of the House are mainly due, not to want of talent among individuals, but to its defective methods, and especially to the absence of leadership. These are faults which the addition of twenty or thirty able men would not cure. Some of the committees would be stronger, and so far the work would be better done. But the House as a whole would not (assuming its rules and usages to remain what they are now) be distinctly a greater power in the country. On the other hand,
OHAP, XVIII RELATIONS OF THE TWO HOUSES 183
the merits of the Senate are largely due to the fact that it trains to higher efficiency the ability which it has drawn from the House, and gives that ability a sphere in which it can develop with better results. Were the Senate and the House thrown into one, the country would lose more, I think much more, by losing the Senate than it would gain by improving the House, for the united body would have the qualities of the House and not those of the Senate.
Collisions between the two Houses are frequent. Each is jealous and combative. Each is prone to alter the bills that come from the other ; and the Senate in particular knocks about remorselessly those favourite children of the House, the appro- priation bills. The fact that one House has passed a bill goes but a little way in inducing the other to pass it; the Senate would reject twenty House bills as readily as one. Deadlocks, however, disagreements over serious issues which stop the machinery of administration, are not common. They rarely cause excitement or alarm outside Washington, because the country, remembering previous instances, feels sure they will be adjusted, and knows that either House would yield were it unmistakably condemned by public opinion. The executive government goes on undisturbed, and the worst that can happen is the loss of a bill which may be passed four months later. Even as between the two bodies there is no great bitterness in these conflicts, because the causes of quarrel do not lie deep. Sometimes it is self-esteem that is involved, the sensitive self- esteem of an assembly. Sometimes one or other House is play- ing for a party advantage. That intensity which in the similar contests of Europe arises from class feeling is absent, because there is no class distinction between the two American chambers. Thus the country seems to be watching a fencing match rather than a combat a outrance.
I dwell upon this substantial identity of character in the Senate and the House because it explains the fact, surprising to a European, that two perfectly co-ordinate authorities, neither of which has any more right than its rival to claim to speak for the whole nation, manage to get along together. Their quarrels are professional and personal rather than conflicts of adverse principles. The two bodies are not hostile elements in the nation, striving for supremacy, but servants of the same master, whose word of rebuke will quieten them,
184 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
It must, however, be also remembered that in such countries as England, France, and Italy, the popular chamber stands in very close relation with the executive government, which it has virtually installed and which it supports. A conflict between the two chambers in such countries is therefore a conflict to which the executive is a party, involving sues which may be of the extremest urgency; and this naturally intensifies the struggle. For the House of Lords in England or the Senate in Italy to resist a demand for legislation made by the ministry, who are responsible for the defence and peace of the country, and backed by the representative House, is a more serious matter than almost any collision between the Senate and the House can be in America.!
The United States is the only great country in the world in which the two Houses are really equal and co-ordinate. Such a system could hardly work, and therefore could not last, if the executive were the creature of either or of both, nor unless both were in close touch with the sovereign people.
When each chamber persists in its own view, the regular pro- ceeding is to appoint a committee of conference, consisting of three members of the Senate and three of the House. These six meet in secret, and generally settle matters by a compromise, which enables each side to retire with honour. When appro- priations are involved, a sum intermediate between the smaller one which the House proposes to grant and the larger one desired by the Senate is adopted. If no compromise can be arranged, the conflict continues till one side yields or it ends by an ad- journment, which of course involves the failure of the measure disagreed upon. The House at one time tried to coerce the Senate into submission by adding “riders,” as they are called, to appropriation bills, «2 annexing or “tacking” (to use the English expression) pieces of general legislation to bills granting sums of money. This puts the Senate in the dilemma of either accepting the unwelcome rider, or rejecting the whole bill, and thereby withholding from the executive the funds it needs. This happened in 1855 and 1856. However, the Senate stood firm,
and the House gave way. ‘The device had previously been
1 Of course a case may be imagined in which the President should ask for legislation, as Lincoln did during the war, and one House of Congress should grant, the other refuse, the Acts demanded. But such cases are less likely to occur in America than in Europe under the Cabinet system.
CHAP, XVIII RELATIONS OF THE TWO HOUSES 185
attempted (in 1849) by the Senate in tacking a pro-slavery provision to an appropriation bill which it was returning to the House, and it was revived by both Houses against President Andrew Johnson in 1867.
In a contest the Senate usually, though not invariably, gets the better of the House. It is smaller, and can therefore more easily keep its majority together; its members are more ex- perienced ; and it has the great advantage of being permanent, whereas the House is a transient body. The Senate can hold out, because if it does not get its way at once against the House, it may do so when a new House comes up to Washington. The House cannot afford to wait, because the hour of its own dissolu- tion is at hand: Besides, while the House does not know the Senate from inside, the Senate, many of whose members have sat in the House, knows all the “ins and outs” of its rival, can gauge its strength and play upon its weakness.
CHAPTER XIX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS
Arrer this inquiry into the composition and working of each branch of Congress, it remains for me to make some observations which apply to both Houses, and which may tend to indicate the features that distinguish them from the representative assemblies of Europe. ‘The English reader must bear in mind three points which, in following the details of the last few chapters, he may have forgotten. The first is that Congress is not like the Parliaments of England, France, and Italy, a sovereign assembly, but is subject to the Constitution, which only the people can change. The second is, that it neither appoints nor dismisses the executive government, which springs directly from popular election. The third is, that its sphere of legislative action is limited by the existence of thirty-eight governments in the several States, whose authority is just as well based as its own, and cannot be curtailed by it.
I. The choice of members of Congress is locally limited by law and by custom. Under the Constitution every representative and every senator must when elected be an inhabitant of the State whence he is elected. Moreover, State law has in many and custom practically in all States, established that a repre- sentative must be resident in the congressional district which elects him.! The only exceptions to this practice occur in large cities where occasionally a man is chosen who lives in a different district of the city from that which returns him; but such ex- ceptions are extremely rare. This restriction surprises a Euro-
1 The best legal authorities hold that a provision of this kind is invalid, because State law has no power to narrow the qualifications for a Federal representative prescribed by the Constitution of the United States. And Congress would pro- bably so hold if the question arose in a case brought before it as to a disputed election. So far as I have been able to ascertain, the point has never arisen for determination,
CHAP. XIX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 187
pean, who thinks it must be found highly inconvenient both to candidates, as restricting their field of choice in looking for a constituency, and to constituencies, as excluding persons, however eminent, who do not reside in their midst. To Americans, however, it seems so obviously reasonable that I found very few persons, even in the best educated classes, who would admit its policy to be disputable. In what are we to seek the causes of this opinion ?
Firstly. In the existence of States, originally separate poli- tical communities, still for many purposes independent, and accustomed to consider the inhabitant of another State as almost a foreigner. A New Yorker, Pennsylvanians would say, owes allegiance te New York; he cannot feel and think as a citizen of Pennsylvania, and cannot therefore properly represent Penn- sylvanian interests. This sentiment has spread by a sort of sympathy, this reasoning has been applied by a sort of analogy, to the counties, the cities, the electoral districts of the State itself. State feeling has fostered local feeling; the locality deems no man a fit representative who has not by residence in its limits, and by making it his political home, the place where he exercises his civic rights, become soaked with its own local sentiment.
Secondly. Much of the interest felt in the proceedings of Congress relates to the raising and spending of money. Changes in the tariff may affect the industries of a locality ; or a locality may petition for an appropriation of public funds to some local public work, the making of a harbour, or the improvement of the navigation of a river. In both cases it is thought that no one but an inhabitant can duly comprehend the needs or zealously advocate the demands of a neighbourhood.
Thirdly. Inasmuch as no high qualities of statesmanship are expected from a congressman, a district would think it a slur to be told that it ought to look beyond its own borders for a repre- sentative ; and as the post is a paid one, the people feel that a good thing ought to be kept for one of themselves rather than thrown away on astranger. It is by local political work, organ- izing, canvassing, and haranguing, that a party is kept going: and this work must be rewarded.
A perusal of the chapter of the Federalist, which argues that one representative for 30,000 inhabitants will sufficiently satisfy republican needs, suggests another reflection. The writer refers
aS SS oe ee
188 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT - PART 1
to some who held a numerous representation to be a democratic institution, because it enabled every small district to make its voice heard in the national Congress. Such representation then existed in the State legislatures. Evidently the habits of the people were formed by these State legislatures, in which it was a matter of course that the people of each township or city sent one of themselves to the assembly of the State. When they came to return members to Congress, they followed the same practice. A stranger had no means of making himself known to them and would not think of offering himself. That the habits of England are different may be due, so far as the eighteenth century is concerned, to the practice of borough-mongering, under which candidates unconnected with the place were sent down by some influential person, or bought the seat from the corrupt cor- poration or the limited body of freemen. Thus the notion that a stranger might do well enough for a borough grew up, while in counties it remained, till 1885, a maxim that a candidate ought to own land in the county 1—the old law required a freehold qualification somewhere—or ought to live in, or ought at the very least (as I once heard a candidate, whose house lay just out- _ side the county for which he was standing, allege on his own behalf) to look into the county from his window while shaving in the morning. The English practice might thus seem to be an
1 The old law (9 Anne, c. 5) required all members to possess a freehold qualifi- cation somewhere. All property qualifications were abolished by statute in 1858. «, ? The English habit of allowing a man to stand for a place with which he is personally unconnected would doubtless be favoured by the fact that many min- isters are necessarily members of the House of Commons. The inconvenience of | excluding a man from the service of the nation because he could not secure his return in the place of his residence would be unendurable. No such reason exists . in America, because ministers cannot be members of Congress. In France, Ger- many, and Italy the practice seems to resemble that of England, 7.e. many mem- bers sit for places where they do not reside, though of course a candidate residing in the place he stands for has a certain advantage.
It is remarkable that the original English practice required the member to be a resident of the county or borough which returned him to Parliament. This is said to be a requirement at common law (witness the words “de comitatu tuo” in the writ for the election addressed to the sheriff) ; and was expressly enacted by the statute 1 Henry V. cap. 1. But already in the time of Elizabeth the requirement was not enforced ; and in 1681 Lord Chief-Justice Pemberton ruled that ‘‘little regard was to be had to that ancient statute 1 Henry V. forasmuch as common practice hath been ever since to the contrary.” The statute was repealed by 14 Geo. III. cap 50.—See Anson, Law and. Custom of the Constitu- tion, vol. i. p. 83; Stubbs, Constit. Hist., vol. iii. p. 424. Dr. Stubbs observes that the object of requiring residence in early times was to secure ‘‘ that the House of Commons should be a really representative body.” Mr, Hearn (Government of
CHAP, XIX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 189
exception due to special causes, and the American practice that which is natural to a free country, where local self-government is fully developed and rooted in the habits of the people. It is from their local government that the political ideas of the Ameri- can people have been formed: and they have applied to their State assemblies and their national assembly the customs which grew up in the smaller area.
These are the best explanations I can give of a phenomenon which strikes Europeans all the more because it exists among a population more unsettled and migratory than any in the Old World. But they leave me still surprised at this strength of local feeling, a feeling not less marked in the new regions of the Far West than in the venerable commonwealths of Massachusetts and Virginia. The most significant fact about the practice in America is that one seldom hears it there commented on as a defect of the political system. Fierce as is the light of criticism which beats upon every part of that system, this point, which at once strikes the European as specially weak, remains uncensured, because assumed to be part of the order of nature.
Its results are unfortunate. So far as the restriction to residents in a State is concerned it is intelligible. The senator was—to some extent is still—a sort of ambassador from his State. He is chosen by the legislature or collective authority of his State. He cannot well be a citizen of one State and repre- sent another. Even a representative in the House from one State who lived in another might be perplexed by a divided allegiance, though there are groups of States, such as those of the north-west, whose great industrial interests are substantially the same. But what reason can there be for preventing a man resi- dent in one part of a State from representing another part, a England) suggests that the requirement had to be dropped because it was hard to find country gentlemen (or indeed burgesses) possessing the legal knowledge and
statesmanship which the constitutional struggles of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries demanded.
1 When President Garfield was one of the leaders of the House of Representa- tives it happened that his return for the district in which he resided became doubtful, owing to the strength of the Democratic party there. One of his friends (to whom I owe the anecdote), anxious to make sure that he should some- how be returned to the House, went.into the adjoining district to sound the Repub- lican voters there as to the propriety of running Mr. Garfield for their constituency, They laughed at the notion, ‘‘ Why, he don’t live in our deestrict.” I have heard of a case in which a member of Congress having after his election gone to live ina neighbouring district, was thereupon compelled by the pressure of public opinion to resign his seat. :
190 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
Philadelphian, for instance, from being returned for Pittsburg, or a Bostonian for Lenox in the west of Massachusetts? In Eng land it is not found that a member is less active or successful in urging the local interests of his constituency because he does not live there. He is often more successful, because more personally influential or persuasive than any resident whom the constituency could supply ; and in case of a conflict of interests he always feels his efforts to be owing first to his constituents, and not to the place in which he happens to reside.
The mischief is twofold. Inferior men are returned, because there are many parts of the country which do not grow states- men, where nobody, or at any rate nobody desiring to enter Con- gress, is to be found above a moderate level of political capacity. And men of marked ability and zeal are prevented from forcing their way in. Such men are produced chiefly in the great cities of the older States. There is not room enough there for nearly all of them, but no other doors to Congress are open. Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, could furnish six or eight times as many good members as there are seats in these cities. As such men cannot enter from their place of residence, they do not enter at all, and the nation is deprived of the benefit of their services. Careers are moreover interrupted. A promising poli- tician may lose his seat in his own district through some fluctua- tion of opinion, or perhaps because he has offended the local wire-pullers by too much independence. Since he cannot find a seat elsewhere, as would happen in England, he is stranded ; his political life is closed, while other young men inclined to inde- pendence take warning from his fate. Changes in the State laws would not remove the evil, for the habit of choosing none but local men is rooted so deeply that it would probably long survive the abolition of a restrictive law, and it is just as strong in States where no such law exists.!
II. Every senator and representative receives a salary at present fixed at $5000 (£1000) per annum, besides an allowance (called mileage) of 20 cents (10d.) per mile for travelling ex- penses to and from Washington, and $125 (£25) for stationery. The salary is looked upon as a matter of course. It was not introduced for the sake of enabling working men to be returned
1 In Maryland, a State almost divided into two parts by Chesapeake Bay, it is the invariable practice that one of the two senators should be chosen from the residents east of the bay, the other from those of the western shore.
CHAP, xIx GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 191
as members, but on the general theory that all public work ought to be paid for. The reasons for it are stronger than in England or France, because the distance to Washington from most parts of the United States is so great, and the attendance required there so continuous, that a man cannot attend to his profession or business while sitting in Congress. If he loses his livelihood in serving the community, the community ought to compensate him, not to add that the class of persons whose private means put them above the need of a lucrative calling, or of compensa- tion for interrupting it, is comparatively small even now, and hardly existed when the Constitution was framed. Cynics defend the payment of congressmen on another ground, viz. that “they would steal worse if they didn’t get it,” and would make politics, as Napoleon made war, support itself. Be the thing bad or good, it is at any rate necessary, so that no one talks of abolishing it. For that reason its existence furnishes no argu- ment for its introduction into a small country with a large leisured and wealthy class. In fact, the conditions of European countries are so different from those of America that one must not cite American experience either for or against the remunera- tion of legislative work. I do not believe that the practice works ill by preventing good men from entering politics, for they feel no more delicacy in accepting their $5000 than an English duke does in drawing his salary as a secretary of state. It may strengthen the tendency of members to regard themselves as mere delegates, but that tendency has other and deeper roots. It contributes to keep up a class of professional politicians, for the salary, though small in comparison with the incomes earned by successful merchants or lawyers, is a prize to men of the class whence professional politicians mostly come. But those English writers who describe it as the formative cause of that class are mistaken. That class would have existed had members not been paid, would continue to exist if payment were withdrawn. On the other hand, the benefit which the English advocates of paid legislators dilate on, viz. the introduction of a large number of representative working men, has hitherto been little desired and nowise secured. Few such persons appear as candidates in America, and until recently the working class
1 Benjamin Franklin argued strongly in the Convention of 1787 against this theory, but found little support. See his remarkable speech in Mr. John Bige- low’s Life of Franklin, vol, iti. p. 389.
192 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARI 1
has not deemed itself, nor acted as, a distinct body with special interests.1
In 1873 Congress passed an act increasing many official salaries, and among others those of senators and representatives, which it raised from $5000 to $7500 (£1500). All the in- creases were to take effect for the future only, except that of congressional salaries, which was made retroactive. This un- blushing appropriation by Congress of nearly $200,000 to them- selves roused so much indignation that the act, except with relation to the salaries of Federal judges, was repealed by the next Congress. It is known as the “back-pay grab.”
III. A congressman’s tenure of his place is usually short. Senators are sometimes returned for two, three, or even four successive terms by the legislatures of their States, although it may befall even the best of them to be thrown out by a change in the balance of parties, or by the intrigues of an opponent. But a member of the House can seldom feel safe in the saddle. If he is so eminent as to be necessary to his party, or if he main- tains intimate relations with the leading local wire-pullers of his district, he may in the eastern, middle, and southern States hold his ground for three or four Congresses, «.¢. for six or eight years. Very few do more than this. In the West a member is extremely lucky if he does even this. Out there a seat is regarded as a good thing which ought to go round. It has a salary. It sends a man, free of expense, for two winters and springs to Washington and lets him see something of the fine world there, where he rubs shoulders with ambassadors from Europe. Local leaders cast sheep’s eyes at the seat, and make more or less open bargains between themselves as to the order in which they shall enjoy it. So far from its being, as in England, a reason for re-electing a man that he has been a member already, it is a reason for passing him by, and giving somebody else a turn. Rotation in office, dear to the Democrats of Jeffer- son’s school a century ago, still charms the less educated, who see in it a recognition of equality, and have no sense of the value of
1 In Victoria (Australia) members of the popular house receive a salary of £300 a year. I understand that this has had so far no considerable effect in enabling working men to enter the assembly. In Australia, however, a repre- sentative seems to be expected to subscribe to local objects within his constituency, which is not the case in America, and is every day less the case in England. In France and Germany representatives are paid. In Italy they receive no salary, but a free pass over the railroads.
CHAP. XIX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 193
special knowledge or training. They like it for the same reason that the democrats of Athens liked the choice of magistrates by lot. It is a recognition and application of equality. An ambi- tious congressman is therefore forced to think day and night of his re-nomination, and to secure it not only by procuring, if he can, grants from the Federal treasury for local purposes, and places for the relatives and friends of the local wire-pullers who control the nominating conventions, but also by sedulously “nursing” the constituency during the vacations. No habit could more effectually discourage noble ambition or check the growth of aclass of accomplished statesmen. There are few walks of life in which experience counts for more than it does in parliamentary politics. It is an education in itself, an education in which the quick-witted western American would make rapid progress were he suffered to remain long enough at Washington. At present he is not suffered, for, as observed above, nearly one half of each successive house consists of new men, while the old members are too much harassed by the trouble of procuring their re-election to have time or motive for the serious study of political problems. This is what comes of the doctrine that a member ought to be absolutely dependent on his constituents, and of the notion that politics is neither a science, nor an art, nor even an occupation, like farming or store-keeping, in which one learns by experience, but a thing which comes by nature, and for which one man of common sense is as fit as another.
IV. The last-mentioned evil is aggravated by the short dura- tion of a Congress. Short as it seems, the two years term was warmly opposed, when the Constitution was framed, as being too long. The constitutions of the several States, framed when they shook off the supremacy of the British Crown, all fixed one year, except the ultra-democratic Connecticut and Rhode Island, where under the colonial charters a legislature met every six months, and South Carolina, which had fixed two years. So essential to republicanism was this principle deemed, that the
- maxim “ where annual elections end tyranny begins” had passed
into a proverb ;2 and the authors of the Federalist were obliged
1 In the Massachusetts Convention of 1788, when this question was being dis- cussed, ‘General Thomson then broke out into the following pathetic apostrophe, ‘O my country, never give up your annual elections: young men, never give up your jewel.’ He apologized for his zeal.” —Hlliot’s Debates, vol. ii. p. 16.
2 The whole subject is discussed with acuteness and judgment in the 51st and 52d numbers of the Federalist, numbers whose authorship is variously attri-
VOL. I 0
194 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
to argue that the limited authority of Congress, watched by the executive on one side, and the State legislatures on the other, would prevent so long a period as two years from proving dangerous to liberty, while it was needed in order to enable the members to master the laws and understand the conditions of different parts of the Union. At present the two years term is justified on the ground that it furnishes a proper check on the President. The Congress elected in the autumn of 1884 at the same time as the President, meets in December 1885, while another, elected in 1886, meets in 1887, and thus covers the later part of his four years term. Thus the people can, if they please, express disapproval of the policy which he has so far fol- lowed. One is.also told that these frequent elections are necessary to keep up popular interest in current politics, nor do some fail to hint that the temptations to jobbing would overcome the virtue of members who had a longer term before them. Where Ameri- can opinion is unanimous, it would be presumptuous for a stranger to dissent. Yet the remark may be permitted that the dangers originally feared have proved chimerical. There is no country whose representatives are more dependent on popular opinion, more ready to trim their sails to the least breath of it. The public acts, the votes, and speeches of a member from Oregon or Texas can be more closely watched by his constituents than those of a Virginian member could be watched in 1789.+ And as the frequency of elections involves inexperienced mem- bers, the efficiency of Congress suffers.
VY. The numbers of the two American houses seem small to a European when compared on the one hand with the population of the country, on the other with the practice of European States. The Senate has 76 members against the British House of Lords with about 560, and the French Senate with 300. The House has 325 against the British House of Commons with 670, and the French and Italian Chambers with 584 and 508 respectively.
The Americans, however, doubt whether both their Houses have not already become too large. They began with 26 in the buted to Hamilton and to Madison. In England the duration of parliaments was at one time (and may perhaps be again) matter of active controversy. One
of the five points of the “People’s Charter’’ of 1848 was the restriction of their duration to one year.
1 Of course his conduct in committee is rarely known, but I doubt whether the shortness of the term makes him more scrupulous.
4
CHAP. XIX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 195
Senate, 65 in the House, numbers then censured as too small, but which worked well, and gave less encouragement to idle talk and vain display than the crowded halls of to-day. The propor- tion of representatives to inhabitants, originally 1 to 30,000, is now 1 to 154,000, having constantly fallen as the population in- creased. ‘The inclination of wise men is to stop further increase when the number of 400 has been reached, for they perceive that the House already suffers from disorganization, and fear that a much larger one would prove unmanageable.! So, much depends on the particular circumstances of each country that no general rule can be laid down as to the size of representative assemblies, and the experience of one nation is of no great value for another. So far as general principles go, a student of politics will be disposed to think that as the American Chamber ought not to be raised much further, so the British House of Commons ought to be rather reduced than increased.”
VI. American congressmen are more assiduous in their attendance than the members of most European legislatures. The great majority not only remain steadily at Washington
1 There is force in the following observations which I copy from the 54th and 57th numbers of the Federalist :—“ A certain number at least seems necessary to secure the benefits of free consultation and discussion, and to guard against too easy a combination for improper purposes ; as on the other hand, the number ought to be kept within a certain limit in order to avoid the confusion and intem- perance of a multitude. In all very numerous assemblies, of whatever characters composed, passion never fails to wrest the sceptre from reason. Had every Athenian citizen been a Socrates, every Athenian assembly would still have been amob.... In all legislative assemblies, the greater the number comprising them may be, the fewer will be the men who will in fact direct their proceed- ings. The larger the number, the greater will be the proportion of members of limited information and of weak capacities. Now it is precisely on characters of this description that the eloquence and address of the few are known to act with all their force. In the ancient republics where the whole body of the people assembled in person, a single orator, or an artful statesman, was generally seen to rule with as complete a sway as if a sceptre had been placed in his single hand. On the same principle the more multitudinous a representative assembly may be rendered, the more it will partake of the infirmities incident to collective meetings of the people. Ignorance will be the dupe of cunning, and passion the slave of sophistry and declamation. The people can never err more than in supposing that by multiplying their representatives beyond a certain limit they strengthen the barrier against the government of a few. Experience will for ever admonish them that, on the contrary, after securing a certain number for the purposes of safety, of local information, and of diffusing sympathy with the whole society, they will counteract their own views by every addition to their representatives.”
2 The House of Commons would be much less manageable than it is did the whole of its 670 members attend. Even now, the number present during a debate rarely exceeds 450, though of course as many as 600 sometimes vote in great divisions. There is sitting space on the floor for only 360.
196 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
through the session, but are usually to be found in the Capitol, often in their Chamber itself, while a sitting lasts. There is therefore comparatively little trouble in making a quorum,’ though the quorum consists of one half in each House, whereas in England the House of Lords, whose quorum is three, has usually less than thirty peers present, and the House of Com- mons finds a difficulty, through many private members’ days and on government days from eight till ten o’clock p.m., in making up its modest quorum of forty.? This requirement of a high quorum, which is prescribed in the Constitution, has doubtless helped to secure a good attendance. Other causes are the dis- tance from Washington of the residences of most members, so that it is not worth while to take the journey home for a short sojourn, and the fact that very few attempt to carry on any regular business or profession while the session lasts. Those who are lawyers, or merchants, or manufacturers, leave their work to partners; but many are politicians and nothing else. In Washington, a city without commerce or manufactures, political or semi-political intrigue is the only gainful occupation possible ; for the Supreme Court practice employs only a few leading bar- risters. The more democratic a country is, so much the more regular is the attendance, so much closer the attention to the re- quests of constituents which a member is expected to render. Every extension of the suffrage in England has been followed not only by a change in the character of the House of Commons, but by an increase in the numbers usually present, and in the eager- ness of members to defer to every wish of those who have returned them.? Apart from that painful duty of finding places for constituents which consumes so much of a congressman’s time, his duties are not heavier than those of a member of the English Parliament who desires to keep abreast of current ques- tions. The sittings are neither so long nor so late as those of the House of Commons; the questions that come up not so
1 Though sometimes the sergeant-at-arms is sent round Washington with a carriage to fetch members down from their residences to the Capitol.
2 Oliver Cromwell’s House of 360 members, including 30 from Scotland and 30
from Ireland, had a quorum of 60. See the Articles of December 1653 in Par-' liamentary History, vol. iii. p. 1417.
° Before the Reform Bill of 1832 there were rarely more than 200 members present in the House of Commons, and it usually sat for two or three hours only in each day. I remember to have been tcld of a member for Hampshire about 1820, who sat for thirteen years, being in perfect health, and was only thrice in the House. Nor was this deemed a very singular case.
eee
_, CHAP. xix GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 197
multifarious, the blue books to be read less numerous, the correspondence (except about places) less troublesome. The
position of senator is more onerous than that of a member of the
House, not only because his whole State, and not merely a dis-
trict, has a direct claim upon him, but also because, as one of a
smaller body, he incurs a larger individual responsibility, and sits
upon two or more committees instead of on one only.
VII. The reasons which make a political career unattractive to most Americans will deserve to be considered in a later chapter. Here I will only remark that the want of opportunities for distinction in Congress is one of them. It takes a new member at least a session to learn the procedure of the House. Full dress debates are rare, newspaper reports of speeches delivered are curt and little read. The most serious work is done in committees ; it is not known to the world, and much of it results in nothing, because many bills which a committee has considered . are perhaps never even voted on by the House. A place on a good House committee is to be obtained by favour, and a high- spirited man may shrink from applying for it to the Speaker. Ability, tact, and industry make their way in the long run in Congress, as they do everywhere else. But in Congress there is, for most men, no long run. Only very strong local influence, or some remarkable party service rendered, will enable a member to keep his seat through two or three successive congresses. Nowhere therefore does the zeal of a young politician sooner wax cold than in the House of Representatives. Unfruitful toil, the toil of turning a crank which does nothing but register its own turnings, or of writing. contributions which an editor steadily rejects, is of all things the most disheartening. It is more dis- heartening than the non-requital of merit; for that at least spares the self-respect of the sufferer. Now toil for the public is usually unfruitful in the House of Representatives, indeed in all Houses. But toil for the pecuniary interests of one’s constituents and friends is fruitful, for it obliges people, it wins the reputation of energy and smartness, it has the promise not only of a re-nomination, but of a possible seat in the Senate. Now a seat in the Senate is the highest ambition of the congress- man. Power, fame, perhaps even riches, sit upon that pinnacle. But the thin spun life is usually slit before the fair guerdon has been found. When I first went to America, I used to ask the ablest and most ambitious of the friends I made among
198 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT | PART I
young men whether they looked forward to entering Congress. Out of many scarcely one seemed drawn towards the career which those who have won success at the universities of England naturally look forward to.! Presently I came to under- tand their attitude, and to feel that the probable disappoint- ments and vexations of a life in Congress so far outweighed its attractions that nothing but a strong sense of public duty would induce a man of fine tastes and high talents to adopt it. Law, education, literature, the higher walks of commerce, finance, or railway work, offer a better prospect of usefulness, enjoy- ment, or distinction.
Inside Washington, the representative is dwarfed by the senator and the Federal judges. Outside Washington he enjoys no great social consideration.? His opinion is not quoted with respect. He seems to move about under a prima facie suspicion of being a jobber, and to feel that the burden of proof lies on him to show that the current jests on this topic do not apply to him. Rich men therefore do not seek, as in England, to enter the legislature in order that they may enter society. They will get no entrée which they could not have secured otherwise. Nor is there any opportunity for the exercise of those social influences which tell upon members, and still more upon members’ wives and daughters, in European legislatures. It may of course be worth while to “capture” a particular senator, and for that purpose to begin by capturing his wife. But the salon plays no sensible part in American public life.
The country does not go to Congress to look for its presidential
candidates as England looks to Parliament for its prime ministers. -
The opportunities by which a man can win distinction there are few. He does not make himself familiar to the eye and ear of the people. Congress, in short, is not a focus of political life as are the legislatures of France, Italy, and England. This has always been so, and is no less so now than formerly. Although Congress has become more powerful against the several States
1 Although young Englishmen seem less drawn to parliamentary life now than they were twenty or thirty years ago.
2 A few years ago an eminent Englishman, not then a member of the House of Commons, visiting one of the colleges for women in New England, and wishing to know something of the social standing of the students, remarked, “I suppose you have a good many young ladies here belonging to the best families, daughters of members of Congress and so forth?” The question excited so much amusement that it was repeated to me months afterwards not only as an instance of English ignorance but as an excellent joke. .
CHAP, XIX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 199
than it was formerly, though it has extended its arms in every direction, and encroached upon the executive, it has not. become more interesting to the people, it has not strengthened its hold on their respect and affection.
VIII. Neither in the Senate nor in the House are there any recognized leaders. ‘There is no ministry, no ex-ministry leading an opposition, no chieftains at the head of definite groups who follow their lead, as the Irish Nationalist members in the British Parliament follow Mr. Parnell, and’a large section of the Left in the French chamber follow M. Clemenceau. In other words, no regular means exist for securing either that members shall be apprised of the approach of an important division, or that they shall vote in that division in a particular way.
To any one familiar with the methods of the English parlia- ment this seems incomprehensible. How, he asks, can business go on at all, how can the party make itself felt as a party with neither leader nor Whips ?
I have mentioned the Whips. Let me say a word on this vital, yet even in England little appreciated, part of the machinery of constitutional government. Hach party in the House of Commons has, besides its leaders, a member of the House nominated by the chief leader as his aide-de-camp, and called the whipper-in, or, for shortness, the whip. The whip’s duties are (1) to inform every member belonging to the party when an im- portant division may be expected, and if he sees the member in or about the House, to keep him there until the division is called ; (2) to direct the members of his own party how to vote; (3) to obtain pairs for them if they cannot be present to vote; (4) to “tell,” ¢.e. count the members in every party division; (5) to “keep touch” of opinion within the party, and convey to the leader a faithful impression of that opinion, from which the latter can judge how far he may count on the support of his whole party in any course he proposes to take. A member in doubt how he shall vote on a question with regard to which he has no opinion of his own, goes to the whip for counsel. A member who without grave cause stays away unpaired from an important division to which the whip has duly summoned him is guilty of a mis- demeanour only less flagrant than that of voting against his party. A ministerial whip is further bound to “keep a house,” i.e. to secure that when government business is being considered there shall always be a quorum of members present, and of
200 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
course also to keep a majority, i.¢. to have within reach a number of supporters sufficient to give the ministry a majority on any ministerial division.1_ Without the constant presence and activity of the ministerial whip the wheels of government could not go on for a day, because the ministry would be exposed to the risk of casual defeats which would destroy their credit and might involve their resignation. Similarly the Opposition, and any third or fourth party, find it necessary to have a whip, because it is only thus that they can act as a party, guide their supporters, and bring their full strength to bear on a division. Hence when a new party is formed, its first act, that by which it realizes and proclaims its existence, is to name a whip, to whom its adherents may go for counsel, and who may in turn receive their suggestions as to the proper strategy for the party to adopt. So essential are these officers to the discipline of English parliamentary armies that an English politician’s first question when he sees Congress is, “ Where are the whips ?” his next, “ How in the world do you get on without them ?”
The answer to this question is threefold. Whips are not so necessary at Washington as at Westminster. A sort of substitute for them has been devised. Congress does suffer from the want of them, that is, it suffers from the inadequacy of the substituted device.
A division in Congress has not the importance it has in the House of Commons. There it may throw out the ministry. In Congress it never does more than affirm or negative some particular bill or resolution. Even a division in the Senate which involves the rejection of a treaty or of an appointment to some great office, does not disturb the tenure of the executive, Hence it is not essential to the majority that its full strength
1 That which was at one time the chief function of the ministerial whip, viz. to pay members for the votes they gave in support of the government, has been extinct for about a century. He is still, however, the recognized organ for handling questions of political patronage, and is therefore called the Patronage Secretary to the Treasury. People who want places for their friends, or titles for themselves, still address their requests to him, which he communicates to the prime minister with his opinion as to whether the applicant’s party services justify the request. Nowadays this patronage has no great political importance.
? Even parties formed with a view to particular, and probably transitory issues, such as that of the English Anti-Home-Rule Liberals in the House of Commons at this moment (1888), appoint one or more of their members as whips, because they could not otherwise act with that effect which only habitual concert gives.
Each party has its whips in the House of Lords also, but as divisions there have less political significance their functions are less important.
- i
CHAP, XIX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 201
should be always at hand, nor has a minority party any great prize set before it as the result of a successful vote.
Questions, however, arise in which some large party interest is involved. There may be a bill by which the party means to carry out its main views of policy or perhaps to curry favour with the people, or a resolution whereby it hopes to damage a hostile executive. In such cases it is important to bring up every vote. Accordingly a meeting of the party is convened, called a senatorial caucus or congressional (i.e. House) caucus (as the case may be).! The attitude to be assumed by the party is debated with closed doors, and a vote taken as to the course to be adopted. By this vote every member of the party is deemed bound, just as. he would be in England by the request of the leader conveyed through the whip. Disobedience cannot be punished in Congress itself, except of course by social penalties ; but it endangers the seat of the too independent member, for the party managers at Washington will communicate with the party managers in his district, and the latter will probably refuse to re-nominate him at the next election. The most important caucus of a Congress is that held at the opening to select the party candidate for the speakership, selection by the majority being of course equivalent to election. As the views and tendencies of the Speaker determine the composition of the committees, and thereby the course of legislation, his selection is a matter of supreme importance, and is preceded by weeks of intrigue and canvassing.
This process of “going into caucus” is the regular American substitute for recognized leadership, and has the advantage of seeming more consistent with democratic equality, because every member of the party has in theory equal weight in the party meeting. It is used whenever a line of policy has to be settled, or the whole party to be rallied for a particular party division. But of course it cannot be employed every day or for every bill. Hence when no party meeting has issued its orders, a member is free to vote as he pleases, or rather as he thinks his constituents please. If he knows nothing of the matter, he may take a
1 At the beginning of a session each party in the Senate and in the House elects a chairman of the party caucus ; and it is the duty of this person to convoke a caucus of his party when the need arises. An experienced senator told me that the Senate caucus of his party used to meet on an average twice a month, the House
caucus less frequently. General meetings of a party in Parliament are much less common in England.
202 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
friend’s advice, or vote as he hears some prominent man on his own side vote. Anyhow, his vote is doubtful, unpredictable ; and consequently divisions on minor questions are uncertain. This is a further reason, added to the power of the standing committees, why there is a want of consistent policy in the action of Congress. As its leading men have comparatively little authority, and there are no means whereby a leader could keep his party together on ordinary questions, so no definite ideas run through its conduct and express themselves in its votes. It moves in zig-zags. The freedom thus enjoyed by members on minor questions has the interesting result of preventing dissensions and splits in the parties. There are substances which cohere best when their contact is loose. Fresh fallen snow keeps a smooth surface even on a steep slope, but when by melting and regelation it has become ice, cracks and rifts begin to appear. A loose hung carriage will hold together over a road whose roughness would strain and break a more solid one. Hence serious differences of opinion may exist in a congressional party without breaking its party unity, for nothing more is needed than that a solid front should be presented on the occasions, few in each session, when a momentous division arrives. The appearance of agreement is all the more readily preserved because there is little serious debating, so that the advocates of one view seldom provoke the other section of their party to rise and contradict them; while a member who dissents from the bulk of his party on an important issue is slow to vote against it, because he has little chance of defining and defending his position by an explanatory speech. The congressional caucus is more or less called into action according to the number and gravity of the party issues that come before Congress. In troublous times it has to be supple- mented by something like obedience to regular leaders. Mr. Thaddeus Stevens, for instance, led with recognized authority the majority of the House in its struggle with President Andrew Johnson. The Senate is rather more jealous of the equality of all its members. No senator can be said to have any authority beyond that of exceptional talent and experience ; and of course a senatorial caucus, since it rarely consists of more than forty
persons, is a better working body than a House caucus, which
may reach two hundred.}
1 At one time the congressional caucus played in American history a great part which it has now renounced. From 1800 till 1824 party meetings of
“4 -
CHAP. x1x GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 208
The European reader may be perplexed by the apparent contradictions in what has been said regarding the party organization of Congress. “Is the American House after all,” he will ask, “more or less a party body than the British House of Commons? Is the spirit of party more or less strong in Congress than in the American people generally ?”
I answer firstly that the House of Representatives is for the purpose of serious party issues fully as much a party body as the House of Commons. A member voting against his party on such an issue is more certain to forfeit his party reputation and his seat than is an English member. ‘This is true of both the Senate and the House. But for the purpose of ordinary questions, of issues not involving party fortunes, a representative is less bound by party ties than an English member, because he has neither leaders to guide him by their speeches nor whips by their private instructions. The apparent gain is that a wider field is left for independent judgment on non-partisan questions. The real loss is that legislation becomes weak and inconsistent. This conclusion is not encouraging to those who expect us to get rid of party in our legislatures. A deliberative assembly is, after all, only a crowd of men; and the more intelligent a crowd is, so much the more numerous are its volitions ; so much greater the difficulty of agreement. Like other crowds, a legisla- ture must be led and ruled. Its merit lies not in the independence of its members, but in the reflex action of its opinion upon the leaders, in its willingness to defer to them in minor matters, reserving disobedience for the issues in which some great principle overrides both the obligation of deference to established authority and the respect due to special knowledge.
The above remarks answer the second question also. The spirit of party may seem to be weaker in Congress than in the people at large. But this is only because the questions which the people decide at the polls are always questions of choice between candidates for office. These are definite questions, questions eminently of a party character, because candidates represent in the America of to-day not principles but parties. Whenever a vote upon persons occurs in Congress, Congress
senators and representatives were held which nominated the party candidates for the presidency, who were then accepted by each party as its regular candidates, In 1828 the State legislatures made these nominations, and in 1832 the present system of national conventions (see post, in Vol. II.) was introduced.
904 + +‘THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
=x, oe se y eek Te CP” 5 ) x Ae .,
ee
gives a strict party vote. Were the people to vote at the polls o on matters not explicitly comprised within a party platform, —
there would be the same uncertainty as Congress displays. The _ |
habit of joint action which makes the life of a party is equally _ intense in every part of the American system. But in England © the existence of a Ministry and Opposition in Parliament sweeps
within the circle of party action many topics which in America — are left outside, and therefore Congress seems, but is not, less
permeated than Parliament by party spirit.
eal nll a at ae
——s
CHAPTER XX
THE RELATIONS OF CONGRESS TO THE PRESIDENT !
So far as they are legislative bodies, the House and the Senate have similar powers and stand in the same relation to the executive.2, We may therefore discuss them together, or rather
_the reader may assume that whatever is said of the House as a
legislature is also true of the Senate. The Senate is also a semi-
executive council, intended to advise and to restrain the
President, but its functions in that capacity have been already discussed.?
Although the Constitution forbids any Federal official to be chosen a member of either the House or the Senate, there is nothing in it to prevent officials from speaking there ; as indeed there is nothing to prevent either House from assigning places and the right to speak to any one whom it chooses. Now, how- ever, no Federal officer appears on the floor. In the early days Washington came down and delivered his opening speech. Occasionally he remained in the Senate during a debate, and even expressed his opinion there. When Hamilton, the first secretary of the treasury, prepared his famous report on the national finances, he asked the House whether they would hear him speak it, or would receive it in writing. They chose the
_ latter course, and the precedent then set has been followed by
1 The relations of the various organs of government to one another in the United States are so interesting and so unlike those which exist in most
European countries, that I have found it necessary to describe them with some
minuteness, and from several points of view. In this chapter an account is given of the actual working relations of the President and Congress; in the next chapter the general theory of the respective functions of the executive and legis- lative departments is examined, and the American view of the nature of these functions explained ; while in Chapter XXV. the American system as a whole is compared with the so-called “cabinet system” of England and her colonies.
2 The House has the exclusive initiative in revenue bills ; but this privilege does not affect what follows. 8 See above, Chapter XI,
206 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI
subsequent ministers,! while that set in 1801 by President Jefferson when he transmitted his message in writing instead of delivering a speech, has been similarly respected by all his successors. Thus neither House now hears a member of the executive. A committee may request the attendance of a minister and examine him, but he appears before it only as a witness to answer questions, not to state and argue his own case. There is therefore little direct intercourse between Congress and the administration, and no sense of interdependence and com- munity of action such as exists in other parliamentary countries.” Be it remembered also that a minister may never have sat in Congress, and may therefore be ignorant of its temper and habits. Three members of Mr. Cleveland’s present cabinet have never had a seat in either House. The President himself, although he has been voted into office by his party, is not necessarily its leader, nor even one among its most prominent leaders. Hence he does not sway the councils and guide the policy of those members of Congress who belong to his own side. The expression of his wishes conveyed in a message has not necessarily any more effect on Congress than an article in a prominent party newspaper. No duty lies on Congress to take up a subject to which he has called attention as needing legisla- lation ; and, in fact, the suggestions which he makes, year after year, are usually neglected, even when his party has a majority in both Houses, or when the subject les outside party lines.
The President and his cabinet have no recognized spokesman
1 Hamilton, however, was, while secretary, frequently present in Congress and addressed it. Nor has any rule ever been made by either House to prevent a secretary from doing so now. It is mere matter of custom. A bill was brought in some years ago giving seats in both Houses of Congress to cabinet ministers, and permitting them to speak on matters relating to their department, but not to join in general debate. This was provided in the Constitution of the Southern Confederacy (see note to Chapter XXVI. at the end of this volume). The President may of course come into the Senate, though he does not now address it. He does not go into the House of Representatives. Nor has any English king entered the House of Commons, except Charles I. in 1642, on the occasion of his attempt to seize the five members, when, says the Jowrnal, “His Majesty came into the House and took Mr. Speaker’s chair: ‘Gentlemen, I am sorry to have this occasion to come unto you.’” The results did not encourage his successors to repeat the visit. But Charles IJ. and Anne were sometimes present during debates in the House of Lords; and there would not, it is conceived, be anything to prevent the Sovereign from being present now.
2 The House some years ago passed a bill for transferring Indian affairs from the Secretary of the Interior to the Secretary of War without consulting either official.
CHAP. XX CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT 207
in either House. A particular senator or representative may be in confidential communication with them, and be the instrument through whom they seek to act; but he would probably disavow Ptr than claim the position of an exponent of ministerial wishes. The only means the President possesses of influencing members of Congress is through patronage. He may give places to them or their ieiendas he may approve or veto bills in which they are interested ; his “ministers may allot lucrative contracts to their nominees. ‘This power is considerable, but covert, for the knowledge that it was being used might damage the member in public estimation and expose the executive to imputations. The consequence of cutting off open relations has been to encourage secret influence, which may of course be used for legitimate purposes, but which, being exerted in darkness, is seldom above suspicion. When the President or a minister is attacked in Congress, it is not the duty of any one there to justify his conduct. The accused official may send a written defence or may induce a member to state his case; but this method lacks the advantages of the European parliamentary system, under which the person assailed repels in debate the various charges, showing himself not afraid to answer fresh questions and grapple with new points. Thus by its exclusion from Congress the executive is deprived of the power of leading and guiding the legislature and of justifying in debate its administrative acts.
Next as to the power of Congress over the executive. Hither House of Congress, or both Houses jointly, can pass resolutions calling on the President or his ministers to take certain steps, or censuring steps they have already taken. The President need not obey such resolutions, need not even notice them. They do not shorten his term or limit his discretion. If the resolution be one censuring a minister, or demanding his dismissal, there is another ground on which the President may disregard it. The act is in law not the minister’s act, but that of the President himself, and he does not therefore escape responsibility by throwing over his adviser.
1 In England a resolution of the House of Commons alone is treated as impera- tive in matters lying within the discretion of the executive, but then the House of Commons has the power of dismissing the Government if its wishes are dis- regarded. here have even been instances of late years in which the executive
has ceased to put in force the provisions of an unrepealed statute, because the House of Commons has expressed its disapproval of that statute.
é 2s oS ae re Pat a . ema “sh \ . = 5 Seen = 4 ‘ ' ig J 15 Wh —- ‘ ; y ‘ Bed
208 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT  paRT
Either House of Congress can direct a committee to summon and examine a minister, who, though he might legally refuse to ~ attend, never does refuse. The committee, when it has got him, can do nothing more than question him. He may evade their questions, may put them off the scent by dexterous concealments. He may with impunity tell them that he means to take his own course. To his own master, the President, he standeth or falleth.
Congress may refuse to the President the legislation he re- quests, and thus, by mortifying and embarrassing him, may seek to compel his compliance with its wishes. It is only a timid President, or a President greatly bent on accomplishing some end for which legislation is needed, who will be moved by such tactics.
Congress can pass bills requiring the President or any minister to do or abstain from doing certain acts of a kind hitherto left to his free will and judgment, may, in fact, endeavour to tie down the officials by prescribing certain conduct for them in great detail. The President will presumably veto such bills, as con- trary to sound administrative policy. If, however, he signs them, or if Congress passes them by a two-thirds vote in both Houses over his veto, the further question may arise whether they are within the constitutional powers of Congress, or are invalid as unduly trenching on the discretion which the Constitution leaves to the President. If he (or a minister), alleging them to be un. constitutional, disobeys them, the only means of deciding whether he is right is by getting the point before the Supreme Court as an issue of law in some legal proceeding. This cannot always be done. If itis done, and the court decide against the President, then if he still refuses to obey, nothing remains but to impeach him.
Impeachment, of which an account has already been given, is the heaviest piece of artillery in the congressional arsenal, but because it is so heavy it is unfit for ordinary use. It is like a hundred-ton gun which needs complex machinery to bring it into position, an enormous charge of powder to fire it, and a large mark to aim at. Or to vary the simile, impeachment is what physicians call a heroic medicine, an extreme remedy, proper to be applied against an official guilty of political crimes, but ill adapted for the punishment of small transgressions. Since 1789 it has been used only once against a President, and then, although that President (Andrew Johnson) had for two years constantly, and with great intemperance of language, so defied and resisted Con- gress that the whole machinery of government had been severely
CHAP. xx CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT 209
strained by the collision of the two authorities, yet the Senate did not convict him, because no single offence had been clearly made out. Thus impeachment does not tend to secure, and indeed was never meant to secure, the co-operation of the execu- tive with Congress.
It accordingly appears that Congress cannot compel the dis- missal of any official. It may investigate his conduct by a com- mittee and so try to drive him to resign. It may request the President to dismiss him, but if his master stands by him and he sticks to his place, nothing more can be done. He may of course be impeached, but one does not impeach for mere incompetence or laxity, as one does not use-steam hammers to crack nuts. Thus we arrive at the result, surprising to a European, that while Congress may examine the servants of the public to .any extent, may censure them, may lay down rules for their guidance, it cannot get rid of them. It is as if the directors of a company were forced to go on employing a manager whom they had ceased to trust, because it was not they but the shareholders who had appointed him.
There remains the power which in free countries has been long regarded as the citadel of parliamentary supremacy, the power of the purse. Congress has the sole right of raising money and appropriating it to the service of the state. Its management of national finance is significantly illustrative of the plan which separates the legislative from the executive. It has been shown in a preceding chapter that in this supremely important matter of raising and applying the public revenue, the executive govern- ment, instead of proposing and supervising, instead of. securing that each department gets the money that it needs, that no money goes where it is not needed, that revenue is procured in the least troublesome and expensive way, that an exact yearly balance is struck, that the policy of expenditure is self-consistent and reasonably permanent from year to year, is by its exclusion from Congress deprived of influence on the one hand, of responsi- bility on the other. The chancellorship of the exchequer, to use an English expression, is put into commission, and divided be- tween the chairmen of several unconnected committees of both Houses. A mass of business which, as English experience shows, specially needs the knowledge, skill, and economical con- science of a responsible ministry, is left to committees which are powerful but not responsible, and to Houses whose nominal
VOL. I P
210 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
responsibility is in practice sadly weakened by their want of appropriate methods and organization.
The question follows: How far does the power of the purse enable Congress to control the President? Much less than in European countries. Congress may check any particular scheme which the President favours by refusing supplies for it. If he were to engage in military operations—he cannot under the Con- stitution “declare war” for that belongs to Congress—the House might paralyse him by declining to vote the requisite army appropriations. If he were to repeat the splendid audacity of Jefferson by purchasing a new territory, they could withhold the purchase money. But if, keeping within the limits of his constitutional functions, he takes a different course from that they recommend, if for instance he should refuse, at their re- peated requests, to demand the liberation of American citizens pining in foreign dungeons, or to suppress disorders in a State whose government had requested Federal intervention, they would have to look on. To withhold the ordinary supplies, and thereby stop the machine of government, would injure the country and themselves far more than the President. They would, to use a common expression, be cutting off their nose to spite their face. They could not lawfully refuse to vote his salary, for that is guaranteed to him by the Constitution. They could not, except by a successful impeachment, turn him out of the White House or deprive him of his title to the obedience of all Federal officials.
Accordingly, when Congress has endeavoured to coerce the
President by the use of its money powers, the case being one in which it could not attack him by ordinary legislation (either because such legislation would be unconstitutional, or for want of a two-thirds majority), it has proceeded not by refusing appro- priations altogether, as the English House of Commons would do in like circumstances, but by attaching what is called a “rider” to an appropriation bill. More than twenty years ago the House had formed the habit of inserting in bills appropriating money to the purposes of the public service, provisions relating to quite different matters, which there was not time to push through in the ordinary way. In 1867 Congress used this device against President Johnson, with whom it was then at open war, by
1 A leading member of the House, Mr. Reagan of Texas, said there that be- tween 1862 and 1875, 375 measures of general legislation had been passed as
CHAP. Xx CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT 211
attaching to an army appropriation bill a clause which virtually deprived the President of the command of the army, entrusting its management to the general highest in command (General Grant). The President yielded, knowing that if he refused the bill would be carried over his veto by a two-thirds vote; and a usage already mischievous was confirmed. In 1879, the majority in Congress attempted to overcome, by the same weapon, the resistance of President Hayes to certain measures affecting the South which they desired to pass. They tacked these measures to three appropriation bills, army, legislative, and judiciary. The minority in both houses fought hard against the riders, but were beaten. The President vetoed all three bills, and Congress was obliged to pass them without the riders. Next session the struggle recommenced in the same form, and the President, by rejecting the money bills, again compelled Congress to drop the tacked provisions. This victory, which was of course due to the fact that the dominant party in Congress could not command a two-thirds majority, was deemed to have settled the question as between the executive and the legislature, and may have per- manently discouraged the latter from recurring to the same tactics. President Hayes in his veto messages argued strongly against the whole practice of tacking other matters to money bills. It has certainly caused great abuses, and is now forbidden by the constitutions of many States Recently the President has urged upon Congress the desirability of so amending the Federal Con- stitution as to enable him, as a State governor is by some recent State constitutions allowed to do, to veto single items in an appropriation bill without rejecting the whole bill. Such an amendment is generally desired by enlightened men, because it would enable the executive to do its duty by the country in defeating many petty jobs which are now smuggled into these bills, without losing the supplies necessary for the public service which the bills provide. The change seems a small one, but its adoption would cure one of the defects due to the absence of ministers from Congress, and might save the nation millions of dollars a year, by diminishing wasteful expenditure on local purposes. But the process of amending the Constitution is so troublesome that even a changewhich involves no party issues may remain unadopted long after the best opinion has become unanimous in its favour.
provisoes upon appropriation bills. See Mr, Horace Davis’s “ American Con- stitutions,” p. 80, in Johns Hopkins University Studies, Third Series.
CHAPTER XXI THE LEGISLATURE AND THE EXECUTIVE
Tue fundamental characteristic of the American National Govern- ment is its separation of the legislative, executive, and judicial departments. This separation is the merit which the Philadel- phia Convention chiefly sought to attain, and which the Americans ‘have been wont to regard as most completely secured by their Constitution. In Europe, as well as in America, men are accus- tomed to talk of legislation and administration as distinct. But a consideration of their nature will show that it is not easy to separate these two departments in theory by analysis, and still less easy to keep them apart in practice. We may begin by examining their relations in the: internal affairs of a nation, reserving foreign policy for a later part of the discussion.
People commonly think of the Legislature as the body which lays down general rules of law, which prescribes, for instance, that at a man’s death his children shall succeed equally to his property, or that a convicted thief shall be punished with im- prisonment, or that a manufacturer may register his trade mark, They think of the Executive as the person or persons who do certain acts under those rules, who lock up convicts, register trade marks, carry letters, raise and pay a police and an army. In finance the Legislature imposes a tax, the Executive gathers it, and places it in the treasury or in a bank, subject to legislative orders ; the Legislature votes money by a statute, appropriating it to a specific purpose; the Executive draws it from the treasury or bank, and applies it to that purpose, perhaps in paying the army, perhaps in building a bridge.
The executive is, in civilized countries, itself the creature of the law, deriving therefrom its existence as well as its authority. Sometimes, as in France, it is so palpably and formally. The President of the Republic has been called into existence by the
CHAP. XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE : 213
Constitution. Sometimes, as in England, it is so substantially, though not formally. The English Crown dates from a remote antiquity, when custom and belief had scarcely crystallized into law; and though Parliament has repeatedly determined its devolution upon particular persons or families—it is now held under the Act of Settlement—no statute has ever affected to confer upon it its rights to the obedience of the people. But practically it holds its powers at the pleasure of Parliament, which has in some cases expressly limited them, and in others given them a tacit recognition. We may accordingly say of England and of all constitutional monarchies as well as of republics that the executive in all its acts must obey the law, that is to say, if the law prescribes a particular course of action, the executive must take that course; if the law forbids a par- ticular course, the executive must avoid it.
It is therefore clear that the extent of the power of the ex- ecutive magistrate depends upon the particularity with which the law is drawn, that is, upon the amount of discretion which the law leaves to him. If the law is general in its terms, the execu- tive has a wide discretion. If, for instance, the law prescribes simply that a duty of ten per cent ad valorem be levied on all manufactured goods imported, it rests with the executive to de- termine by whom and where that duty shall be collected, and on what principles it shall be calculated. If the law merely creates a post-office, the executive may fix the rate of payment for letters and parcels, and the conditions on which they will be received and delivered. In these cases the executive has a large field within which to exert its free will and choice of means. Power means nothing more than the extent to which a man can make his individual will prevail against the wills of other men, so as to control them. Hence, when the law gives to a magistrate a wide discretion, he is powerful, because the law clothes his will with all the power of the state. On the other hand, if the law goes into very minute details, directing the official to do this and not to do that, it narrows the discretion of the executive magis- trate. His personal will and choice are gone. He can no longer be thought of as a co-ordinate power in the state. He becomes a mere servant, a hand to carry out the bidding of the legislative brain, or, we may even say, a tool in the legislative hand.
As the legislature has been the body through which the people have chiefly asserted their authority, we find that in all free
214 } THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I ~
states law-making assemblies, whether primary or representative, have sought to extend their province and to subject the execu- tive to themselves. They have done this in several ways. In the democracies of ancient Greece the assembly of all citizens not only passed statutes of general application, but made peace or declared war; ordered an expedition to start for Sphacteria, and put Cleon at the head of it; commanded the execution of prisoners or reprieved them; conducted, in fact, most of the public business of the city by a series of direct decrees, all of which were laws, i.e. declarations of its sovereign will. It was virtually the government. The chief executive officers of Athens, called the generals, had little authority except over the military operations in the field. Even the Roman Constitution, a far more highly developed and scientific, though also a complicated and cumbrous system, while it wisely left great discretion to the chief magistrates (requiring them, however, to consult the Senate), yet permitted the passing pro re nata of important laws, which were really executive acts, such as the law by which Pompey received an extraordinary command against Mithridates.
The Romans did not draw, any more than the Greek republics, ©
a distinction between general and special legislation,
This method, in which the people directly govern as a legis- lature, reducing the executive magistrates to passive instruments, is inapplicable where the country is large, because the mass of citizens cannot come together as an assembly. It is almost equally inapplicable where the legislature, though a representa- tive body, is very numerous. England, accordingly, and the nations which have imitated England,? have taken a different
1 The distinction between general legislative acts, which we call laws proper or statutes, and special legislative acts, ordering a particular thing to be done, is marked in Greek by the words véuos and Wydicmas; and in some cities, as in Athens, a vduos could be passed or changed only by a specially provided method. At Rome everything done by the people was of equal legal force and called lex (though the word privilegium is sometimes applied to special acts), The dis- tinction is apt to be forgotten under a despotic monarch, who is at once the executive and the legislative authority. Nevertheless, even under an autocrat there are some general rules which his individual volition dares not change, because the universal opinion of the people approves them. The book of Danie! even represents Darius as unable to revoke a general law he has once sanctioned, or to except a particular person from its operation.
? But during and immediately after the great Civil War the Long Parliament acted as both a legislative and an executive authority, as did the Convention through part of the French Revolution. And Parliament of course still retains its power of giving what are practically executive orders, e.g. it could pass a statute directing an expedition to seize a particular Pacific island.
) =
CHAP. XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 215
method. The people (that is, the qualified voters) have allowed an executive to subsist with apparently wide powers, but. they virtually choose this executive, and keep it in so close and con- stant a dependence upon their pleasure, that it dare not act against what it believes their will to be. The struggle for popular liberties in England took at first the form of a struggle for the supremacy of law; that is to say, it was a struggle to restrain the prerogative of the king by compelling his ministers to respect the ancient customs of the land and the statutes passed in Parliament. As the customs were always maintained, and the range of the statutes constantly widened, the executive was by degrees hemmed in within narrow limits, its discretionary power restricted, and that characteristic principle of the Constitution, which has been well called “The Reign of Law,” was established. ‘It was settled that the law, i.e the ancient customs and the statutes, should always prevail against the discretion of the Crown and its ministers, and that acts done by the servants of the Crown should be justiciable, exactly like the acts of private persons.! This once achieved, the executive fairly bitted and bridled, and the ministry made to hold office at the pleasure of the House of Commons, Parliament had no longer its former motive for seeking to restrict the discretion of the ministers of the Crown by minutely particular legislation, for ministers had become so accustomed to subjection that their discretion might be trusted. Parliament has, in fact, of late years begun to sail on the other tack, and allows ministers to do many things by regulations, schemes, orders in council, and so forth, which would previously have been done by statute.?
It may be asked how it comes, if this be so, that people nevertheless talk of the executive in England as being a separate and considerable authority? The answer is twofold. The English Crown has never been, so to speak, thrown into the melting-pot and recast, but has continued, in external form and seeming, an independent and highly dignified part of the con- stitutional system.? Parliament has never asserted a direct control
1 See Mr. Dicey’s Law of the Constitution for a lucid exposition of this principle.
2 Tn these cases, however (of which schemes under the Endowed Schools Acts may be taken as an instance), Parliament reserves to itself a right of veto in the form of an address to the Crown requesting that the regulation or scheme be not
approved. : ; 3 An interesting illustration of the relations of the English executive to the
216 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
over certain parts of the royal prerogative, such as the bestowal of honours, the creation of peerages, the making of appointments to office. No one at this moment can say exactly what the royal prerogative does or does not include. And secondly, the actual executive, i.e. the ministry of the day, retains some ad- vantages which are practically, though not legally, immense. - It has an initiative in all legislation, a sole initiative in financial legislation. It is a small and well organized body placed in the midst of a much larger and less organized body (i.e. the two Houses), on which therefore it can powerfully act. All patronage, ecclesiastical as well as civil, lies in its gift, and though it must not use this function so as to disgust the Commons, it has great latitude in the disposal of favours. While Parliament is sitting it disposes of a large part, sometimes (as in 1887) of the whole of the time of the House of Commons, and can therefore advance the measures it prefers, while retarding or evading motions it dislikes. During nearly half the year Parliament is not sitting, and the necessities of a great State placed in a restless world oblige a ministry to take momentous resolutions upon its own responsibility. Finally, it includes a few men who have obtained a hold on the imagination and confidence of the people, which emboldens them to resist or even to lecture Parliament, and often to prevail, not only against its first impulses, but possibly against its deliberate wishes. And an English ministry is strong not only because it so frankly acknowledges its depend- ence on the Commons as not to rouse the antagonism of that body, to which, be it remembered, most ministers belong, but legislature in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, when Parliament was little more than a pure legislature, is afforded by the present constitution of the tiny kingdom of the Isle of Man, the last survivor of those numerous kingdoms among which the British Isles were once divided. Its government is carried on by a Governor (appointed by the English Crown), a council of eight (composed partly of persons nominated by the Crown and partly of ex-officio members holding posts to which they have been appointed by the Crown), and an elected representative assembly of twenty-four. The assembly is purely legislative, and cannot check the Governor otherwise than by withholding the legislation he wishes for and such taxes as are annually voted. For the purposes of finance bills the assembly (House of Keys) and the council sit together but vote separately. The Governor presides, as the English king did in his Great Council. The Governor can stop any legislation he disapproves, and can retain his ministers against the will of the assembly. He is a true executive magistrate, commanding, moreover, like the earlier English kings, a considerable revenue which does not depend on the
annual votes of the legislature. Here therefore is an Old-World instance of the
American system as contradistinguished from the cabinet system of England and her colonies,
CHAP, XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE _ 217
also because it has another power outside to which it can, in extreme cases, appeal. It may dissolve Parliament, and ask the people to judge between its views and those of the majority of the House of Commons. Sometimes such an appeal succeeds. The power of making it is at all times a resource.
This delicate equipoise of the ministry, the House of Commons, and the nation acting at a general election, is the secret of the smooth working of the British Constitution. It reappears in two remarkable Constitutions, which deserve fuller study than they have yet received from American or English publicists, those of Prussia and the new German Empire. There, however, the ministry is relatively stronger than in England, because the Crown retains not only a wider stretch of legal authority, but a greater moral influence over the people, who have had less practice than the English in working free institutions, and who never forget that they are soldiers, and the King-Emperor head of the army. A Prussian minister is so likely to have the nation on his side when he makes an appeal to it in the name of the King, and feels so confident that even if he defies the Chambers without dissolving, the nation will not be greatly stirred, that he sometimes refuses to obey the legislature. This is one of those exceptions which illustrate the rule. The legislature is prevented from gaining ground on the executive, not so much by the Constitution as by the occasional refusal of the executive to obey the Constitution, a refusal made in reliance on the ascendency of the Crown.
So far we have been considering domestic policy. The case of foreign affairs differs chiefly in this, that they cannot be pro- vided for beforehand by laws general in application, but minutely particular in wording. A governing assembly may take foreign affairs into its own hand. In the republics of antiquity the Assembly did so, and was its own foreign office, The Athenian Assembly received ambassadors, declared war, concluded treaties. It got on well enough while it had to deal with other republics like itself, but suffered when the contest came to be with an astute diplomatist like Philip of Macedon. ‘The Roman Senate conducted the foreign policy of Rome, often with the skill to be expected from men of immense experience and ability, yet some- times with a vacillation which a monarch would have been less likely to show. But the foreign relations of modern states are so numerous and complex, and so much entangled with commercial
218 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT nies
questions, that it has become necessary to create a staff of trained officials to deal with them. No large popular assembly could have either the time or the knowledge requisite for managing the ordinary business, much less could it conduct a delicate negotiation whose success would depend on promptitude and secrecy. Hence even democratic countries like France and England are forced to leave foreign affairs to a far greater degree than home affairs to the discretion of the ministry of the day. France reserves to the Chambers the power of declaring war or concluding a treaty. England has so far adhered to the old traditions as to leave both to the Crown, though the first, and in most cases the second, must be exerted with the virtual approval of Parliament. The executive is as distinctly responsible to the legislature, as clearly bound to obey the directions of the legisla- ture, as in matters of domestic concern. But the impossibility which the legislature in countries like France and England finds in either assuming executive functions in international intercourse, or laying down any rules by law for the guidance of the execu- tive, necessarily gives the executive a wide discretion and a correspondingly large measure of influence and authority. The only way of restricting this authority would be to create a small foreign affairs committee of the legislature and to empower it to sit when the latter was not sitting. And this extreme course neither France nor England has yet taken, because the depend- ence of the ministry on the majority of the legislature has hitherto seemed to secure the conformity of the Foreign Office to the ideas and sentiments of that majority.
Before applying these observations to the United States, let us summarize the conclusions we have reached.
We have found that wherever the will of the people prevails, the legislature, since it either is or represents the people, can make itself omnipotent, unless checked by the action of the people themselves. It can do this in two ways. It may, like the republics of antiquity, issue decrees for particular cases as they arise, giving constant commands to all its agents, who thus become mere servants with no discretion left them. Or it may frame its laws with such particularity as to provide by anticipa- tion for the greatest possible number of imaginable cases, in this way also so binding down its officials as to leave them no volition, no real authority.
We have also observed that every legislature tends so to
w ‘
CHAP. XX1 LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 219
enlarge its powers as to encroach on the executive; and that it has great advantages for so doing, because a succeeding legis- lature rarely consents to strike off any fetter its predecessor has ‘imposed,
Thus the legitimate issue of the process would be the extinc- tion or absorption of the executive as a power in the State. It would become a mere set of employés, obeying the legislature as the clerks in a bank obey the directors. If this does not happen, the cause is generally to be sought in some one or more of the following circumstances :—
The legislature may allow the executive the power of appeal- ing to the nation against itself (England).?
The people may from ancient reverence or the habit of “ah tary submission be so much disposed to support the executive as
‘to embolden the latter to defy the legislature (Prussia).
The importance of foreign policy and the difficulty of taking it out of the hands of the executive may be so great that the executive will draw therefrom an influence re-acting in favour of its general weight and dignity (Prussia, England, and, to some extent, France).
Let us now see how the founders of the American Constitu- tion settled the relations of the departments. They were terribly afraid of a strong executive, and desired to reserve the final and decisive voice to the legislature, as representing the people. They could not adopt what I have called the Greek method of an assembly both executive and legislative, for Con- gress was to be a body with limited powers; continuous sittings would be inconvenient, and the division into two equally power- ful houses would evidently unfit it to govern with vigour and promptitude. Neither did they adopt the English method of a legislature governing through an executive dependent upon it It was urged in the Philadelphia Convention of 1787 that the executive ought to be appointed by and made accountable to the legislature, as being the supreme power in the national govern- ment. ‘This was over-ruled, because the majority of the Conven- tion were fearful of “democratic haste and instability,” fearful that the legislature would, in any event, become too powerful, and therefore anxious to build up some counter authority to check and balance it. By making the President independent,
1 In France the President can dissolve the Chambers, but only with the con- sent of the Senate.
220 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
and keeping him and his ministers apart from the legislature, the Convention thought they were strengthening him, as well as protecting it from attempts on his part to corrupt it.1 They were also weakening him. He lost the initiative in legislation which the English executive enjoys. He had not the English King’s power of dissolving the legislature and throwing himself upon the country. Thus the executive magistrate seemed left at the mercy of the legislature. It could weave so close a net- work of statutes round him, like the net of iron links which Hephestus throws over the lovers in the Odyssey, that his discre- tion, his individual volition, seemed to disappear, and he ceased to be a branch of the government, being nothing more than a servant working under the eye and at the nod of his master. This would have been an absorption of the executive into the legislature more complete than that of England, for the English prime minister is at any rate a leader, perhaps as necessary to his parliamentary majority as it is to him, whereas the President would have become a sort of superior police commissioner, irre- movable during four years, but debarred from acting either on Congress or on the people.
Although the Convention may not have realized how helpless _ such a so-called Executive must be, they felt the danger of encroachments by an ambitious legislature, and resolved to strengthen him against it. This was done by giving the Presi- dent a veto which it requires a two-thirds vote of Congress to over-ride. In doing this they went back on their previous action. They had separated the President and his ministers from Con- gress. They now bestowed on him legislative functions, though in a different form. He became a distinct branch of the legisla- ture, but for negative purposes only. He could not propose, but he could refuse. Thus the executive was strengthened, not as an executive, but by being made a part of the legislature ; and the legislature, already weakened by being divided into two co- equal houses, was further weakened by finding itself liable to be arrested in any new departure on which two-thirds of both houses were not agreed.
When the two houses are of one mind, and the party hostile
1 Their sense of the danger to a legislature from corruption by the executive was probably quickened by what they knew of the condition of the Irish Parlia- ment, full, even after 1782, of placemen and pensioners. Much of the best blood of Ulster had emigrated to America in the preceding half century, and Irish nolitics must have excited a good deal of interest there.
CHAR, XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 221
to the President has a two-thirds majority in both, the Executive is almost powerless. It may be right that he should be power- less, because such majorities in both houses presumably indicate a vast preponderance of popular opinion against him.! The fact to be emphasized is, that in this case all “balance of powers” is gone. ‘The legislature has swallowed up the executive, in virtue of the principle from which this discussion started, viz. that the executive is in free States only an agent who may be so limited by express and minute commands as to have no volition left him.
The strength of Congress consists in the right to pass statutes ; the strength of the President in his right to veto them. But foreign affairs, as we have seen, cannot be brought within the scope of statutes. How then was the American legislature to deal with them? There were two courses open. One was to leave foreign affairs to the executive, as in England, giving Con- gress the same indirect control as the English Parliament enjoys over the Crown and ministry. This course could not be taken, because the President is independent of Congress and irremov- able during his term. The other course would have been for Congress, like a Greek assembly, to be its own foreign office, or to create a foreign affairs committee of its members to handle these matters. As the objections to this course, which would have excluded the chief magistrate from functions naturally inci- dental to his position as official representative of the nation, were overwhelmingly strong, a compromise was made. The initiative in foreign policy and the conduct of negotiations were left to him, but the right of declaring war was reserved to Congress, and that of making treaties to one, the smaller and more experienced, branch of the legislature. A measure of authority was thus suffered to fall back to the executive which would have served to raise materially his position had foreign questions played as large a part in American politics as they have in French or Eng- lish. They have, however, been comparatively unimportant, especially since 1815.
1 An exceptionally experienced observer (Mr. James G. Blaine) says (Zwenty Years of Congress, vol. i. p. 185): “The practical deduction as to the working of our governmental system from the whole of that troublous period (the contest between President Johnson and Congress) is that two-thirds of each House united and stimulated to one end can practically neutralize the executive power of the government, and lay down its policy in defiance of the efforts and the opposition of the President.”
222 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
‘It may be said that there was yet another source whence the
executive might draw strength to support itself against the
legislature, viz. those functions which the Constitution, deeming them necessarily incident to an executive, has reserved to the President and excluded from the competence of Congress. But examination shows that there is scarcely one of these which the long arm ‘of legislation cannot reach. The President is com- mander-in-chief of the army, but the numbers and organization of the army are fixed by statute. The President makes appoint- ments, but the Senate has the right of rejecting them, and Con- egress may pass Acts specifying the qualifications of appointees, and reducing the salary of any official except the President him- self and the judges. ‘The real strength of the executive there- fore, the rampart from behind which it can resist the aggressions of the legislature, is in ordinary times the veto power.! In other words, it survives as an executive in virtue not of any properly executive function, but of the share in legislative functions which it has received; it holds its ground by force, not of its separa- tion from the legislature, but of its participation in a right properly belonging to the legislature.” An authority which depends on a veto capable of being over-
ruled by a two-thirds majority may seem frail. But the experi- ’
ence of a century has shown that, owing to the almost equal strength of the two great parties, the Houses often differ, and there is rarely a two-thirds majority of the same colour in both. Hence the Executive has enjoyed some independence. He is strong for defence, if not for attack. Congress can, except within that narrow sphere which the Constitution has absolutely
1 In moments of public danger, as during the War of Secession, the executive of course spripgs up into immense power, partly because the command of the army is then of the first importance ; partly because the legislature, feeling its unfitness for swift and secret decisions, gives free rein to the Executive, and practically puts its law-making powers at his disposal.
* What is said here of the national executive and national legislature is a fortiori true of the State executive and State legislatures. The State governor has no power of independent action whatever, being checked at every step by State statutes, and his discretion superseded by the minute directions which those statutes contain. He has not even ministers, because the other chief officials of the State are chosen, not by himself, but by popular vote. He has very little patronage ; and he has no foreign policy at all. The State legislature would therefore prevail against him in everything, were it not for his veto and for the fact that the legislature is now generally restrained (by the provisions of the State
constitution) from passing laws on many topics. (See post, Chapters XXXVII- XLY.)
CHAP, XXI _ LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 223
reserved to him, baffle the President, can interrogate, check, and
worry his ministers. But it can neither drive him the way it wishes him to go, nor dismiss them for disobedience or incom- petence.
An individual man has some great advantages in combating an assembly. His counsels are less distracted. His secrets are better kept. He may sow discord among his antagonists. He can strike a more sudden blow. Julius Cesar was more than a match for the Senate, Cromwell for the Long Parliament, even Louis Napoleon for the French Assembly of 1851. Hence, when the President happens to be a strong man, resolute, prudent, and popular, he may well hope to prevail against a body whom he may divide by the dexterous use of patronage, may weary out . by inflexible patience, may overawe by winning the admiration of the masses, always disposed to rally round a striking personality. But in a struggle extending over a long course of years an assembly has advantages over a succession of officers, especially of elected officers. The Roman Senate encroached on the con- suls, though it was neither a legislature nor representative ; the Carthaginian Councils encroached on the Suffetes; the Venetian Councils encroached on the Doge. Men come and go, but an assembly goes on for ever; it is immortal, because while the members change, the policy, the passion for extending its authority, the tenacity in clinging to what has once been gained, remain persistent. A weak magistrate comes after a strong magistrate, and yields what his predecessor had fought for; but an assembly holds all it has ever won.! Its pressure is steady and continuous ; it is always, by a sort of natural process, expanding its own powers and devising new methods for fettering its rival. Thus Congress, though it is no more respected or loved by the people now than it was seventy years ago, though it has developed no higher capacity for promoting the best interests of the State, has succeeded in occupying nearly all the ground which the Constitution left debatable between the Presi-
1 This is still more conspicuously the case when the members of the executive government do not sit in the assembly. When they do, and lead it, their in- fluence tends to restrain legislative encroachments, Even the presence of persons who are likely to be soon called on to form the executive has its influence. In 1886 a resolution moved in the House of Commons declaring that the executive ought to make no treaty without the previous consent of Parliament was resisted by the leaders of the Opposition as well as by the Government, partly because the
former, feeling they might at any time be called back to power, had personal as well as public grounds for not desiring to see the executive fettered.
224 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
dent and itself;! and would, did it possess a better internal organization, be even more plainly than it now is the supreme power in the government.
In their effort to establish a balance of power, the framers of the Constitution so far succeeded that neither power has sub- jected the other. But they underrated the inconveniences which arise from the disjunction of the two chief organs of government. They relieved the Administration from a duty which European ministers find exhausting and hard to reconcile with the proper performance of administrative work—the duty of giving attend- ance in the legislature and taking the lead in its debates. They secured continuity of executive policy for four years at least, instead of leaving government at the mercy of fluctuating major- ities in an excitable assembly. But they so narrowed the sphere of the executive as to prevent it from leading the country, or even its own party in the country. They sought to make mem- bers of Congress independent, but in doing so they deprived them of some of the means which European legislators enjoy of learning how to administer, of learning even how to legislate in admin- istrative topics. They condemned them to be architects without science, critics without experience, censors without responsibility.
1 The modification (in 1869) and repeal (in 1886) of the Tenure of Office Act (see above, p. 59) are scarcely instances to the contrary, because that Act, even if constitutional, had proved difficult to work.
Justice Miller observes (Oration at the Centennial Celebration of the framing of the Constitution, p. 20), ‘‘No department of the government has been more shorn of its just powers or crippled in the exercise of them than the Presidency.”
Pah A,
CHAPTER XXII
THE FEDERAL COURTS
WHEN in 1788 the loosely confedcrated States of North America - united themselves into a nation, national tribunals were felt to be a necessary part of the national government. Under the Con- federation there had existed no means of enforcing the treaties made or orders issued by the Congress, because the courts of the several States owed no duty to that feeble body, and had little will to aid it. Now that a Federal legislature had been estab- lished, whose laws were to bind directly the individual citizen, a Federal judicature was evidently needed to interpret and apply these laws, and to compel obedience to them. ‘The alternative _would have been to entrust the enforcement of the laws to State courts. But State courts were not fitted to deal with matters of a quasi-international character, such as admiralty jurisdiction and rights arising under treaties. They supplied no means for decid- ing questions between different States. They could not be trusted to do complete justice between their own citizens and those of another State. Being under the control of their own State governments, they might be forced to disregard any Federal law which the State disapproved; or even if they admitted its authority, might fail in the zeal or the power to give due effect to it. And being authorities co-ordinate with and independent of one another, with no common court of appeal placed over them to correct their errors or harmonize their views, they would be likely to interpret the Federal Constitution and statutes in different senses, and make the law uncertain by the variety of their decisions. These reasons pointed imperatively to the estab- lishment of a new tribunal or set of tribunals, altogether detached from the States, as part of the machinery of the new government. Side by side of the thirteen (now thirty-eight) different sets of State courts, whose jurisdiction under State laws and between
VOL. T Q
226 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT “> 4 PARTY ¢
their own citizens was left untouched, there arose a new and complex system of Federal courts. The Constitution drew the outlines of the system. Congress perfected it by statutes ; and as the details rest upon these statutes, Congress retains the power of altering them. Few American institutions are better worth studying than this intricate judicial machinery : few deserve more admiration for the smoothness of their working: few have more contributed to the peace and well-being of the country.
The Federal courts fall into three classes :—
The Supreme court, which sits at Washington.
The Circuit courts.
The District courts.
The Supreme court is directly created by Art. iii. § 1 of the Constitution, but with no provision as to the number of its judges. Originally there were six; at present there are nine, a chief justice, with a salary of $10,500 (£2100), and eight
associate justices (salary $10,000). The justices are nominated —
by the President and confirmed by the Senate. They hold office during good behaviour, #.e. they are removable only by impeach-
ment. ‘They have thus a tenure even more secure than that of
English judges, for the latter may be removed by the Crown on an address from both Houses of Parliament.! Moreover, the English statutes secure the permanence only of the judges of the Supreme court of judicature, not also of judges of county or other local courts, while the provisions of the American Constitu- tion are held to apply to the inferior as well as the superior Federal judges. The Fathers of the Constitution were extremely anxious to secure the independence of their judiciary, regarding it as a bulwark both for the people and for the States against aggressions of either Congress or the President.2. They affirmed the life tenure by an unanimous vote in the Convention of 1787, because they deemed the risk of the continuance in office of an incompetent judge a less evil than the subserviency of all judges
1 12 and 13 William III, cap. 2.; cf. 1 George III., cap. 23. The occasional °
resistance of the parliament of Paris, whose members held office for life, to the French Crown may probably have confirmed the Convention of 1787 in its attach- ment to this English principle.
2 See Hamilton in Mederalist, No. Ixxviii.: ‘‘The standard of good behaviour for the continuance in office of the judicial magistracy is certainly one of the most valuable of the modern improvements in the practice of government. Ina monarchy it is an excellent barrier to the despotism of the prince; in a republic
it is a no less excellent barrier to the encroachments and oppressions of the legis- lative body.”
1 )
CHAP.’ XXII : THE FEDERAL COURTS 227
to the legislature, which might flow from a tenure dependent on legislative will. The result ‘has justified their expectations. The judges have shown themselves independent of Congress and of party, yet the security of their position has rarely tempted them to breaches of judicial duty. Impeachment has been four times resorted to, once only against a justice of the Supreme court, and then unsuccessfully. Attempts have been made, beginning from Jefferson, who argued that judges should hold office for terms of four or six years only, to alter the tenure of the Federal judges, as that of the State judges has been altered in most States ; but Congress has always rejected the proposed constitutional amendment.
The Supreme court sits at Washington from October till July in every year. The presence of six judges is required to pro- nounce a decision, a rule which, by preventing the division of the court into two or more branches, retards the despatch of business, though it has the advantage of securing a thorough consideration of every case. The sittings are held in the Capitol, in the chamber formerly occupied by the Senate, and the justices wear black gowns, being not merely the only public officers, but the only non-ecclesiastical persons of any kind whatever within the bounds of the United States who use any official dress.2_ Every case is discussed by the whole body twice over, once to ascertain the opinion of the majority, which is then directed to be set forth in a written judgment; then again when that written judgment, which one of the judges has prepared, is submitted for criticism and adoption as the judgment of the court.
The Circuit courts have been created by Ce under a power in the Constitution to establish “inferior courts.” There are at present nine judicial circuits, in which courts are held annually. For each of these there has been appointed a Circuit judge (salary $6000), and to each there is also allotted one of the justices of the Supreme court. The Circuit court may be held either by the Circuit judge alone, or by the Supreme court Circuit justice alone, or by both together, or by either sitting along with the District judge (hereafter mentioned) of the dis-
1 This was Samuel Chase of Maryland in 1804-5. The other three cases were of district Federal judges. Two were convicted (one of violence, apparently due to insanity, the other of rebellion), the third was acquitted.
* Save that of late years in one or two universities the president and pro-
fessors have taken to wearing academic gowns on great occasions, such as the annual Commencement,
228 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
trict wherein the particular circuit court is held. An appeal lies from the Circuit court to the Supreme court, except in certain cases where the amount in dispute is small.
The District courts are the third and lowest class of Federal tribunals. They are at present fifty-five in number, and their judges receive salaries of from $3500 to $5000 (£700 to £1000) per annum. The Constitution does not expressly state whether they and the Circuit judges are to be appointed by the President and Senate like the members of the Supreme court; but it has always been assumed that such was its intention, and the appointments are so made accordingly.
For the purpose of dealing with the claims of private persons against the Federal government there has been established in Washington a special tribunal called the Court of Claims, with five justices (salary $4500), from which an appeal lies direct to the Supreme court.
The jurisdiction of the Federal courts extends to the follow- ing classes of cases, on each of which I say no more than what seems absolutely necessary to explain their nature. All other cases have been left to the State courts, from which there does not lie (save as hereinafter specified) any appeal to the Federal courts.
1. “Cases in law and equity arising under the constitution, the laws of the United States and treaties made under their authority.”
In order to enforce the supremacy of the national Constitution and laws over all State laws, it was necessary to place the former under the guardianship of the national judiciary. This - provision accordingly brings before a Federal court every cause in which either party to a suit relies upon any Federal enact- ment. It entitles a plaintiff who bases his. case on a Federal statute to, bring his action in a Federal court: it entitles a defendant who rests his defence on a Federal enactment to have the action, if originally brought in a State court, removed to a
1 « All the enumerated cases of Federal cognizance are those which touch the safety, peace, and sovereignty of the nation, or which presume that State attach- ments, State prejudices, State jealousies, and State interests might sometimes obstruct or control the regular administration of justice. The appellate power in all these cases is founded on the clearest principles of policy and wisdom, and is necessary in order to preserve uniformity of decision upon all subjects within the purview of the Constitution.” —Kent’s Commentaries (Holmes? edition), vol, i, p. 320.
CHAP.’ XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS 229
Federal court." But, of course, if the action has originally been brought in a State court, there is no reason for removing it unless the authority of the Federal enactment can be supposed to be questioned. Accordingly, the rule laid down by the Judiciary Act (1789) provides “for the removal to the supreme court of the United States of the final judgment or decree in any suit, rendered in the highest court of law or equity of a State in which a decision could be had, in which is drawn in question the validity of a treaty or statute of, or authority exercised under, the United States, and the decision is against their validity ; or where is drawn in question the validity of a statute of, or an authority exercised under, any State, on the ground of their being repugnant to the Constitution, treaties, or laws of the United States, and the decision is in favour of their validity ; or where any title, right, privilege, or immunity is claimed under the Constitution, or any treaty or statute of a commission held or . authority exercised under the United States, and the decision is against the title, right, privilege, or immunity specially set-up or claimed by either party under such Constitution, treaty, statute, commission, or authority. But to authorize the removal under that act, it must appear by the record, either expressly or by clear and necessary intendment, that some one of the enumerated questions did arise in the State court, and was there passed upon. It is not sufficient that it might have arisen or been applicable. And if the decision of the State court is in favour of the right, title, privilege, or exemption so claimed, the Judiciary Act does not authorize such removal, neither does it where the validity of the State law is drawn in question, arid the decision of the State court is against its validity.” ?
The rule seems intricate, but the motive for it and the work- ing of it are plain. Where in any legal proceeding a Federal enactment has to be construed or applied by a State court, if the latter supperts the Federal enactment, 7.¢. considers it to govern the case, and applies it accordingly, the supremacy of Federal law is thereby recognized and admitted. There is therefore no reason for removing the case to a Federal tribunal. Such a
1 The removal may be before or after judgment given, and in the latter event, by way of appeal or by writ of error.
2 Cooley, Constitutional Limitations, p.16. For details regarding the removal of suits, and the restrictions when the amount in dispute is small, see Cooley,
Principles of Constitutional Law, p. 122 sqg.; and see also the Act of 3d March 1887.
230 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
tribunal could do no more to vindicate Federal authority than the State court has already done. But if the decision of the State court has been against the applicability of the Federal law, it is only fair that the party who suffers by the decision should be entitled to Federal determination of the point, and he has accord- ingly an absolute right to carry it before the Supreme court.
The principle of this rule is applied even to executive acts of the Federal authorities. If, for instance, a person has been arrested by a Federal officer, a State court has no jurisdiction to release him on a writ of habeas corpus, or otherwise to inquire into the lawfulness of his detention by Federal authority, be- cause, as was said by Chief-Justice Taney, ‘The powers of the general government and of the State, although both exist and are exercised within the same territorial limits, are yet separate and distinct sovereignties, acting separately and independently of each other, within their respective spheres. And the sphere of action appropriated to the United States is as far beyond the reach of the judicial process issued by a State court as if the line of division was traced by landmarks and monuments visible to the eye.” ?
2. “ Cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls.”
As these persons have an international character, it would be improper to allow them to be dealt with by a State court which has nothing to do with the national government, and for whose learning and respectability there may exist no such securities as those that surround the Federal courts.
3. “Cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction.”
_ These are deemed to include not only prize cases but all
maritime contracts, and all transactions relating to navigation, as well on the navigable lakes and rivers of the United States as on the high seas.
4. “Controversies to which the United States shall be a party.” ;
This provision is obviously needed to protect the United States from being obliged to sue or be sued in a State court, to whose decision the national government could not be expected to submit. When a pecuniary claim is sought to be established against the Federal government, the proper tribunal is the Court of Claims.
ee v. Booth, 21 How. 516 ; and see Cooley, Constitutional Limitations, p- ;
CHAPy XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS 231
5. “Controversies between two or more States, between a State and citizens of another State, between citizens of different States, between citizens of the same State claiming lands under
grants of different States, and between a State, or the citizens
thereof, and foreign States, citizens, or subjects.”
In all these cases a State court is likely to be, or at any rate to seem, a partial tribunal, and it is therefore desirable to vest _ the jurisdiction in judges equally unconnected with the plaintiff and the defendant. By securing recourse to an unbiassed and competent tribunal, the citizens of every State obtain better com- mercial facilities than they could otherwise count upon, for their eredit will stand higher with persons belonging to other States if
the latter know that their legal rights are under the protection,
not of local and possibly prejudiced judges, but of magistrates named by the national government, and unamenable to local influences.
One important part of the jurisdiction here conveyed has been subsequently withdrawn from the Federal judicature. When the Constitution was submitted to the people, a principal objection urged against it was that it exposed a State, although a sovereign commonwealth, to be sued by the individual citizens of some other State. That one State should sue another was perhaps necessary, for what other way could be discovered of terminating disputes? But the power as well as the dignity of a State would be gone if it could be dragged into court by a private plaintiff. Hamilton (writing in the Federalist) met the objection by arguing that the jurisdiction-giving clause of the Constitution ought not to be so construed, but must be read as being subject to the general doctrine that a sovereign body cannot be sued by an individual without its own consent, a doc- trine not to be excluded by mere implication but only by express words.2, However, in 1793 the Supreme court, in the famous case of Chisholm v. The State of Georgia,’ construed the Constitu- tion in the very sense which Hamilton had denied, holding that
1 There are countries in Europe with which English merchants are unwilling to do business because they can seldom obtain justice from the courts against a native. Local feeling was, of course, much stronger in the America of 1787 than it is now. Englishmen who had claims against American citizens failed to obtain their enforcement from 1783 till the Federal courts were established in
1789. 2 Federalist, No. lxxxi. The same view was contemporaneously maintained by John Marshall (afterwards Chief-Justice) in the Virginia Convention of 1788.
3 2 Dall. 419.
232 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
an action did lie against Georgia at the suit of a private plaintiff ; and when Georgia protested and refused to appear, the court proceeded (in 1794) to give judgment against her by default in case she should not appear and plead before a day fixed. Her cries of rage filled the Union, and brought other States to her help. An amendment (the eleventh) to the Constitution was passed through Congress and duly accepted by the requisite majority of the States, which declares that “the judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit com- menced or prosecuted against one of the United States by citizens of another State or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.” ? Under the protection of this amendment, not a few States have with impunity repudiated their debts.?
The jurisdiction of the Supreme court is original in cases affecting ambassadors, and wherever a State is a party ; in other cases it is appellate; that is, cases may be brought to it from the inferior Federal courts and (under the circumstances before mentioned) from State courts. The jurisdiction is in some matters exclusive, in others concurrent with that of the State courts. Upon these subjects there have arisen many difficult and intricate questions, which I must pass by, because they would be unintelligible without long explanations.? _ One point, however, may be noted. The State courts cannot be invested by Congress with any jurisdiction, for Congress has no authority over them, and is not permitted by the Constitution to delegate any judicial powers to them. Hence the jurisdiction of a State court, wherever it is concurrent with that of Federal judges, is a jurisdiction which the court possesses of its own right, inde- pendent of the Constitution. And in some instances where congressional statutes have purported to impose duties on State courts, the latter have refused to accept and discharge them.
1 Tt has been held that the amendment applies only when a State is a party to the record, and therefore does not apply to the case of a State holding shares in a corporation. Neither does it apply to appeals and writs of error.
2 Quite recently (February 1, 1886), a decision has been pronounced requiring the State of Virginia to accept in payment of taxes coupons in terms made by her law so receivable, and attached to bonds which she had repudiated. The circum- stances of this case are very intricate, but the above is the broad result. The decision
was pronounced by five justices against four, the minority holding that the Eleventh Amendment must be taken to govern the case.
% The lawyer who is curious in such matters may be referred to Story’s Commentaries on the Constitution (4th edition by Judge Cooley), chapter xxxviii., and to the judgments of Chief-Justice Marshall in the cases of Martin v. Hunter (1 Wheat. 304) and Cohens v. Virginia (6 Wheat. 406).
CHAP, XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS 233
The criminal jurisdiction of the Federal courts, which extends to all offences against Federal law, is purely statutory. “The United States as such can have no common law. It derives its powers from the grant of the people made by the Constitution, and they are all to be found in the written law, and not else- where.” }
The procedure of the Federal courts is prescribed by Congress, subject to some few rules contained in the Constitution, such as those which preserve the right of trial by jury in criminal cases? and suits at common law.? As “cases in law and equity” are mentioned, it is held that Congress could not accomplish such a fusion of law and equity as has been effected in several States of the Union, and was recently effected in England,* but must maintain these methods of procedure as distinct, though ad- ministered by the same judges.
The law applied in the Federal courts is of course first and foremost that enacted by the Federal legislature, which, when it is applicable, prevails against any State law. But very often, as for instance in suits between citizens of different States, Federal law does not, or does only in a secondary way, come in question. In such instances the first thing is to determine what law it is that ought to govern the case, each State having a law of its own; and when this has been ascertained, it is applied to the facts, just as an English court would apply Freftch or Scotch law in pronouncing on the validity of a marriage contracted in France or Scotland. In administering the law of any State (including its constitution, its statutes, and its common law, which in Louisiana is the civil law in its French form) the Federal courts ought to follow the decisions of the State courts, treating those decisions as the highest authority on the law of the particular State. This doctrine is so fully applied that the Supreme court has even over-ruled its own previous determinations on a point of State law in order to bring itself into agreement with the view of the highest court of the particular State. Needless to say, the State courts follow the decisions of the Federal courts upon questions of Federal law ®
1 Cooley, Principles, p. 131. 2 Art. iii. § 2.
3 Amendment vii. § 1. 4 By the Judicature Act, 1873.
5 “he judicial department of every government is the appropriate organ for construing the legislative acts of that government... . On this principle the
construction given by this (the supreme) court to the Constitution and laws of the United States is received by all as the true construction; and on the same
234 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
For the execution of its powers each Federal court has attached to it an officer called the United States marshal, cor- responding to the sheriff in the State governments, whose duty it is to carry out its writs, judgments, and orders by arresting prisoners, levying execution, putting persons in possession, and so forth. He is entitled, if resisted, to call on all good citizens for help; if they will not or cannot render it, he must refer to Washington and obtain the aid of Federal troops. There exists also in every judiciary district a Federal public prosecutor, called the United States district attorney, who institutes proceedings against persons transgressing Federal laws or evading the discharge of obligations to the Federal treasury. Both sets of officials are under the direction of the attorney-general, as head of the department of justice. They constitute a net-work of Federal authorities covering the whole territory of the Union, and independent of the officers of the State courts and of the public prosecutors who represent the State governments. Where a State maintains a gaol for the reception of Federal prisoners, the U.S. marshal delivers his prisoners to the State gaoler; where this provision is wanting, he must himself arrange for their custody.
The French or English reader may ask how it is possible to work a system so extremely complex, under which every yard of ground in the Union is covered by two jurisdictions, with two sets of judges and two sets of officers, responsible to different superiors, their spheres of action divided only by an ideal line, and their action liable in practice to clash. ‘The answer is that the system does work, and now, after a hundred years of ex- perience, works smoothly. It is more costly than the simpler systems of France, Prussia, or England, though, owing to the small salaries paid, the expense falls rather on litigants than on the public treasury. But it leads to few conflicts or heart- burnings, because the key to all difficulties is found in the principle that wherever Federal law is applicable Federal law must prevail, and that every suitor who contends that Federal law is applicable is entitled to have the point determined by a Federal court. The acumen of the lawyers and judges, the wealth of accumulated precedents, make the solution of these questions of applicability and jurisdiction easier than a European
principle the construction given by the courts of the various States to the legis- lative acts of those States is received as true, unless they come in conflict with the Constitution, laws, or treaties of the United States.’ *—Marshall, C.-J., in Limendorf v. Taylor, 10 Wheat. 109.
| OHAP. XXIL THE FEDERAL COURTS 235
practitioner can realize: while the law-abiding habits of the people and their sense that the supremacy of Federal law and juris- diction works to the common benefit of the whole people, secure general obedience to Federal judgments. The enforcement of the law, especially the criminal law, in some parts of America leaves much to be desired; but the difficulties which arise are now due not to conflicts between State and Federal pretensions but to other tendencies equally hostile to both authorities.
A word in conclusion as to the separation of the judicial from the other two departments, a point on which the framers of the Constitution laid great stress. The functions of the legislature are more easily distinguished from those of the judiciary than from those of the executive. The legislature makes the law, the judiciary applies it to particular cases by investigating the facts and, when these have been ascertained, by declaring what rule of law governs them. Nevertheless, there are certain points in which the functions of the two departments touch, certain ground which is debatable between the judiciary on the one hand and the legislature on the other. In most countries the courts have grown out of the legislature ; or rather, the sovereign body, which, like Parliament, was originally both a law court and a legislature, has delivered over most of its judicial duties to other persons, while retaining some few to be still exercised by itself.
In most points America has followed the principles and practice of England. Like England, she creates no separate administrative tribunals such as exist in the states of the European continent, but allows officials to be sued in or indicted before the ordinary courts. Like England, she has given the judges (i.e. the Federal judges) a position secured against the caprice of the legislature or executive. Like England, she recognizes judicial decisions as law until some statute has set them aside.’ In one respect she has improved on England—viz. in forbidding the legislature to exercise the powers of a criminal court, by passing acts of attainder or of pains and penalties, measures still legal, though virtually obsolete, in England.? In others, she stands behind England. England has practically ceased to use one branch of her Parliament as a court for the trial of impeachments.
1 Assuming the statute to be one within the competence of the legislature
which has passed it.
2 Neither House of ‘Congress can punish a witness for contempt, after the fashion of the British Parliament (Ailbourn v. Thompson, 103 U.S. p. 168). See note to Chapter XX XIII. post.
1
236 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
America still occasionally throws upon one House of Congress this function ; which though it is ill suited to an ordinary court of justice, is scarcely better discharged by a political assembly. England has remitted to the courts of law the trial of disputed parliamentary elections; America still reserves thesé for com- mittees of Congress. Special and local bills which vest in private hands certain rights of the State, such as public franchises, or the power of taking private property against the owner’s will, are, though in form exercises of legislative power, really fitter to be examined and settled by judicial methods than by the loose opinion, the private motives, the lobbying, which determine legislative decisions where the control of public opinion is insufficiently provided for. England accordingly, though she refers such bills to committees of Parliament, directs these com- mittees to apply a quasi-judicial procedure, and to decide accord- ing to the evidence tendered. America takes no such securities, but handles these bills like any others. Here therefore we see three pieces of ground debatable between the legislature and the judiciary. All of them originally belonged to the legislature. All in America still belong to it. England, however, has abandoned the first, has delivered over the second to the judges, and treats the third as matter to be dealt with by judicial rather than legislative methods. Such points of difference are worth noting, because the impression has prevailed in Europe that America is the country in which the province of the judiciary has been most widely extended.
CHAPTER XXIII THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION
No feature in the government of the United States has awakened so much curiosity in the European mind, caused so much discus- sion, received so much admiration, and been more frequently misunderstood, than the duties assigned to the Supreme Court and the functions which it discharges in guarding the ark of the Constitution. Yet there is really no mystery about the matter. It is not a novel device. It is not a complicated device. It is the simplest thing in the world if approached from the right side.
In England and many other modern States there is no differ- ence in authority between one statute and another. All are made by the legislature: all can be changed by the legislature. What are called in England constitutional statutes, such as Magna Charta, the Bill of Rights, the Act of Settlement, the Acts of Union with Scotland and Ireland, are merely ordinary laws, which could be repealed by Parliament at any moment in exactly the same way as it can repeal a highway act or lower the duty on tobacco. The habit has grown up of talking of the British Constitution as if it were a fixed and definite thing. But there is in England no such thing as a Constitution apart from the rest of the law: there is merely a mass of law, consisting partly of statutes and partly of decided cases and accepted usages, in con- formity with which the government of the country is carried on from day to day, but which is being constantly modified by fresh statutes and cases. The same thing existed in ancient Rome, and everywhere in Europe a century ago. It is, so to speak, the “natural,” and used to be the normal, condition of things in all countries, free or despotic.
The condition of America is wholly different. There the name Constitution designates a particular instrument adopted in 1788, amended in some points since, which is the foundation of
238 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
the national government. This Constitution was ratified and made binding, not by Congress, but by the people acting through conventions assembled in the thirteen States which then com-
posed the Confederation. It created a legislature of two houses ; ~
but that legislature, which we call Congress, has no power to alter it in the smallest particular. That which the people have enacted, the people only can alter or repeal.
Here therefore we observe two capital differences between England and the United States. The former has left the out- lines as well as the details of her system of government to be gathered from a multitude of statutes and cases. The latter has drawn them out in one comprehensive fundamental enactment. The former has placed these so-called constitutional laws at the mercy of her legislature, which can abolish when it pleases any institution of the country, the Crown, the House of Lords, the Established Church, the House of Commons, Parliament itself. The latter has placed her Constitution altogether out of the reach of Congress, providing a method of amendment whose difficulty is shown by the fact that it has been very sparingly used.
In England Parliament is omnipotent. In America Congress is doubly restricted. It can make laws only for certain purposes specified in the Constitution, and in legislating for these purposes it must not transgress any provision of the Constitution itself. The stream cannot rise above its source.
Suppose, however, that Congress does so transgress, or does overpass the specified purposes. It may do so intentionally: it is likely to do so inadvertently. What happens? If the Con- stitution is to be respected, there must be some means of secur- ing it against Congress. If a usurpation of power is attempted, how is it to be checked? Ifa mistake is committed, who sets it right ?
The point may be elucidated by referring it to a wider category, familiar to lawyers and easily comprehensible by lay- men, that of acts done by an agent for a principal. If a land-
1 Parliament of course cannot restrict its own powers by any particular Act because that Act might be repealed in a subsequent session, and indeed any sub- sequent Act inconsistent with any of its provisions repeals ipso facto that provision. (For instance, the Act of Union with Scotland (6 Anne, c. 11) declared certain provisions of the Union, for the establishment of Presbyterian church government in Scotland, to be “essential and fundamental parts of the Union,” but some of those provisions have been altered by subsequent statutes.) Parliament could,
however, extinguish itself by legally dissolving itself, leaving no legal means whereby a subsequent Parliament could be summoned.
Sr ee . + ae
cuap. xxu1 THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 239
owner directs his bailiff to collect rents for him, or to pay debts due to tradesmen, the bailiff has evidently no authority to bind his employer by any act beyond the instructions given hin, as, for instance, by contracting to buy a field. If a manufacturer directs his foreman to make rules for the hours of work and meals in the factory, and the foreman makes rules not only for those purposes, but also prescribing what clothes the workmen shall wear and what church they shall attend, the latter rules have not the force of the employer’s will behind them, and the workmen are not to be blamed for neglecting them.
The same principle applies to public agents. In every country it happens that acts are directed to be done and rules to be made by bodies which are in the position of agents, ae. which have received from some superior authority a limited power of acting and of rule-making, a power to be used only for certain purposes or under certain conditions. Where this power is duly exercised, the act or rule of the subordinate body has all the force of an act done or rule made by the superior authority, and is deemed to be made by it. And if the latter be a law-making body, the rule of the subordinate body is therefore also a law. But if the subordinate body attempts to transcend the power committed to it, and makes rules for other purposes or under other conditions than those specified by the superior authority, these rules are not law, but are null and void. Their validity depends on their being within the scope of the law-making power conferred by the superior authority, and as they have passed outside that scope they are invalid. They do not justify any act done under them forbidden by the ordinary law. They ought not to be obeyed or in any way regarded by the citizens, because they are not law.
The same principle applies to acts done by an executive officer beyond the scope of his legal authority. In free countries an individual citizen is justified in disobeying the orders of a magis- trate if he correctly thinks these orders to be in excess of the magistrate’s legal power, because in that case they are not really the orders of a magistrate, but of a private person affecting to act as a magistrate. In England, for instance, if a secretary of state, or a police constable, does any act which the citizen affected by it rightly deems unwarranted, the citizen may resist, by force if necessary, relying on the ordinary courts of the land to sustain him. ‘This is a consequence of the English doctrine that all
240 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI
executive power is strictly limited by the law, and is indeed a corner-stone of English liberty.1 It is applied even as against the dominant branch of the legislature. If the House of Commons should act.in excess of the power which the law and custom of Parliament has secured to it, a private individual may resist the officers of the House and the courts will protect him by directing him to be acquitted if he is prosecuted, or, if he is plaintiff in a civil action, by giving judgment in his favour.
An obvious instance of the way in which rules or laws made by subordinate bodies are treated is afforded by the bye-laws made by an English railway company or municipal corporation under powers conferred by an Act of Parliament. So long as these bye-laws are within the scope of the authority which the Act of Parliament has given, they are good, ze. they are laws, just as much as if enacted in the Act. If they go’ beyond it, they are bad, that is to say, they bind nobody and cannot be enforced. If a railway company which has received power to make bye-laws imposing fines up to the amount of forty shillings, makes a bye-law punishing any person who enters or quits a train in motion with a fine of fifty shillings or a week’s imprison- ment, that bye-law is invalid, that is to say, it is not law at all, and no magistrate can either imprison or impose a fine of fifty shillings on a person accused of contravening it. If a municipal corporation has been by statute empowered to enter into contracts for the letting of lands vested in it, and directed to make bye- laws, for the purpose of letting, which shall provide, among other things, for the advertising of all lands intended to be let, and if it makes a bye-law in which no provision is made for advertising, and under that bye-law contracts for the letting of a piece of land, the letting made in pursuance of this bye-law is void, and conveys no title to the purchaser. All this is obvious to a lay as well as to a legal mind ; and it is no less obvious that the ques- tion of the validity of the bye-law, and of what has been done under it, is one to be decided not by the municipal corporation or company, but by the courts of justice of the land.
Now, in the United States the position of Congress may for
1 See as to the different doctrine and practice of the European continent, and particularly as to the “administrative law” of France, the instructive remarks of Mr. Dicey in his Law of the Constitution. The view he there takes of the rela- tion of the Federal Constitution to Congress coincides in most points with that
presented in the present chapter, which, however, was written before his book appeared,
CHAP. XXIII THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 241
this purpose be compared to that of an English municipal cor- poration or railway company. The supreme law-making power is the People, that is, the qualified voters, acting in a prescribed way. The people have by their supreme law, the Constitution, given to Congress a delegated and limited power of legislation. Every statute passed under that power conformably to the Con- stitution has all the authority of the Constitution behind it. Any statute passed which goes beyond that power is invalid, and incapable of enforcement. It is in fact not a statute at all, be- cause Congress in passing it was not really a law-making body, but a mere group of private persons.
There is of course this enormous difference between Congress
_and any subordinate law-making authority in England, that Congress is supreme within its proper sphere, the people having no higher permanent organ to override or repeal such statutes as Congress may pass within that sphere; whereas in England there exists in Parliament a constantly present supervising authority, which may at any moment cancel or modify what any subordinate body may have enacted, whether within or with- out the scope of its delegated powers. This is a momentous distinction. But it does not affect the special point which I desire to illustrate, viz. that a statute passed by Congress beyond the scope of its powers is of no more effect than a bye-law made ultra vires by an English municipality. There is no mystery so far: there is merely an application of the ordinary principles of the law of agency. But the question remains, How and by whom, in case of dispute, is the validity or invalidity of a statute to be determined ?
Such determination is to be effected by setting the statute side by side with the Constitution, and considering whether there is any discrepancy between them. Is the purpose of the statute one of the purposes mentioned or implied in the Constitution ! Does it in pursuing that purpose contain anything which violates any clause of the Constitution? Sometimes this is a simple question, which an intelligent layman may answer. More fre- quently it is a difficult one, which needs not only the subtlety of the trained lawyer, but a knowledge of former cases which have thrown light on the same or a similar point. In any event it is an important question, whose solution ought to proceed from a weighty authority. It is a question of interpretation, that is, of determining the true meaning both of the superior
VOL. 1 kh
242 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I -
law and of the inferior law, so as to discover whether they are inconsistent.
Now the interpretation of laws belongs to courts of justice. A law implies a tribunal, not only in order to direct its enforce- ment against individuals, but to adjust it to the facts, ae. to determine its precise meaning and apply that meaning to the circumstances of the particular case. The legislature, which can only speak generally, makes every law in reliance on this power of interpretation. It is therefore obvious that the question, whether a congressional statute offends against the Constitution, must be determined by the courts, not merely because it is a question of legal construction, but because there is nobody else to determine it. Congress cannot do so, because Congress is a party interested. If such a body as Congress were permitted to decide whether the acts it had passed were constitutional, it would of course decide in its own favour, and to allow it to decide would be to put the Constitution at its mercy. The President cannot, because he is not a lawyer, and he also may be personally interested. There remain only the courts, and these must be the National or Federal courts, because no other courts can be relied on in such cases. So far again there is no mystery about the matter.
Now, however, we arrive at a feature which complicates the facts, though it introduces no new principle. The United States is a federation of commonwealths, each of which has its own constitution and laws. The Federal Constitution not only gives certain powers to Congress, as the national legislature, but recognizes certain powers in the States, in virtue whereof their respective peoples have enacted fundamental State laws (the State constitutions) and have enabled their respective legisla- tures to pass State statutes. However, as the nation takes precedence of the States, the Federal Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land everywhere, and the statutes duly made by Congress under it, are preferred to all State constitutions and statutes ; and if any conflict arise between them, the latter must give way. The same phenomenon therefore occurs as in the case of an inconsistency between the Constitution and a con- gressional statute. Where it is shown that a State constitution or statute infringes either the Federal Constitution or a Federal (i.e. congressional) statute, the State constitution or statute must be held and declared invalid. And this declaration must, of
cuar. xxi THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 243
course, proceed from the courts, nor solely from the Federal courts; because when a State court decides against its own statutes or constitution in favour of a Federal law, its decision is final.1
It will be observed that in all this there is no conflict between the law courts and any legislative body. The conflict is between different kinds of laws. The duty of the judges is as strictly confined to the interpretation of the laws cited to them as it is in England or France; and the only difference is that in America there are laws of four different degrees of authority, whereas in England all laws (excluding mere bye-laws, Privy Council ordinances, etc.) are equal because all proceed from Parliament. These four kinds of American laws are :—
I. The Federal Constitution, II. Federal statutes. III. State constitutions.
IV. State statutes.?
The American law court therefore does not itself enter on any conflict with the legislature. It merely secures to each kind of law its due authority. It does not even preside over a conflict and decide it, for the relative strength of each kind of law has been settled already. All the court does is to point out that a conflict exists between two laws of different degrees of authority. Then the question is at an end, for the weaker law is extinct.
This is the abstract statement of the matter; but there is also an historical one. Many of the American colonies received charters from the British Crown, which created or recognized colonial assemblies, and endowed these with certain powers of making laws for the colony. Such powers were of course limited, partly by the charter, partly by usage, and were subject to the superior authority of the Crown or of the British Parliament. Questions sometimes arose in colonial days whether the statutes made by these assemblies were in excess of the powers conferred by the charter; and if the statutes were found to be in excess,
1 When the State court decides against the applicability of a Federal law the case may be removed to a Federal court. See above, p. 228.
2 Of these, the Federal Constitution prevails against all other laws. Federal statutes, if made in pursuance of and conformably to the Constitution, prevail against III. and IV. If in excess of the powers granted by the Constitution, they are wholly invalid. A State constitution yields to I. and II., but prevails against the statutes of the State.
244 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
they were held invalid by the courts, that is to say, in the first instance, by the colonial courts, or, if the matter was carried to England, by the Privy Council.
When the thirteen American colonies asserted their indepen- dence in 1776, they replaced these old charters by new constitu- tions,?, and by. these constitutions entrusted their respective legislative assemblies with certain specified and limited legislative powers. The same question was then liable to recur with regard to a statute passed by one of these assemblies. If such a statute was in excess of the power which the State constitution conferred on the State legislature, or in any way transgressed the pro- visions of that constitution, it was invalid, and acts done under it were void. The question, like any other question of law, came for decision before the courts of the State. Thus, in 1786, the supreme court of Rhode Island held a statute of the legisla- ture void, on the ground that it made a penalty collectible on summary conviction, without trial by jury ; the colonial charter, which was then still in force as the constitution of the State, having secured the right of trial by jury in all cases.2 When the Constitution of the United States came into operation in 1789, and was declared to be paramount to all State constitutions and State statutes, no new principle was introduced ; there was merely a new application, as between the nation and the States, of the old doctrine that a subordinate and limited legislature cannot pass beyond the limits fixed for it. It was clear, on general principles, that a State law incompatible with a Federal law must give way; the only question was: What courts are to pronounce upon the question whether such incompatibility exists? Who is to decide whether or no the authority given to Congress has been exceeded, and whether or no the State law contravenes the Federal Constitution or a Federal statute ?
In 1789 the only pre-existing courts were the State courts.
1 The same thing happens even now as regards the British colonies. The question was lately argued before the Privy Council whether the legislature of the Dominion of Canada, created by the British North America Act of 1867 (an imperial statute), had power to extinguish the right of appeal from the supreme court of Canada to the British Queen in council.
* Connecticut and Rhode Island, however, went on under the old charters, with which they were well content. See as to this whole subject, Chapter XXXVII., on State Constitutions. :
3 See as to this interesting case (Tvevett v. Weedon), the first in which a legisla- tive act was declared unconstitutional for incompatibility with a State constitution, Cooley’s Constitutional Limitations, p. 106 note.
oe er
\ \
CHAP. XXIII THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 245
If a case coming before them raised the point whether a State constitution or statute was inconsistent with the Federal Constitu- tion or a statute of Congress, it was their duty to decide it, like any other point of law. But their decision could not safely be accepted as final, because, being themselves the offspring of, and amenable to the State governments, they would naturally tend to uphold State laws against the Federal Constitution or statutes. Hence it became necessary to call in courts created by the central Federal authority and co-extensive with it—that is to say, those Federal courts which have been already described. The matter seems complicated, because we have to consider not only the superiority of the Federal Constitution to the Federal Congress,
but also the superiority of both the Federal Constitution and
Federal statutes to all State laws. But the principle is the same and equally simple in both sets of cases. Both are merely instances of the doctrine, that a law-making body must not exceed its powers, and that when it has attempted to exceed its powers, its so-called statutes are not laws at all, and cannot be enforced.
In America the supreme law-making power resides in the people. Whatever they enact binds all courts whatsoever. All other law-making bodies are subordinate, and the enactments of such bodies must conform to the supreme law, else they will perish at its touch, as a fishing smack goes down before an ocean steamer. And these subordinate enactments, if at variance with the supreme law, are invalid from the first, although their in- validity may remain for years unnoticed or unproved. It can be proved only by the decision of a court in a case which raises the point for determination. ‘The phenomenon cannot arise in a country whose legislature is omnipotent, but naturally * arises wherever we find a legislature limited by a superior authority, such as a constitution which the legislature cannot alter.
In England the judges interpret Acts of Parliament exactly as American judges interpret statutes coming before them. If they find an Act conflicting with a decided case, they prefer the Act to the case, as being of higher authority. As between two con- flicting Acts, they prefer the latter, because it is the last expres-
1] do not say ‘‘ necessarily,’ because there are countries on the European continent where, although there exists a constitution superior to the legislature, the courts are not allowed to hold a legislative act invalid, because the legislature
is deemed to have the right of taking its own view of the constitution. This seems to be the case both in France and in Switzerland,
246 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
sion of the mind of Parliament. If they misinterpret the mind of Parliament, i.e. if they construe an Act in a sense which Parliament did not really intend, their decision is nevertheless valid, and will be followed by other courts! until Parliament speaks its mind again by another Act. The only difference between their position and that of their American brethren is that they have never to distinguish between the authority of one enactment and of another, otherwise than by looking to the date, and that they have therefore never to inquire whether an Act of Parliament was invalid when first passed. Invalid it could not have been, because Parliament is omnipotent, and Parliament is omnipotent because Parliament is deemed to be the people. Parliament is not a body with delegated or limited authority. The whole fulness of popular power dwells in it. The whole nation is supposed to be present within its walls.2 Its will is law ; or, as Dante says in a famous line, “its will is power.” There is a story told of an intelligent Englishman who, having heard that the Supreme Federal Court was created to protect the Constitution, and had authority given it to annul bad laws, spent two days in hunting up and down the Federal Constitution for the provisions he had been told to admire. No wonder he did not find them, for there is not a word in the Constitution on the subject. The powers of the Federal courts are the same as those of all other courts in civilized countries, or rather they differ from those of other courts by defect and not by excess, being limited to certain classes of cases. The so-called “power of annulling an unconstitutional statute” is a duty rather than a power, and a duty incumbent on the humblest State court when a case raising the point comes before it no less than on the Supreme Federal Court at Washington. When therefore people talk, as they
1 That is, by other courts of the same or a lower degree of authority. A court of the same authority will, however, sometimes differ from a decision it thinks erroneous, and a higher court will not hesitate to do so.
? The old writers say that the reason why an Act of Parliament requires no public notification in the country is because it is deemed to be made by the whole nation, so that every person is present at the making of it. It is certainly true that the orthodox legal view of Parliament never regards it as exercising powers that can in any sense be called delegated. A remarkable example of the power which Parliament can exert as an ultimately and completely sovereign body is afforded by the Septennial Act (1 Geo, I. st. 2, cap. 38), By this statute a Parlia- ment in which the House of Commons had been elected for three years only, under the Triennial Act then in force, prolonged not only the possible duration of
future Parliaments but its own term to seven years, taking to itself four years of power which the electors had not given it.
CHAP. xxu1 THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 247
‘sometimes do, even in the United States, of the Supreme court
as “the guardian of the Constitution,” they mean nothing more than that it is the final court of appeal, before which suits in- volving constitutional questions may be brought up by the parties for decision. In so far the phrase is legitimate. But the functions of the Supreme court are the same in kind as those of all other courts, State as well as Federal. Its duty and theirs is simply to declare and apply the law ; and where any court, be it a State court of first instance, or the Federal court of last - instance, finds a law of lower authority clashing with a law of higher authority, it must reject the former, as being really no law, and enforce the latter.
It is therefore no mere technicality to point out that the American judges do not, as Europeans are apt to say, “control the legislature,” but simply interpret the law. The word “con- trol” is misleading, because it implies that the person or body of whom it is used possesses and exerts discretionary personal Will. Now the American judges have no will in the matter any more than has an English court when it interprets an Act of Parlia- ment. The will that prevails is the will of the people, expressed in the Constitution which they have enacted. All that the judges have to do is to discover from the enactments before them what the will of the people is, and apply that will to the facts of a given case. The more general or ambiguous the language which the people have used, so much the more difficult is the task of interpretation, so much greater the need for ability and integrity in the’ judges. But the task is always the same in its nature. The judges have no concern with the motives or the results of an enactment, otherwise than as these may throw light on the sense in which the enacting authority intended it. It would be a breach of duty for them to express, I might almost say a breach of duty to entertain, an opinion on its policy except so far as its policy explains its meaning. They may think a statute excellent in purpose and working, but if they cannot find in the Constitution a power for Congress to pass it, they must brush it aside as invalid. They may deem another statute per- nicious, but if it is within the powers of Congress, they must en- force it. To construe the law, that is, to elucidate the will of the people as supreme lawgiver, is the beginning and end of their duty."
1 “Suppose, however,” some one may say, “that the court should g0 beyond its duty and import its own views of what ought to be the law into its decision
‘ i ‘
248 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
To press this point is not to minimize the importance of the functions exercised by the judiciary of the United States, but to indicate their true nature. The importance of those functions can hardly be exaggerated. It arises from two facts. One is that as the Constitution cannot easily be changed, a bad decision on its meaning, #.¢. a decision which the general opinion of the profession condemns, may go uncorrected. In England, if a court has construed a statute in a way unintended or unexpected, Parliament sets things right next session by amending the statute, and so prevents future decisions to the same effect. But Ameri- can history shows only one instance in which an unwelcome decision on the meaning of the Constitution has been thus dealt with, viz. the decision, that a State could be sued by a private citizen,! which led to the eleventh amendment, whereby it was declared that the Constitution should not cover a case which the court had held it did cover.
The other fact which makes the function of an American judge so momentous is the brevity, the laudable brevity, of the Con- stitution. The words of that instrument are general, laying down a few large principles. The cases which will arise as to the construction of these general words cannot be foreseen till they arise. When they do arise the generality of the words leaves open to the interpreting judges a far wider field than is afforded by ordinary statutes which, since they treat of one particular subject, contain enactments comparatively minute and precise. Hence, although the duty of a court is only to interpret, the considerations affecting interpretation are more numerous than in the case of ordinary statutes, more delicate, larger in their reach and scope. They sometimes need the exer- cise not merely of legal acumen and judicial fairness, but of a comprehension of the nature and methods of government which one does not demand from the European judge who walks in the narrow path traced for him by ordinary statutes. It is therefore hardly an exaggeration to say that the American Constitution as it now stands, with the mass of fringing decisions which explain
as to what is the law. This would be an exercise of judicial will.” Doubtless i4 would, but it would be a breach of duty, would expose the court to the distrust of the people, and might, if repeated or persisted in in a serious matter, provoke resistance to the law as laid down by the court. See Chapter XXXIII. post.
See above, p. 231. The doctrine of the Dred Scott case (of which more anon) was set aside by the fourteenth amendment, but that amendment was intended to effect much more than merely to correct the court.
CHAP. XXIII THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 249
it, is a far more complete and finished instrument than it was when it came fire-new from the hands of the Convention. It is not merely their work but the work of the judges, and most of all of one man, the great Chief-Justice Marshall.
The march of democracy in England has disposed English writers and politicians of the very school which thirty or twenty years ago pointed to America as a terrible example, now to dis- cover that her republic possesses elements of stability wanting in the monarchy of the mother country. They lament that England should have no supreme court. Some have even sug- gested that England should create one. They do not seem to perceive that the dangers they discern arise not from the want of a court but from the omnipotence of the British Parliament. They ask for a court to guard the British Constitution, forget- ting that Britain has no constitution, in the American sense, and never had one, except for a short space under Oliver Cromwell. The strongest court that might be set up in England could effect nothing so long as Parliament retains its power to change every part of the law, including all the rules and doctrines that are called constitutional. If Parliament were to lose that power there would be no need to create a supreme court, because the existing judges of the land would necessarily discharge the very functions which American judges now discharge. If Parliament were to be split up into four parliaments for England, Scotland, Treland, and Wales, and a new Federal Assembly were to be established with limited legislative powers, powers defined by an instrument which neither the Federal Assembly nor any of the four parliaments could alter, questions would forthwith arise as to the compatibility both of acts passed by the Assembly with the provisions of the instrument, and of acts passed by any of the four parliaments with those passed by the Assembly. These questions would come before the courts and be determined by them like any other question of law. The same thing would happen if Britain were to enter into a federal pact with her colonies, creating an imperial Council, and giving it powers which, though restricted by the pact to certain purposes, transcended those of the British Parliament. The interpretation of the pact would belong to the courts, and both Parliament and the sup- posed Council would be bound by that interpretation.’ If a
1 Assuming of course that the power of altering the pact was reserved to some authority superior to either the Council or Parliament.
250 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
new supreme court were created by Britain, it would be created not because there do not already exist courts capable of enter- taining all the questions that could arise, but because the parties to the new constitution enacted for the United Kingdom, or the British Empire (as the case might be), might insist that a tribunal composed of persons chosen by some Federal authority would be more certainly impartial. The preliminary therefore to any such “judicial safeguard” as has been suggested is the extinction of the present British Parliament and the erection of a wholly different body or bodies in its room.
These observations may suffice to show that there is nothing strange or mysterious about the relation of the Federal courts to the Constitution. The plan which the Convention of 1787 adopted is simple, useful, and conformable to general legal principles. It is, in the original sense of the word, an elegant plan. But it is not novel. It was at work in the States before the Convention of 1787 met. It was at work in the thirteen colonies before they revolted from England. It is an application of old and familiar legal doctrines. Such novelty as there is belongs to the scheme of a Supreme or Rigid constitution, reserving the ultimate power to the people, and limiting in the same measure the power of a legislature.+
It is nevertheless true that there is no part of the American system which reflects more credit on its authors or has worked better in practice. It has had the advantage of relegating questions not only intricate and delicate, but peculiarly liable to excite political passions, to the cool, dry atmosphere of judicial determination. The relations of the central Federal power to the States, and the amount of authority which Congress and the President are respectively entitled to exercise, have been the most permanently grave questions in American history, with.
1 This was clearly stated by James Wilson of Pennsylvania, one of the deepest thinkers and most exact reasoners among the members of the Convention of 1787. Speaking of the State constitutions, he remarked in the Pennsylvania Convention of 1788 : “ Perhaps some politician who has not considered with sufficient accur- acy our political systems would observe that in our governments the supreme power was vested in the constitutions. This opinion approaches the truth, but does not reach it. The truth is that in our governments the supreme, absolute, and uncontrollable power remains in the people. As our constitutions are superior to our legislatures, so the people are superior to our constitutions.’— Elliot’s Debates, ii. 432.
Mr. M‘Kean, speaking in the same convention, quoted Locke’s Civil Govern- ment (c. 2, § 140, and ec. 18, § 152) as an authority for the proposition that the powers of Congress could be no greater than the positive grant might convey,
cuar, xxi THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 251
which nearly every other political problem has become entangled. If they had been left to be settled by Congress, itself an inter- ested party, or by any dealings between Congress and the State legislatures, the dangers of a conflict would have been extreme, and instead of one civil war there might have been several. But the universal respect felt for the Constitution, a respect which grows the longer it stands, has disposed men to defer to any decision which seems honestly and logically to unfold the meaning of its terms. In obeying such a decision they are obeying, not the judges, but the people who enacted the Constitution. To have foreseen that the power of interpreting the Federal Constitution and statutes, and of determining whether or no State constitutions and statutes transgress Federal provisions, would be sufficient to prevent struggles between the National government and the State governments, required great insight and great faith in the soundness and power of a principle. While the Constitution was being framed the suggestion was made, and for a time seemed likely to be adopted, that a veto on the acts of State legislatures should be conferred upon the Federal Congress. Discussion revealed the objections to such a plan. Its introduction would have offended the sentiment of the States, always jealous of their autonomy; its exercise would have provoked collisions with them. The disallowance of a State statute, even if it did really offend against the Federal Constitution, would have seemed a political move, to be resented by a political counter-move. And the veto would often have been pronounced before it could have been ascertained exactly how the State statute would work, sometimes, perhaps, pro- nounced ,in cases where the'statute was neither pernicious in itself nor opposed to the Federal Constitution. But by the action of the courts the self-love of the States is not wounded, and the decision annulling their laws is nothing but a tribute to the superior authority of that supreme enactment to which they were themselves parties, and which they may themselves desire to see enforced against another State on some not remote occasion. - However, the idea of a veto by Congress was most effectively demolished in the Convention by Roger Sherman, who acutely remarked that a veto would seem to recognize as valid the State statute objected to, whereas if inconsistent with the Constitution it was really invalid already and needed no
veto.
252 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART T
By leaving constitutional questions to be settled by the courts of law another advantage was incidentally secured. The court does not go to meet the question ; it waits for the question to come to it. When the court acts it acts‘at the instance of a party. Sometimes the plaintiff or the defendant may be the National government or a State government, but far more frequently both are private persons, seeking to enforce or defend their private rights. For instance, in the famous case? which established the doctrine that a statute passed by a State repeal- ing a grant of land to an individual made on certain terms by a previous statute is a law “impairing the obligation of a con- tract,” and therefore invalid, under Art. i. § 10 of the Federal Constitution ; the question came before the court on an action by one Fletcher against one Peck on a covenant contained in a deed made by the latter; and to do justice between plaintiff and defendant it was necessary to examine the validity of a statute passed by the legislature of Georgia. This method has the merit of not hurrying a question on, but leaving it to arise of itself. Full legal argument on both sides is secured by the private interests which the parties have in setting forth their conten- tions ; and the decision when pronounced, since it appears to be, as in fact it is, primarily a decision upon private rights, obtains that respect and moral support which a private plaintiff or defendant establishing his legal right is entitled to from law-
‘abiding citizens. A State might be provoked to resistance if it saw, as soon as it had passed a statute, the Federal government inviting the Supreme court to declare that statute invalid. But when the Federal authority stands silent, and a year after in an ordinary action between Smith and Jones the court decides in favour of Jones, who argued that the statute on which the plaintiff relied was invalid because it transgressed some provision of the Constitution, everybody feels that Jones was justified in so arguing, and that since judgment was given in his favour he must be allowed to retain the money which the court has found to be his, and the statute which violated his private right must fall to the ground.
This feature has particularly excited the admiration of Continental critics. To an Englishman it seems perfectly natural, because it is exactly in this way that much of English con- stitutional law has been built up. The English courts had
1 Fletcher v. Peck, 6 Cranch, p. 87.
vi I a
cHAP. xx THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 253
indeed no rigid documentary constitution by which to test the ordinances or the executive acts of the Crown, and their decisions on constitutional points have often been pronounced in pro- ceedings to which the Crown or its ministers were parties. But they have repeatedly established principles of the greatest moment by judgments delivered in cases where a private interest was involved, grounding themselves either on a statute which they interpreted or on some earlier decision.!. Lord Mansfield’s famous declaration that slavery was legally impossible in England was pronounced in such a private case. Stockdale v. Hansard, in which the law regarding the publishing of debates in Parliament was settled, was an action by a private person against printers. The American method of settling constitutional questions, like all other legal questions, in actions between private parties, is there- fore no new device, but a part of that priceless heritage of the English Common Law which the colonists carried with them across the sea, and which they have preserved and developed in a manner worthy of its own free spirit and lofty traditions. Europeans commonly suppose that the functions above de- scribed as pertaining to the American courts are peculiar to and essential to a Federal government. ‘This is a mistake. They are not peculiar to a federation, because the distinction of fundamental laws and inferior laws may exist equally well in a unified government, did exist in each of the thirteen colonies up till 1776, did exist in each of the thirteen States from 1776 till 1789, does exist in every one of the thirty-eight States now. Nor are they essential, because a federation may be imagined in which the central or national legislature should be theoretically sovereign in the same sense and to the same full extent as is the British Parliament.2 The component parts of any confederacy will no doubt be generally disposed to place their respective State rights under the protection of a compact unchangeable by the national legislature. But they need not do so, for they may rely on the command which as electors they have over that
1 The independence (since the Revolution) of the English judges and of the American Federal judges has of course largely contributed to make them trusted, and to make them act worthily of the trust reposed in them.
2 Tt would appear that in the Achean League the Assembly (which voted by cities) was sovereign, and could by its vote vary the terms of the federal arrange- ments between the cities forming the federation ; although the scantiness of our data and what may be called the want of legal-mindedness among the Greeks make this and similar questions not easy of determination.
254 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
legislature, and may prefer the greater energy which a sovereign legislature promises to the greater security for State rights which a limited legislature implies. In the particular case of America it is abundantly clear that if there had been in 1787 no States jealous of their powers, but an united nation creating for itself an improved frame of government, the organs of that government would have been limited by a fundamental law just as they are now, because the nation, fearing and distrusting the agents it was creating, was resolved to fetter them by reserving to itself the ultimate and over-riding sovereignty.
The case of Switzerland shows that the American plan is not the only one possible to a federation. The Swiss Federal Court, while instituted in imitation of the American, is not the only authority competent to determine whether a Cantonal law is void because inconsistent with the Federal Constitution, for in some cases recourse must be had not to the Court but to the Federal Council, which is a sort of executive cabinet of the Confederation. And the Federal Court is bound to enforce every law passed by the Federal legislature, even if it violate the Constitution. In other words, the Swiss Constitution has reserved some points of Cantonal law for an authority not judicial but political, and has made the Federal legislature the sole judge of its own powers, the authorized interpreter of the Constitution, and an interpreter not likely to proceed on purely legal grounds.! To an English or American lawyer the Swiss copy seems neither so consistent with sound theory nor so safe in practice as the American original. But the statesmen of Switzerland felt that a method fit for America might be ill-fitted for their own country, where the latitude given to the executive is greater; and the Swiss habit of constantly recurring to popular vote makes it less necessary to restrain the legislature by a permanently enacted instrument. The political traditions of the European continent differ widely from those of England and America; and the Federal Judicature is not the only Anglo-American institution which might fail to thrive anywhere but in its native soil.
1 See upon this fascinating subject, the provisions of the Swiss Federal Con- stitution of 1874, arts. 102, 110, and 114 ; also Dubs, Das oeffentliche Recht der Schaeizerischen Eidgenossenschaft, and a valuable pamphlet by M. Ch. Soldan, entitled Du recours de Droit Public au Tribunal Fédéral; Bale, 1886. Dr. Dubs was himself the author of the plan whereby the Federal legislature is made the arbiter of its own constitutional powers.
WS
CHAPTER XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS
THOSE readers who have followed thus far the account given of the Federal courts have probably asked themselves how judicial authorities can sustain the functions which America requires them to discharge. It is plain that judges, when sucked into the vortex of politics, must. lose dignity, impartiality, and influence. But how can judges keep out of politics, when political issues raising party passions come before them? Must not constitutional questions, questions as to the rights under the Constitution of the Federal government against the States, and of the branches of the Federal government against one another, frequently involve momentous political issues? In the troublous times during which the outlines of the English Constitution were settled, controversy often raged round the courts, because the decision of contested points lay in their hands. When Charles I. could not induce Parliament to admit the right of levying contributions which he claimed, and Parliament relied on the
_ power of the purse as its defence against Charles 1, the question
whether ship-money could lawfully be levied was vital to both parties, and the judges held the balance of power in their hands. At that moment the law could not be changed, because the Houses and the king stood opposed: hence everything turned on the interpretation of the existing law. In America the Constitution is at all times very hard to change: much more then must ‘political issues turn on its interpretation. And if this be so, must not the interpreting court be led to assume a control over the executive and legislative branches of the govern- ment, since it has the power of declaring their acts illegal ? There is ground for these criticisms. The evil they point to has occurred and may recur. But it occurs very rarely, and may be averted by the same prudence which the courts have hitherto
256 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
generally shown. The causes which have enabled the Federal courts to avoid it, and to maintain their dignity and influence almost unshaken, are the following :—
The Supreme court—I speak of the Supreme court because its conduct has governed that of inferior Federal courts—has steadily refused to interfere in purely political questions. Whenever it finds any discretion given to the President, any executive duty imposed on him, it considers the manner in which he exercises his discretion and discharges the duty to be beyond its province. Whenever the Constitution has conferred a power of legislating upon Congress, the court declines to inquire whether the use of the power was in the case of a particular statute passed by Congress either necessary or desirable, or whether it was exerted in a prudent manner, for it holds all such matters to be within the exclusive province of Congress.
‘¢In measures exclusively of a political, legislative, or executive character, it is plain that as the supreme authority as to these questions belongs to the legislative and executive departments, they cannot be re-examined elsewhere. Thus Congress, having the power to declare war, to levy taxes, to appropriate money, to regulate intercourse and commerce with foreign nations, their mode of executing these powers can never become the subject of re-examina- tion in any other tribunal. So the power to make treaties being confided to the President and Senate, when a treaty is properly ratified, it becomes the law of the land, and no other tribunal can gainsay its stipulations. Yet cases may readily be imagined in which a tax may be laid, or a treaty made upon motives and grounds wholly beside the intention of the Constitution, The remedy, however, in such cases is solely by an appeal to the people at the elections, or by the salutary power of amendment provided by the Constitu- tion itself.” 4
This may seem a vague statement of the principle which the court has followed, but it could be rendered more precise only by setting forth the instances in which it has been applied. It has enabled the court to avoid an immixture in political strife which must have destroyed its credit, has deterred it from enter- ing the political arena, where it would have been weak, and ‘ enabled it to act without fear in the sphere of pure law, where it is strong. Occasionally, however, as I shall explain presently, the court has come into collision with the executive. Occa- sionally it has been required to give decisions which have worked with tremendous force on politics. The most famous of
1 Story, Commentaries on the Constitution, § 374,
CHAP, XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 257
these was the Dred Scott case,! in which the Supreme court, on an action by a negro for assault and battery against the person claiming to be his master, declared that a slave taken temporarily to a free State and to a Territory in which Congress had for- bidden slavery, and afterwards returning into a slave State and resuming residence there, was not a citizen capable of suing in the Federal courts if by the law of the slave State he was still a slave. This was the point which actually called for decision ; but the majority of the court, for there was a dissentient minority, went further, and delivered a variety of dicta on various other points touching the legal status of negroes and the constitutional view of slavery. This judgment, since the lan- guage used in it seemed to cut off the hope of a settlement by the authority of Congress of the then (1857) pending disputes over slavery and its extension, did much to precipitate the Civil War.
Some questions, and among them many which involve poli- tical issues, can never come before the Federal courts, because they are not such as are raisable in an action between parties. Of those which might be raised, some never happen to arise, while others do not present themselves in an action till some time after the statute has been passed or act done on which the court is called to pronounce. By that time it may happen that the warmth of feeling which expressed itself during debate in Congress or in the country has passed away, while the judgment of the nation at large has been practically pronounced upon the issue.
Looking upon itself as a pure organ of the law, commissioned to do justice between man and man, but to do nothing more, the Supreme court has steadily refused to decide abstract questions, or to give opinions in advance by way of advice to the executive. When, in 1793, President Washington requested its opinion on the construction of the treaty of 1778 with France, the judges declined to comply.?
This restriction of the court’s duty to the determination of concrete cases arising in suits has excited so much admiration
1 Scott v. Sandford, 19 How. 393. There is an immense literature about this case, the legal points involved in which are too numerous and _ technical to be here stated. It is noticeable that the sting of the decision lay rather in the obiter dicta than in the determination of the main question involved.
2 Story, Commentaries, § 1571; cf. Marshall’s Life of Washington, vol. v. chap. vi.
VOL, I S
258 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
from De Tocqueville and other writers, that the corresponding disadvantages must be stated. They are these :—
To settle at once and for ever a disputed point of constitu- tional law would often be a gain both to private citizens and to the organs of the government. Under the present system there is no certainty when, if ever, such a point will be settled. No- body may care to incur the trouble and expense of taking it before the court. A suit which raises it may be compromised or dropped.
When such'a question, after perhaps the lapse of years, comes before the Supreme court and is determined, the determination may be different from what the legal profession has expected, may alter that which has been believed to be the law, may shake or overthrow private interests based upon views now declared to be erroneous.! These are, no doubt, drawbacks inci- dent to every system in which the decisions of courts play a great part. There are many points in the law of England which are uncertain even now, because they have never come before a court of high authority, or, having been decided in different ways by co-ordinate courts, have not been carried to the final court of appeal.2 But in England, if the inconvenience is great, it can be removed by an Act of Parliament, and it can hardly be so great as it may be in America, where, since the doubtful point may be the true construction of the fundamental law of the Union, the President and Congress may be left in uncertainty as to how they shall shape their course. With the best wish in the world to act conformably to the Constitution, these authorities have no means of ascertaining before they act what, in the view of its authorized interpreters, the true meaning of the Constitution is. Moved by this consideration, five States of the Union have by their Constitutions empowered the governor or legislature to require the written opinions of the judges of the highest State court on points submitted to them.? But the
1 The Dred Scott decision in 1857 declared the Missouri compromise, carried out by Act of Congress in 1820, to have been beyond the powers of Congress, which, to be sure, had virtually repealed it a year or two before by the Kansas- Nebraska legislation. Decisions have been given on the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments upsetting or qualifying congressional legislation passed years before.
2 The point at last settled in Martin v. Holgate by the House of Lords will occur to English lawyers as a remarkable instance.
® See Chapter XXXVII. post. There exists a similar provision in the statutes creating some of the British colonial governments, and the Government of Ireland: Bill, introduced into the House of Commons in 1886, but defeated
CHAP, XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 259
President of the United States can only consult his attorney- general,1 and the Houses of Congress have no legal adviser, though to be sure they are apt to receive a profusion of advice from their own legal members.
I return to notice other causes which have sustained the authority of the court by saving it from immersion in the turbid pool of politics. These are the strength of professional feeling among American lawyers, the relation of the bench to the bar, the power of the legal profession in the country. Proposing to describe both bar and bench in subsequent chapters, I will only now remark that the keen interest which the profession takes in the law secures an unusually large number of acute and com- petent critics of the interpretation put upon the law by the judges. Such men form a tribunal to whose opinion the judges are sensitive, and all the more sensitive because the judges, like those of England, but unlike those of continental Europe, have been themselves practising counsel. The better lawyers of the United States do not sink their professional sentiment and opinion in their party sympathies. They know good law even when it goes against themselves, and privately condemn as bad law a decision none the less because it benefits their party or their client. The Federal judge who has recently quitted the ranks of the bar remains in sympathy with it, respects its views, desires its approbation. Both his inbred professional habits, and
his respect for those traditions which the bar prizes, restrain him
from prostituting his office to party objects. Though he has usually been a politician, and owes his promotion to his party, his political trappings drop off him when he mounts the Supreme bench. He has now nothing to fear from party displeasure, because he is irremovable (except by impeachment), nothing to hope from party favour, because he is at the top of the tree and can climb no higher. Virtue has all the external conditions in her favour. It is true that virtue is compatible with the desire to extend the power and jurisdiction of the court. But even allowing that this motive may occasionally
there, contained (§ 25) a proviso enabling the Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland or a Secretary of State to refer a question for opinion to the judicial committee of the Privy Council.
1 The President sometimes, for the benefit of the public, publishes the written opinion of the attorney-general on an important and doubtful point ; but such an opinion has no more authority than what it may derive from the professional eminence of the person who gives it.
260 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
sway the judicial mind, the circumstances which surround the action of a tribunal debarred from initiative, capable of dealing only with concrete cases that come before it at irregular intervals, unable to appropriate any of the sweets of power other than power itself, make a course of systematic usurpation more difficult and less seductive than it would be to a legislative assembly or an executive council. As the respect of the bench for the bar tends to keep the judges in the straight path, so the respect and regard of the bar for the bench, a regard grounded on the sense of professional brotherhood, ensure the moral influence of the court in the country. The bar has usually been very powerful in America, not only as being the only class of educated men who are at once men of affairs and skilled speakers, but also because there has been no nobility or terri- torial aristocracy to overshadow it.1 Politics have been largely in its hands, and must remain so as long as political questions continue to be involved with the interpretation of constitutions. For the first sixty or seventy years of the Republic the leading statesmen were lawyers, and the lawyers as a whole moulded and led the public opinion of the country. Now to the better class of American lawyers law was a sacred science, and the highest court which dispensed it a sort of Mecca, towards which the faces of the faithful turned. Hence every constitutional case before the Supreme court was closely watched, the reasonings of the court studied, and its decisions appreciated as law apart from their bearing on political doctrines. I have heard elderly men describe the interest with which, in their youth, a famous advo- cate who had gone to Washington to argue a case before the Supreme court was welcomed by the bar of his own city on his return, how the rising men crowded round him to hear what he had to tell of the combat. in that arena where the best intellects of the nation strove, how the respect which he never failed to express for the ability and impartiality of. the court communi- cated itself to them, how admiration bred acquiescence, and the whole profession accepted expositions of the law unexpected by many, perhaps unwelcome to most. When it was felt that the judges had honestly sought to expound the Constitution, and
1 This professional interest in law seems to have been stronger in the last generation than it is now ; it is even now stronger in America than in England. Of course I do not speak of those sharpshooters who, while calling themselves
lawyers, are really politicians or lobbyists, but of the regular army of practitioners,
eaiete 1
CHAP, XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 261
when the cogency of their reasonings was admitted, resentment, if any there had been, passed away, and the support which the bar gave to the court ensured the obedience of the people.
That this factor in the maintenance of judicial influence proved so potent was largely due to the personal eminence of the judges. One must not call that a result of fortune which was the result of the wisdom of successive Presidents in choosing capable men to sit on the supreme Federal bench. Yet one man was so singularly fitted for the office of chief justice, and rendered such incomparable services in it, that the Americans have been wont to regard him as a special gift of favouring Providence. This was John Marshall, who presided over the Supreme court from 1801 till his death in 1835 at the age of seventy-seven, and whose fame overtops that of all other American judges more than Papinian overtops the jurists of Rome or Lord Mansfield the jurists of England. No other man did half so much either to develop the Constitution by expound- ing it, or to secure for the judiciary its rightful place in the government as the living voice of the Constitution. “No one vindicated more strenuously the duty of the court to establish the authority of the fundamental law of the land, no one abstained more scrupulously from trespassing on the field of executive administration or political controversy. The admiration and respect which he and his colleagues won for the court remain its bulwark : the traditions which were formed under him and them have continued in general to guide the action and elevate the sentiments of their successors.
Nevertheless, the court has not always had smooth seas to navigate. It has more than once been shaken by blasts of unpopularity. It has not infrequently found itself in conflict with other authorities.
The first attacks arose out of its decision that it had juris- diction to entertain suits by private persons against a State.? This point was set at rest by the eleventh amendment; but the States then first learnt to fear the Supreme court as an antagonist. In 1801, in an application requiring the secretary of state to deliver a commission, it declared itself to have the power to compel an executive officer to fulfil a ministerial duty affecting the rights of individuals.” President Jefferson protested
1 Chisholm v. Georgia, see above, p. 231. 2 Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch, 137. In this case the court refused to issue
262 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
angrily against this claim, but it has been repeatedly re-asserted, and is now undoubted law. It was in this same case that the court first explicitly asserted its duty to treat as invalid an Act of Congress inconsistent with the Constitution! In 1806 it for the first time pronounced a State statute void; in 1816 and 1821 it rendered decisions establishing its authority as a supreme court of appeal from State courts on “federal questions,” and unfolding the full meaning of the doctrine that the Constitution and Acts of Congress duly made in pursuance of the Constitution are the fundamental and supreme law of the land. This was a doctrine which had not been adequately apprehended even by lawyers, and its development, legitimate as we now deem it, roused opposition. ‘The Democratic party which came into power under President Jackson in 1829, was specially hostile to a construction of the Constitution which seemed to trench upon State rights,? and when in 1832 the Supreme court ordered the State of Georgia to release persons imprisoned under a Georgian statute which the court declared to be invalid,? Jackson, whose duty it was to enforce the decision by the executive arm, remarked, ‘‘ John Marshall has pronounced his judgment: let him enforce it if he can.” The successful resistance of Georgia in the Cherokee dispute * gave a blow to the authority of the court, and marked the beginning of a new period in its history, during which, in the hands of judges mostly appointed by the Democratic party, it made no further advance in power.
the mandamus asked for, but upon the ground that the statute of Congress giving to the Supreme court original jurisdiction to issue a mandamus was inconsistent with the Constitution. See also Kendal v. United States, 12 Peters, 616 ; United States v. Schurz, 102 U.S. 378.
1 This however is a power which it has rarely been found necessary to exert. See Dr. Andrew’s Manual of the Constitution, p. 196.
2 Martin van Buren (President 1837-41) expressed the feelings of the bulk of his party when he complained bitterly of the encroachments of the Supreme court, and declared that it would never have been created had the people fore- seen the powers it would acquire.
’ This was only one act in the long struggle of the Cherokee Indians against the oppressive conduct of Georgia—conduct which the court emphatically con- demned, though it proved powerless to help the unhappy Cherokees.
4 The matter did not come to an absolute conflict, because before the time arrived for the court to direct the United States marshal of the district of Georgia to summon the posse comitatus and the President to render assistance in liberating the prisoners, the prisoners submitted to the State authorities, and were thereupon released. They probably believed that the imperious Jackson would persist in his hostility to the Supreme court.
»
CHAP. XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 263
In 1857 the Dred Scott judgment, pronounced by a majority of the judges, excited the strongest outbreak of displeasure yet witnessed. The Republican party, then rising into strength, denounced this decision in the resolutions of the conyention which nominated Abraham Lincoln in 1860, and its doctrine as to citizenship was expressly negatived in the fourteenth consti- tutional amendment adopted after the War of Secession.
It was feared that the political leanings of the judges who formed the court at the outbreak of the war would induce them to throw legal difficulties in the prosecution of the measures needed for re-establishing the authority of the Union. These fears proved ungrounded, although some contests arose as to the right of officers in the Federal army to disregard writs of habeas corpus issued by the court.1- In 1868, having then become Republican in its sympathies by the appointment of new mem- bers as the older judges disappeared, it sustained the congres- sional plan of reconstruction which President Johnson was endeavouring to defeat, and in subsequent cases it has given effect to most, though not to all, of the statutes passed by Congress under the three amendments which abolished slavery and secured the rights of the negroes. In 1876 it refused to entertain proceedings instituted for the purpose of forbidding the President to execute the Reconstruction Acts.
Two of its later acts are thought by some to have affected public confidence. One of these was the reversal, first in 1871, and again, upon broader but not inconsistent grounds, in 1884, of the decision, given in 1869, which declared invalid the Act of Congress making government paper a legal tender for debts. The original decision of 1869 was rendered by a majority of five to three. The court was afterwards changed by the creation of an additional judgeship, and by the appointment of a new member to fill a vacancy which occurred after the settlement, though before the delivery, of the first decision. Then the question was brought up again in a new case between different parties, and decided in the opposite sense (i.e. in favour of the power of Congress to pass legal tender Acts) by a majority of five to four. Finally, in 1884, another suit having brought up a point practically the same, though under a later statute passed
1 See as to these the article ‘‘ Habeas Corpus” by Mr. Alex. Johnston in the American Cyclopedia of Political Science. And consider the very important decision in Hx parte Milligan, 4 Wall. 129.
264 ; THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
by Congress, the court determined with only one dissentient voice that the power existed.! This last decision excited some criticism, especially among the more conservative lawyers, be- cause it seemed to remove restrictions hitherto supposed to exist on the authority of Congress, recognizing the right to establish a forced paper currency as an attribute of the sovereignty of the national government. But be the decision right or wrong, a point on which high authorities are still divided,” the reversal by the highest court in the land of its own previous decision may have tended to unsettle men’s reliance on the stability of the law; while the manner of the earlier reversal, following as it did on the creation of a new judgeship and the appointment of two justices, both known to be in favour of the view which the majority of the court had just disapproved, disclosed a weak point in the constitution of the tribunal which may some day prove fatal to its usefulness.
The other misfortune was the interposition of the court in the presidential electoral count dispute of 1877.3 Most people now admit that Mr. Tilden and not Mr. Hayes ought to have been declared elected in that year. But the five justices of the Supreme court who were included in the electoral commission then appointed voted on party lines no less steadily than did the senators and representatives who sat on it. A function scarcely judicial, and certainly not contemplated by the Constitu- tion, was then for the first time thrown upon the judiciary, and in discharging it the judiciary acted exactly like non-judicial persons.
Notwithstanding this occurrence, which after all was quite exceptional, the credit and dignity of the Supreme court stand very high. No one of its members has ever been suspected of corruption, and comparatively few have allowed their political sympathies to disturb their official judgment. Though for many years back every President has appointed only men of his own party, and frequently leading politicians of his own party,* the new-made judge has left partisanship behind him,
1 The earlier decision in favour of the power deduced it from war powers, the later from the general sovereignty of the national government, See Hepburn We Griswold, 8 Wall. 603; Legal Tender Cases, 12 Wall. 457; Juilliard v. Greenman, 110 U.S. 421.
2 See the pamphlets of Mr. George Bancroft and Mr. R. CO. MacMurtrie, an article in the Amer. Law Review, iv. 768, by Mr. (Justice) O. W. Holmes, and an article in the Harvard Law Review for May 1887, by Mr. James B. Thayer of the Harvard Law School. 3 See above, p. 44. :
4 Ihave heard American lawyers express surprise as well as admiration at the
Fes aoe a \ . na \ sal? aoa fF
‘cay, xx1v - THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 265
while no doubt usually retaining that bias or tendency of his mind which party training produces. At present all the judges but three belong to the Republican party, but although the Democrats regret this, and when they came into power welcomed ° the prospect of putting in their own men as vacancies occur, the 4 circumstance does not affect their respect for the court and their faith in its uprightness. The desire for an equal representation of both parties is based, not on any fear that suitors will suffer from the influence of party spirit, but on the feeling that when any new constitutional question arises it is right that the tendencies which have characterized the Democratic view of the Constitution should be duly represented over against those sup- posed to influence the Republicans.
Apart from these constitutional questions, the value of the Federal courts to the country at large has been inestimable. They have done much to meet the evils which an elective and ill-paid State judiciary inflicts on some of the newer and a few even of the older States. The Federal Circuit and District judges, small as are their salaries, are in most States individually superior men to the State judges, because the greater security of tenure induces abler men to accept the post. Being irremovable, they feel themselves independent of parties and politicians, whom the elected 'State judge, holding for a limited term, may be tempted to conciliate with a view to re-election. Plaintiffs, therefore, when they have a choice of suing in a State court or a Federal court, frequently prefer the latter ; and the litigant who belongs to a foreign country, or to a different State from that in which his opponent resides, may think his prospects of an unbiassed decision better before it than before a State tribunal.
Federal judgeships of the second and third rank (Circuit and District) are invariably given to the members of the President’s party, and by an equally well-established usage, to persons resident in the State or States where the circuit or district court isheld. But cases of corruption, or even of pronounced partisan- ship, are practically unknown. The chief present defect is the inadequacy of the salaries of the District judges, and the in-
occasional departures in England (as notably in the recent case of Lord Justice Holker, who, having been Attorney-General of one party, was, in respect of his eminent merits, appointed Lord Justice of Appeal by the other) from the practice of political appointments to judicial office. Such non-political appointments are however occasionally made in the several States by the governors, or even (as in the case of Chief-Justice Redfield of Vermont) by the legislature.
266 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
sufficiency of the staff in the more populous Eastern States to grapple with the vast and increasing business which flows in upon them. So too, in the Supreme court, arrears have so accumulated that it is now more than three years from the time when a cause is entered before it can come on for hearing. Some have proposed to meet this evil by limiting the right of appeal to cases involving a considerable sum of money; but a better remedy would be to divide the Supreme court into two divisional courts for the hearing of ordinary suits, reserv- ing for the full court points affecting the construction of the Constitution.
One question remains to be put and answered.
The Supreme court is the living voice of the Constitution—! that is, of the will of the people expressed in the fundamental law they have enacted. It is, therefore, as some one has said, the conscience of the people, who have resolved to restrain them- selves from hasty or unjust action .by placing their representa- tives under the restriction of a permanent law. It is the guarantee of the minority, who, when threatened by the im- patient vehemence of a majority, can appeal to this permanent law, finding the interpreter and enforcer thereof in a court set high above the assaults of faction.
To discharge these momentous functions, the court must be stable even as the Constitution is stable. Its spirit and tone must be that of the people at their best moments. It must resist transitory impulses, and resist them the more firmly the more vehement they are. Entrenched behind impregnable ramparts, it must be able to defy at once the open attacks of the other departments of the government, and the more dangerous, because impalpable, seductions of popular sentiment.
Does it possess, has it displayed, this strength and stability?
It has not always followed its own former decisions. This is natural in a court whose errors cannot be cured by the interven- tion of the legislature. The English final Court of Appeal always follows its previous decisions, though high authorities have declared that cases may be imagined in which it would refuse to do so. And that court (the House of Lords) can afford so to
1 The Romans called their chief judicial officer “ the living voice of the civil law”; but as this “civil law” consisted largely of custom, he naturally enjoyed a wider discretion in moulding and expanding as well as in expounding the law than do the American judges, who have a formally enacted constitution to guide and restrain them.
ee AL:
cHAP. xxIv. -«' THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 267
adhere, because, when an old decision begins to be condemned, Parliament can forthwith alter the law. But as nothing less than a constitutional amendment can alter the law contained in the Federal Constitution, the Supreme court must choose between the evil of unsettling the law by reversing, and the evil of per- petuating bad law by following, a former decision. It may reasonably, in extreme cases, deem the latter evil the greater. The Supreme court feels the touch of public opinion. Opinion is stronger in America than anywhere else in the world, and judges are only men. To yield a little may be prudent, for the tree that cannot bend to the blast may be broken. There is, moreover, this ground at least for presuming public opinion to be right, that through it the progressive judgment of the world is expressed. Of course, whenever the law is clear, because the words of the Constitution are plain or the cases interpreting them decisive on the point raised, the court must look solely to those words and cases, and cannot permit any other considera- tion to affect its mind. But when the terms of the Constitution admit of more than one construction, and when previous decisions have left the true construction so far open that the point in question may be deemed new, is a court to be blamed if it pre- fers the construction which the bulk of the people deem suited to the needs of the time? A court is sometimes so swayed consciously, more often unconsciously, because the pervasive sympathy of numbers is irresistible even by elderly lawyers. A remarkable example is furnished by the decisions (in 1876) of the Supreme court in the so-called Granger cases, suits involving the power of a State to subject railways and other corporations or persons exercising what are called “public trades” to restric- tive legislation without making pecuniary compensation.! I do not presume to doubt the correctness of these decisions; but they evidently represent a different view of the sacredness of private rights and of the powers of a legislature from that enter- tained by Chief-Justice Marshall and his contemporaries. They reveal that current of opinion which now runs strongly in
1 See Munn v. Illinois, and the following cases in 94 U.S. Rep. 193. This was one of those cases in which the court felt bound to regard not only the view which it took itself of the meaning of the Constitution but that which a legisla- ture might reasonably take.—See Chapter XXXIV. post. As to the non-liability to make compensation where licences for the sale of intoxicants are forbidden, see Mugler v. Kansas, decided in the Supreme court of the United States, 5th December 1887.
268 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
America against what are called monopolies and the powers of incorporated companies. The Supreme court has changed its colour, 2.¢. its temper and tendencies, from time to time, according to the political proclivi- ties of the men who composed it. It changes very slowly, because the vacancies in a small body happen rarely, and its composition therefore often represents the predominance of a past and not of the presently ruling party. From 1789 down till the death of Chief-Justice Marshall in 1835 its tendency was to the extension of the powers of the Federal government, and therewith of its own jurisdiction, because the ruling spirits in it were men who belonged to the old Federalist party, though that party fell in 1800, and disappeared in 1814. From 1835 till the War of Secession its sympathies were with the doctrines of the Demo- cratic party. Without actually abandoning the positions of the previous period, the court, during these years when Chief-Justice Taney presided over it, leant against any further extension of Federal power or of its own jurisdiction. During and after the war, when the ascendency of the Republican party had begun to change the composition of the court, a third period opened. Centralizing ideas were again powerful: the vast war powers asserted by Congress were in most instances supported by judi- cial decision, the rights of States while maintained (as in the Granger cases) as against private persons or bodies, were for a time regarded with less favour whenever they seemed to conflict with those of the Federal government. In none of these three periods can the judges be charged with any prostitution of their functions to party purposes. Their action flowed naturally from the habits of thought they had formed before their accession to the bench, and from the sympathy they could not but feel with the doctrines on whose behalf they had contended. Even on the proverbially upright and impartial bench of England the same tendencies may be discerned. There are constitutional questions, and questions touching what may be called the policy of the law, which would be decided differently by one English judge or by another, not from any conscious wish to favour a party or a class, but because the views which a man holds as a citizen cannot fail to colour his judgment even on legal points. The Fathers of the Constitution studied nothing more than to secure the complete independence of the judiciary. The Presi- dent was not permitted to remove the judges, nor Congress to
Ve
oar. xxiv. Ss THEE WORKING OF THE COURTS / 969
diminish their salaries. One thing only was either forgotten or deemed undesirable, because highly inconvenient, to determine, —the number of judges in the Supreme court. Here was a weak point, a joint in the court’s armour through which a weapon might some day penetrate. Congress having in 1801, pursuant to a power contained in the Constitution, established sixteen Circuit courts, President Adams, immediately before he quitted office, appointed members of his own party to the justiceships thus created. When President Jefferson came in, he refused to admit the validity of the appointments ; and the newly elected Congress, which was in sympathy with him, abolished the Circuit courts themselves, since it could find no other means of ousting the new justices. This method of attack, whose constitutionality has been much doubted, cannot be used against the Supreme court, because that tribunal is directly created by the Constitu- tion. But as the Constitution does not prescribe the number of justices, a statute may increase or diminish the number as Congress thinks fit. In 1866, when Congress was in fierce antagonism to President Johnson, and desired to prevent him from appointing any judges, it reduced the number, which was then ten, by a statute providing that no vacancy should be filled up till the number was reduced to seven. In 1869, when John- son had been succeeded by Grant, the number was raised to nine, and the legal tender decision given just before was presently reversed by the altered court. This method is plainly susceptible of further and possibly dangerous application. Suppose a Con- gress and President bent on doing something which the Supreme court deems contrary to the Constitution. They pass a statute. A case arises under it. The court on the hearing of the case unanimously declares the statute to be null, as being beyond the powers of Congress. Congress forthwith passes and the President signs another statute more than doubling the number of the jus- tices. The President appoints to the new justiceships men who are pledged to hold the former statute constitutional. The Senate confirms his appointments. Another case raising the validity of the disputed statute is brought up to the court. The new justices outvote the old ones: the statute is held valid: the security provided for the protection of the Constitution is gone like a morning mist.
What prevents such assaults on the fundamental law—assaults which, however immoral in substance, would be perfectly legal in
270 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
form? Not the mechanism of government, for all its checks have been evaded. Not the conscience of the legislature and the Pre- sident, for heated combatants seldom shrink from justifying the means by the end. Nothing but the fear of the people, whose broad good sense and attachment to the great principles of the
Constitution may generally be relied on to condemn such a per- .
version of its forms. Yet if excitement has risen high over the country, a majority of the people may acquiesce; and then it matters little whether what is really a revolution be accomplished by openly violating or by merely distorting the forms of law. To the people we come sooner or later: it is upon their wisdom and self-restraint that the stability of the most cunningly devised scheme of government will in the last resort depend.
“AY
y j
CHAPTER XXV COMPARISON OF THE AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS
THE relations to one another of the different branches of the government in the United States are so remarkable and so full of instruction for: other countries, that it seems desirable, even at the risk of a little repetition, to show by a comparison with the Cabinet or parliamentary system of European countries how this complex American machinery actually works.
The English system on which have been modelled, of course with many variations, the systems of France, Belgium, Holland, Italy, Germany, Hungary (where, however, the English scheme has been compounded with an ancient and very interesting native-born constitution), Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Spain, and Portugal, as well as the constitutions of the great self-governing English colonies in North America and Australia—this English system places at the head of the state a person in whose name all executive acts are done, and who is (except in France) irrespon- sible and irremovable.2 His acts are done by the advice and on the responsibility of ministers chosen nominally by him, but really by the representatives of the people—usually, but not necessarily, from among the members of the legislature. The re- presentatives are, therefore, through the agents whom they select, the true government of the country. When the representative assembly ceases to trust these agents, the latter resign, and a new set are appointed. ‘Thus the executive as well as the legis- lative power really belongs to the majority of the representative chamber, though in appointing agents, an expedient which its size makes needful, it is forced to leave in the hands of these agents
1 In Denmark constitutional government seems still to subsist in theory, though for a good many years it has been suspended in practice.
2 In the British colonies the governor is irremovable by the colony, and irresponsible to its legislature, though responsible to and removable by the home government.
272 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ‘PART I
a measure of discretion sufficient to make them appear distinct from it, and sometimes to tempt them to acts which their masters disapprove. As the legislature is thus in a sense executive, so the executive government, the council of ministers or cabinet, is in so far legislative that the initiation of measures rests very largely with them, and the carrying of measures through the Chamber demands their advocacy and counter pressure upon the majority of the representatives. They are not merely executive agents but also legislative leaders. One may say, indeed, that the legis- lative and executive functions are interwoven as closely under this system as under absolute monarchies, such as Imperial Rome or modern Russia; and the fact that taxation, while effected by means of legislation, is the indispensable engine of administration, shows how inseparable are these two apparently ‘distinct powers.
Under this system the sovereignty of the legislature may be more or less complete. It is most complete in France; least complete in Germany and Prussia, where the power of the Em- peror and King is great and not declining. But in all these countries not only are the legislature and executive in close touch with one another, but they settle their disputes without reference to the judiciary. The courts of law cannot be invoked by the executive against the legislature, because questions involving the validity of a legislative act do not come before it, since the legis- lature is either completely sovereign, as in England, or the judge of its own competence, as in Belgium. The judiciary, in other words, does not enter into the consideration of the political part of the machinery of government.
This system of so-called cabinet government seems to Europeans now, who observe it at work over a large part of the world, an obvious and simple system. We are apt to forget that it was never seen anywhere till the English developed it by slow degrees, and that it is a very delicate system, depending on habits, traditions, and understandings which are not easily set forth in words, much less transplanted to a new soil.
We are also prone to forget how very recent it is. People commonly date it from the reign of King William the Third ; but it worked very irregularly till the Hanoverian kings came to the throne, and even then it at first worked by means of a monstrous system of bribery and place-mongering. In the days of George the Third the personal power of the Crown for a
CHAP, XXV AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 273
while revived and corruption declined.!_ The executive head of the state was, during the latter decades of the century, a factor apart from his ministers. They were not then, as now, a mere committee of Parliament dependent upon Parliament, but rather a compromise between the king’s will and the will of the parlia- mentary majority. They deemed and declared themselves to owe a duty to the king conflicting with, sometimes overriding, their duty to Parliament. Those phrases of abasement before the Crown which when now employed by prime ministers amuse us by their remoteness from the realities of the case, then expressed realities. In 1787, when the Constitutional Conven- tion met at Philadelphia, the Cabinet system of government was in England still immature. It was so immature that its true nature had not been perceived. And although we now can see that the tendency was really towards the depression of the Crown and the exaltation of Parliament, men might well, when they compared the influence of George III. with that exercised by George I.,? argue in the terms of Dunning’s famous resolu- tion, that “the power of the Crown has increased, is increasing, and ought to be diminished.” 4
1 Corruption was possible, because the House of Commons did not look for support to the nation, its debates were scantily reported, it had little sense of responsibility. An active king was therefore able to assert himself against it, and to form a party in it, as well as outside of it, which regarded him as its head. This forced the Whigs to throw themselves upon the nation at large ; the Tories did the same ; corruption withered away; and as Parliament came more and more under the watchful eye of the people, and responsible to it, the influence of the king declined and vanished.
2 Gouverneur Morris, however, one of the acutest minds in the Convention of 1787, remarked there, ‘‘ Our President will be the British (Prime) Minister. If Mr. Fox had carried his India Bill, he would have made the Minister the King in form almost as well as in substance.’’—Elliot’s Debates, i. 361.
3 George III. had the advantage of being a national king, whereas his two predecessors had been Germans by language and habits as well as by blood. His popularity contributed to his influence in politics. Mrs. Papendiek’s Diary con- tains some amusing illustrations of the exuberant demonstrations of “ loyalty ” which he excited. When he went to Weymouth for sea- bathing after his recovery from the first serious attack of lunacy, crowds gathered along the shore, and bands of music struck up ‘‘God save the King” when he ducked his head beneath the brine.
4 It is not easy to say when the principle of the absolute dependence of ministers on a parliamentary majority without regard to the wishes of the Crown passed into a settled doctrine. (Needless to say that it has received no formally legal recognition, but is merely usage.) The long coincidence during the dominance of Pitt and his Tory successors down till 1827 of the wishes and interests of the Crown with those of the parliamentary majority prevented the question from arising in a practical shape. Hven in 1827 Mr, Canning writes to J. W. Croker :—
VOL) 1 T
274 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
The greatest problem that free peoples have to solve is how to enable the citizens at large to conduct or control the executive business of the state. England was in 1787 the only nation (the cantons of Switzerland were so small as scarcely to be thought of) that had solved this problem, firstly, by the development of a representative system, secondly, by giving to her representatives a large authority over the executive. The Constitutional Con- vention, therefore, turned its eyes to her when it sought to con- stitute a free government for the new nation which the “more perfect union” of the States was calling into conscious being.
Very few of the members of the Convention had been in England so as to know her constitution, such as it then was, at first hand. Yet there were three sources whence light fell upon it, and for that light they were grateful. One was their experi- ence in dealing with the mother country since the quarrel began. They saw in Britain an executive largely influenced by the per- sonal volitions of the king, and in its conduct of colonial and foreign affairs largely detached from and independent of Parlia- ment, since it was able to take tyrannical steps without the pre- vious knowledge or consent of Parliament, and able afterwards to defend those steps by alleging a necessity whereof Parliament, wanting confidential information, could imperfectly judge. It was in these colonial and foreign affairs that the power of the Crown chiefly lay (as, indeed, to this day the authority of Par- liament over the executive is smaller here than in any other de- partment, because secrecy and promptitude are more essential), so they could not be expected to know for how much less the king counted in domestic affairs. Moreover, there was be- lieved to be often a secret junto which really controlled the ministry, because acting in concert with the Crown; and the Crown had powerful engines at its disposal, bribes and honours, pensions and places, engines irresistible by the average virtue of representatives whose words and votes were not reported, and nearly half of whom were the nominees of some magnate.!
“Am I to understand, then, that you consider the King [George IV.] as com- pletely in the hands of the Tory aristocracy as his father, or rather as George II. was in the hands of the Whigs? If so, George III. reigned and Mr. Pitt (both father and son) administered the Government in vain, I have a better opinion of the real vigour of the Crown when it chooses to put forth its own strength, and I
am not without some reliance on the body of the people” !—Croker Correspondence, yol, i. p. 868,
1 The Crown itself had pocket boroughs. Hamilton doubted whether the British Constitution could be worked without corruption.
CHAP. XXV AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 275
The second source was the legal presentation of the English Constitution in scientific text-books, and particularly in Black- stone, whose famous Commentaries, first published in 1765 (their substance having been delivered as professorial lectures at Oxford in 1758 and several succeeding years), had quickly become the standard authority on the subject. Now Blackstone, as is natural in a lawyer who looks rather to the strict letter of the law than to the practice which had grown up modifying it, describes the royal prerogative in terms more appropriate to the days of the Stuarts than to those in which he wrote, and dwells on the independence of the executive, while also declar- ing the withholding from it of legislative power to be essential to freedom.!
The third source was the view of the English Constitution given by the political philosophers of the eighteenth century, among whom, since he was by far the most important, we need look at Montesquieu alone.
When the famous treatise on The Spirit of Laws appeared in 1748, a treatise belonging to the small class of books which per- manently turn the course of human thought, and which, unlike St. Augustine’s City of God, turned it immediately instead of having to wait for centuries till the hour of its power arrived, it dwelt upon the separation of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers in the British Constitution as the most remark- able feature of that system. Accustomed to see the two former powers, and to some extent the third also, exercised by or under the direct control of the French monarch, Montesquiew attri-
1 See Blackstone, Commentaries, bk. i. chap. ii.—‘*‘ Whenever the power of making and that of enforcing the laws are united together, there can be no public liberty. . . . Where the legislative and executive authority are in distinct hands, the former will take care not to entrust the latter with so large a power as may tend to the subversion of its own independence, and therewith of the liberty of the subject. . . . The Crown cannot of itself begin any alteration in the present established law ; but it may approve or disapprove of the alterations suggested and consented to by the two Houses. ‘The legislative, therefore, cannot abridge the executive power of any rights which it now has by law without its own con- sent.” There is no hint here, or in chap. vii. on the royal prerogative, that the royal power of disapproval had not been in fact exercised for some fifty years. Blackstone does not quote Montesquieu for the particular proposition that the powers must be separated, but has evidently been influenced by him. A little later he cites a famous dictum, ‘‘ The President Montesquieu, though I trust too hastily, presages that as Rome, Sparta, and Carthage have lost their liberty and perished, so the Constitution of England will in time lose its liberty—will perish : it will perish whenever the legislative power shall become more corrupt than the executive.”
276 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I |
buted English freedom to their separation.1 The King of Great Britain then possessed a larger prerogative than he has now, and as even then it seemed on paper much larger than it really was, it was natural that a foreign observer should underrate the executive character of the British Parliament and overrate the executive authority of the monarch as a person. Now Montesquieu’s treatise was taken by the thinkers of the next generation as a sort of Bible of political philosophy. Hamilton and Madison, the two earliest exponents of the American Con- stitution they had done so much to create, cite it in the Federalist much as the schoolmen cite Aristotle, that is, they cite it as an authority which everybody will recognize to be binding; and Madison in particular constantly refers to this separation of the legislative, executive, and judicial powers as the distinguishing note of a free government. These views of the British Constitution tallied with and were strengthened by the ideas and habits formed in the Americans by their experience of representative government in the colonies, ideas and habits which were after all the dominant factor in the construction of their political system. In these colonies the executive power had been vested either in a governor sent from England by the Crown, or in. certain proprietors, as they were called, persons to whom the English Crown had granted heredi- tary rights in a province. Along with these authorities there had existed representative assemblies, who made laws and voted money for the purposes of their respective commonwealths. They did not control the governor because his commission issued from the British Crown, and he was responsible thereto and not to the Colonial Government. A governor had no parliamentary cabinet, but only officials responsible to himself and the Crown. His veto on acts of the colonial legislature was frequently used ; and that body, with no means of controlling his conduct other than the refusal to vote money, was a legislature and nothing more. Thus the Americans found and admired in their colonial (or State) systems, a separation of the legislative from the exe- cutive branch, more complete than in England, because in the colonies no ministers sat in the legislature. And being already
1 Locke had already remarked (On Civil Government, chap. xiv.) that ‘‘ the legislative and executive powers are in distinct hands in all moderated monarchies and well-framed governments.”
2 Maryland under Lord Baltimore is the familiar example,
CHAP, XXV AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 277
proud of their freedom, they attributed its amplitude chiefly to this cause. ;
From their colonial experience, coupled with these notions of the British Constitution, the men of 1787 drew three conclusions : Firstly, that the vesting of the executive and the legislative powers in different hands was the normal and natural feature of a free government. Secondly, that the power of the executive was dangerous to liberty, and must be kept within well-defined boundaries. Thirdly, that in order to check the head of the state it was necessary not only to define his powers, and appoint him for a limited period, but also to destroy his opportunities of influencing the legislature. Conceiving that ministers, as named by and acting under the orders of the President, would be his instruments rather than faithful representatives of the people, they resolved to prevent them from holding this double character, and therefore forbade “any person holding office under the United States” to be a member of either House.! They deemed that in this way they had rendered their legislature pure, in- dependent, vigilant, the servant of the people, the foe of arbitrary power. Omnipotent, however, the framers of the Constitution did not mean to make it. They were sensible of the opposite dangers which might flow from a feeble and dependent executive. The proposal made in the first draft of the Constitution that Congress should elect the President, was abandoned, lest he should be merely its creature and unable to check it. To strengthen his position, and prevent intrigues among members of Congress for this supreme office, it was settled that the people should themselves, through certain electors appointed for the purpose, choose the President. By giving him the better status of.a popular, though indirect, mandate, he became independent of Congress, and was encouraged to use his veto, which a mere nominee of Congress might have hesitated to do. Thus it was believed in 1787 that a due balance had been arrived at, the independence of Congress being secured on the one side and the independence of the President on the other. Each power hold- ing the other in check, the people, jealous of their hardly-won
1 In 1700 the English Act of Settlement enacted that “no person who has an office or a place of profit under the King shall be capable of serving as a member of the House of Commons.” ‘This provision never took effect, having been re- pealed by the Act 4 Anne, c. 8. But the holding of the great majority of offices
under the Crown is now, by statute, a disqualification for sitting in the House of Commons. See Anson, Law and Custom of the Constitution, vol. i. p. 174.
t z / ' i . : ¢ y \ i ( \ P R x ,
278 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
liberties, would be courted by each, and safe from the encroach- ments of either. ;
There was of course the risk that controversies as to their respective rights and powers would arise between these two departments. But the creation of a court entitled to place an authoritative interpretation upon the Constitution in which the supreme will of the people was expressed, provided a remedy available in many, if not in all, of such cases, and a security for the faithful observance of the Constitution which England did not, and under her system of an omnipotent Parliament could not, possess.
“They builded better than they knew.” They divided the legislature from the executive so completely as to make each not only independent, but weak even in its own proper sphere. The President was debarred from carrying Congress along with him, as a popular prime minister may carry Parliament in England, to effect some sweeping change. He is fettered in foreign policy, and in appointments, by the concurrent rights of the Senate. He is forbidden to appeal at a crisis from Congress to the country. Nevertheless his office retains a measure of solid independence in the fact that the nation regards him as a direct representative and embodiment of its majesty, while the circumstance that he holds office for four years only makes it possible for him to do acts of power during those four years which would excite alarm from a permanent sovereign. Entrenched behind the ramparts of a rigid Constitution, he has retained rights of which his . prototype the English king has been gradually stripped. Con- gress on the other hand was weakened, as compared with the British Parliament in which one House has become dominant, by its division into two co-equal houses, whose disagreement paralyses legislative action. And it lost that direct control over the executive which the presence of ministers in the legislature, and their dependence upon a majority of the popular House, give to the Parliaments of Britain and her colonies. It has diverged widely from the English original which it seemed likely, with only a slight difference, to reproduce.
The British House of Commons has grown to the stature of a supreme executive as well as legislative council, acting not only by its properly legislative power, but through its right to dis- place ministers by a resolution of want of confidence, and to compel the sovereign to employ such servants as it approves. Congress remains a pure legislature, unable to displace a minister,
\
. CHAP, XXV. AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 279
unable to choose the agents by whom its laws are to be carried out, and having hitherto failed to develop that internal organiza- tion which a large assembly needs in order to frame and success- fully pursue definite schemes of policy. Nevertheless, so far- reaching is the power of legislation, Congress has encroached, and may encroach still farther, upon the sphere of the executive. It encroaches not merely with a conscious purpose, but because the law of its being has forced it to create in its committees bodies whose expansion necessarily presses on the executive. It encroaches because it is restless, unwearied, always drawn by the progress of events into new fields of labour.
These observations may suffice to show why the Fathers of the Constitution did not adopt the English parliamentary or Cabinet system. They could not adopt it because they did not know of its existence. They did not know of it because it was still immature, because Englishmen themselves had not under- stood it, because the recognized authorities did not mention it. There is not a word in Blackstone, much less in Montesquieu, as to the duty of ministers to resign at the bidding of the House of Commons, nor anything to indicate that the whole life of the House of Commons was destined to centre in the leadership of ministers. Whether the Fathers would have imitated the cabinet system had’ it been proposed to them as a model may be doubted. They would probably have thought that the creation of a frame of government so unified, so strong, so capable of swiftly and irresistibly accomplishing the purposes of a transitory majority as we now perceive it to be, might prove dangerous to those liberties of the several States, as well as of individual citizens, which filled the whole background of their landscape. But as the idea never presented itself, we cannot say that it was rejected, nor cite the course they took as an expression of their judgment against the system under which England and her colonies have so far prospered.
1 Roger Sherman saw the importance of the English Cabinet, though he looked on it as a mere engine in the Crown’s hands. ‘The nation,” he observed, in the Convention of 1787, “is in fact governed by the Cabinet council, who are the creatures of the Crown. The consent of Parliament is necessary to give sanction to their measures, and this they easily obtain by the influence of the Crown in appointing to all offices of honour and profit.” It must be remembered that the House of Lords was far more powerful in 1787 than it is now, not only as a branch of the legislature, but in respect of the boroughs owned by the
leading peers: and therefore the dependence of the ministry on the House of Commons was a less prominent feature of the Constitution than it is now.
280 : THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT Ce PARTTT
That system could not be deemed to have reached its maturity till the power of the people at large had been established by the Reform Act of 1832. For its essence resides in the delicate equipoise it creates between the three powers, the ministry, the House of Commons, and the people. The House is strong, be- cause it can call the ministry to account for every act, and can, by refusing supplies, compel their resignation. The ministry are not defenceless, because they can dissolve Parliament, and ask the people to judge between it and them. Parliament, when it displaces a ministry, does not strike at executive authority : it merely changes its agents. The ministry, when they dissolve Parliament, do not attack Parliament as an institution: they recognize the supremacy of the body in asking the country to change the individuals who compose it. Both the House of Commons and the ministry act and move in the full view of the people, who sit as arbiters, prepared to judge in any controversy that may arise. The House is in touch with the people, because every member must watch the lights and shadows of sentiment which play over his own constituency. ‘The ministry are in touch with the people, because they are not only themselves representatives, but are heads of a great party, sensitive to its feelings, forced to weigh the effect of every act they do upon the confidence which their party places in them. The only con- juncture which this system of “checks and balances” does not provide for is that of a ministry supported by a parliamentary majority pursuing a policy which was not presented to the people at the last general election, and of which the bulk of the people in fact disapprove.! This is a real danger, yet one which can seldom last long enough to work grave mischief, for the organs of public opinion are now so potent, and the opportunities for its expression so numerous, that the anger of a popular majority, perhaps even of a very strong minority, is almost certain to alarm both the ministry and the House, and to arrest them in their course.?
1 The recent leading case on this subject is that of Lord Beaconsfield’s Government from 1876 till 1880. It followed, during the years 1877 and 1878, a foreign policy which the bulk of the electors apparently disapproved (though some persons hold that there was not a disapproving majority in the country till 1879), but which Parliament sanctioned by large majorities. But the vehement popular agitation of 1876-78 seems to have had the effect of considerably modify- ing the policy of the ministry, though it could not wholly change its direction.
2 «The dangers arising from a party spirit in Parliament exceeding that of the nation, and of a selfishness in Parliament contradicting the true interest of
nvan
CHAP. XXV AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 281
The drawback to this system of exquisite equipoise is the liability of its equilibrium to be frequently disturbed, each dis- turbance involving either a change of government, with immense temporary inconvenience to the departments, or a general elec- tion, with immense expenditure of money and trouble in the country. It is a system whose successful working presupposes the existence of two great parties and no more, parties each strong enough to restrain the violence of the other, yet one of them steadily preponderant in any given House of Commons. Where a third, perhaps a fourth, party appears, the conditions are changed. ‘The scales of Parliament oscillate as the weight of this detached group is thrown on one side or the other; dis- solutions become more frequent, and even dissolutions may fail to restore stability. The recent history of the French Republic shows the difficulties of working a Chamber composed of groups : nor is the same source of difficulty unknown in England.
It is worth while to compare the form which a constitutional struggle takes under the Cabinet system and under that of America.
In England, if the executive ministry displeases the House of Commons, the House passes an adverse vote. The ministry have their choice to resign or to dissolve Parliament. If they resign, a new ministry is appointed from the party which has proved itself strongest in the House of Commons; and co-operation being restored between the legislature and the executive, public business proceeds. If, on the other hand, the ministry dissolve Parliament, a new Parliament is sent up which, if favourable to the existing cabinet, keeps them in office, if unfavourable, dismisses them forthwith.1_ Accord is in either case restored. Should the difference arise between the House of Lords and a the nation, are not great dangers in a country where the mind of the nation is steadily political, and where its control over its representatives is constant. A steady opposition to a formed public opinion is hardly possible in our House of Commons, so incessant is the national attention to politics, and so keen the fear in the mind of each member that he may lose his valued seat.” —Walter Bagehot, English Constitution, p. 241. These remarks of the most acute of English political writers are even more true now than they were in 1872.
1 Recent instances, dating from Mr. Disraeli’s resignation in December 1868, when the results of the election of that year were ascertained, have established the usage that a ministry quits office, without waiting to be turned out, when they know that the election has gone against them. Mr. Gladstone resigned forthwith after the General Elections of 1874 and 1886, Lord Beaconsfield after that of 1880. The usage, however, is not yet a rule of the Constitution though it seems on the way to become one.
282 ._ THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
ministry supported by the House of Commons, and the former persist in rejecting a bill which the Commons send up, a dissolution is the constitutional remedy ; and if the newly-elected House of Commons reasserts the view of its predecessor, the Lords, according to the now recognized constitutional practice, yield at once. Should they, however, still stand out, there remains the extreme expedient, threatened in 1832, but never yet resorted to, of a creation by the sovereign (i.e. the ministry) of new peers sufficient to turn the balance of votes in the Upper House. Practically the ultimate decision always rests with the people, that is to say, with the party which for the moment commands a majority of electoral votes. This method of cutting knots applies to all differences that can arise between executive and legislature. It is a swift and effective method ; in this swiftness and effectiveness lie its dangers as well as its merits.
In America a dispute between the President and Congress may arise over an executive act or over a bill. If over an executive act, an appointment or a treaty, one branch of Con- gress, the Senate, can check the President, that is, can prevent him from doing what he wishes, but cannot make him do what they wish. If over a bill which the President has returned to Con- gress unsigned, the two Houses can, by a two-thirds majority, pass it over his veto, and so end the quarrel; though the carry- ing out of the bill in its details must be left to him and his ministers, whose dislike of it may render them unwilling and therefore unsuitable agents. Should there not be a two-thirds majority, the bill drops; and however important the question may be, however essential to the country some prompt dealing with ‘it, either in the sense desired by the majority of Congress or in that preferred by the President, nothing can be done till the current term of Congress expires. The matter is then remitted to the people. If the President has still two more years in office, the people may signify their approval of his policy by electing a House in political agreement with him, or disapprove it by re-electing a hostile House. If the election of a new President coincides with that of the new House, the people have a second means provided of expressing their judgment. They may choose not only a House of the same or an opposite com- plexion to the last, but a President of the same or an opposite complexion. Anyhow they can now establish accord between
CHAP, XXV AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 283
one house of Congress and the executive. The Senate, however, may still remain opposed to the President, and may not be brought into harmony with him until a sufficient time has elapsed for the majority in it to be changed by the choice of new senators by the State legislatures. This is a slower method than that of Britain. It may fail in a crisis needing immediate action ; but it escapes the danger of a hurried and perhaps irrevocable decision. -
There exists between England and the United States a difference which is full of interest. In England the legislative branch has become supreme, and it is considered by Englishmen a merit in their system that the practical executive of the country is directly responsible to the House of Commons. In the United States, however, not only in the national government, but in every one of the States, the exactly opposite theory is proceeded upon— that the executive should be wholly independent of the legislative branch. Americans understand that this scheme involves a loss of power and efficiency, but they believe that it makes greatly for safety in a popular government. They expect the executive and the legislature to work together as well as they can, and public opinion does usually compel a degree of co-operation and efficiency which perhaps could not be expected theoretically. It is an interesting commentary on the tendencies of democratic government, that in America reliance is coming to be placed more and more, in the nation, in the State, and in the city, upon the veto of the Executive as a protection to the community against the legislative branch. Weak Executives frequently do harm, but a strong Executive has rarely abused popular con- fidence. On the other hand, instances where the Executive, by the use of his veto power, has arrested mischiefs due to the action of the legislature are by no means rare. This circumstance leads some Americans to believe that the day is not far distant when in England some sort of veto power, or other constitutional safe- guard, must be interposed to protect the people against their Parliament.?
1 It is of course possible that the people may elect at the same time a President belonging to one party and a House the majority whereof belongs to the other party. This happened in 1876, when, however, the presidential election was disputed. It is rendered possible by the fact that the President is elected on a different plan from the House, the smaller States having relatively more weight in a presidential election, and the presidential electors being now chosen, in each State by “general ticket,” not in districts.
2 See Note to Chapter XXXYV. at the end of this volume.
284 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT . PART I
While some bid England borrow from her daughter, other Americans conceive that the separation of the legislature from the executive has been carried too far in the United States, and suggest that it would be an improvement if the ministers of the President were permitted to appear in both Houses of Congress to answer questions, perhaps even to join in debate. I have no space to discuss the merits of this proposal, but must observe that it might lead to changes more extensive than its advocates seem to contemplate. The more the President’s ministers come into contact with Congress, the more difficult will it be to main- — tain the independence of Congress which he and they now possess. When not long ago the Norwegian Stor Thing forced the King of Sweden and Norway to consent to his ministers appearing in that legislature, the king, perceiving the import of the concession, resolved to choose in future ministers in accord with the party holding a majority in the Stor Thing. It is hard to say, when one begins to make alterations in an old house, how far one will be led on in rebuilding, and I doubt whether this change in the present American system, possibly in itself desirable, might not be found to involve a reconstruction large enough to put a new face upon several parts of that system.
In the history of the United States there have been four serious conflicts between the legislature and the executive. The first was that between President Jackson and Congress. It ended in Jackson’s favour, for he got his way ; but he prevailed because during the time when both Houses were against him, his opponents had not a two-thirds majority. In the latter part of the struggle the (re-elected) House was with him; and before he had quitted office his friends obtained a majority in the always- changing Senate. But his success was not so much the success of the executive office as of a particular President popular with the masses. The second contest, which was between President Tyler and both Houses of Congress, was a drawn battle, because the majority in the Houses fell short of two-thirds. In the third, between President Johnson and Congress, Congress prevailed ; the enemies of the President having, owing to the disfranchise- ment of most Southern States, an overpowering majority in both Houses, and by that majority carrying over his veto a series of Acts so peremptory that even his reluctance to obey them could not destroy, though it sometimes marred, their efficiency. It the fourth case, referred to in a previous chapter, the victory
pore
Ss : es
=a ciate b wey cow la : ‘
cuar, xxy AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 285
remained with the President, because the Congressional majority against him was slender. But a presidential victory is usually a negative victory. It consists not in his getting what he wants, but in his preventing Congress from getting what it wants.1 The practical result of the American arrangements thus comes to be that when one party possesses a large majority in Congress it can overpower the President, taking from him all but a few strictly reserved functions, such as those of pardoning, of making pro- motions in the army and navy, and of negotiating (not of con- cluding treaties, for these require the assent of the Senate) with foreign states. Where parties are pretty equally divided, i.e. when the majority is one way in the Senate, the other way in the House, or when there is only a small majority against the President in both Houses, the President is in so far free that new fetters cannot be laid upon him ; but he must move under those which previous legislation has imposed, and can take no step for which new legislation is needed.
It is another and a remarkable consequence of the absence of cabinet government in America, that there is also no party government in the European sense. Party government in France, Italy, and England means, that one set of men, united, or professing to be united, by holding one set of opinions, have obtained control of the whole machinery of government, and are working it in conformity with those opinions. Their majority in the country is represented by a majority in the legislature, and to this majority the ministry of necessity belongs. The ministry is the supreme committee of the party, and controls all the foreign as well as domestic affairs of the nation, because the majority is deemed to be the nation. It is otherwise in America. Men do, no doubt, talk of one party as being “in power,” meaning thereby the party to which the then President belongs. But they do so because that party enjoys the spoils of office, in which to so many politicians the value of power consists. They do so also because in the early days the party which prevailed in the legis- lative usually prevailed also in the executive department, and because the presidential election was, and still is, the main struggle which proclaimed the predominance of one or other party.”
1 In the famous case of President Jackson’s removal of the government deposits of money from the United States Bank, the President did accomplish his object. But this was a very exceptional case, because one which had remained within the executive discretion of the President since no statute had happened to provide for it.
2 The history of the Republic divides itself in the mind of most Americans
286 ' THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
But the Americans, when they speak of the administration party as the party in power, have, in borrowing an English phrase, applied it to utterly different facts. Their “party in power” need have no “power” beyond that of securing places for its adherents. It may be in a minority in one House of Congress, in which event it accomplishes nothing, but can at most merely arrest adverse legislation, or in a small minority in both Houses of Congress, in which event it must submit to see many things done which it dislikes. And if its enemies control the Senate, even its executive arm is paralysed. ‘Though party feeling has generally been stronger in America than in England, and even now covers a larger proportion of the voters, and enforces a stricter discipline, party government is distinctly weaker.
Those who lament the violence of European factions may fancy America an Elysium where legislation is just and reason- able, because free from bias, where pure and enlarged views of national interest override the selfish designs of politicians. It would be nearer the truth to say that the absence of party . control operates chiefly to make laws less consistent, and to pre- vent extended schemes of policy from being framed, because the chance of giving continuous effect to them is small. The natural history of the party system belongs to a later part of this book. I will only here observe that, while this system is complete and well compacted in every other respect, the Constitution has denied to it some of the means which European methods afford of acting through both the legislature and the executive at once on the direct and daily government of the country.
We are now in a position to sum up the practical results of the system which purports to separate Congress from the execu- tive, instead of uniting them as they are united under a cabinet government. I say “purports to separate,” because it is plain that the separation, significant as it is, is less complete than current language imports, or than the Fathers of the Constitu- tion would seem to have intended. The necessary coherence of the two powers baffled them. These results are five :—
The President and his ministers have no initiative in Congress,
into a succession of Presidents and Administrations, just as old-fashioned historians divided the history of England by the reigns of kings, a tolerable way of reckon- ing in the days of Edward the Third and Richard the Second, when the personal gifts of the sovereign were a chief factor in affairs, but absurd in the days of George the Fourth and William the Fourth.
7
(CHAP, XXV AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 287
little influence over Congress, except .what they can exert upon individual members, through the bestowal of patronage.
Congress has, together with unlimited powers of inquiry, imperfect powers of control over the administrative departments.
The nation does not always know how or where to fix re- sponsibility for misfeasance or neglect. The person and bodies concerned in making and executing the laws are so related to one another that each can generally shift the burden of blame on some one else, and no one acts under the full sense of direct accountability.
There is a loss of force by friction—i.e. part of the energy, force, and time of the men and bodies that make up the government is dissipated in struggles with one another. This belongs to all free governments, because all free governments rely upon checks. But the more checks, the more friction.
There is a risk that executive vigour and promptitude may — be found wanting at critical moments.
We may include these defects in one general expression. There is in the American government, considered as a whole, a want of unity. Its branches are unconnected ; their efforts are not directed to one aim, do not produce one harmonious result. The sailors, the helmsman, the engineer, do not seem to have one purpose or obey one will, so that instead of making steady way the vessel may pursue a devious or zigzag course, and sometimes merely turn round and round in the water. The more closely any one watches from year to year the history of free governments, and himself swims in the deep-eddying time current, the more does he feel that current’s force, so that human foresight and purpose seem to count for little, and ministers and parliaments to be swept along they know not whither by some overmastering fate or overruling providence. But this feeling is stronger in America than in Europe, because in America such powers as exist act with little concert and resign themselves to a conscious impotence. Clouds arise, blot out the sun overhead, and burst in a tempest; the tempest passes, and leaves the blue above bright as before, but at the same moment other clouds are already beginning to peer over the horizon. Parties are formed and dissolved, compromises are settled and assailed and violated,
288 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ; PART i
wars break out and are fought through and forgotten, new problems begin to show themselves, and the civil powers, Presi- dents, and Cabinets, and State governments, and Houses of Congress, seem to have as little to do with all these changes, as little ability to foresee or avert or resist them, as the farmer, who sees approaching the tornado which will uproot his crop, has power to stay its devastating course.
A President can do little, for he does not lead either Congress or the nation. Congress cannot guide or stimulate the President, nor replace him by a man fitter for the emergency. The Cabinet neither receive a policy from Congress nor give one to it. Each power in the state goes its own way, or wastes precious moments in discussing which way it sball go, and that which comes to pass seems to be a result not of the action of the legal organs of the state, but of some larger force which at one time uses their discord as its means, at another neglects them altogether. This at least is the impression which the history of the greatest problem and greatest struggle that America.has seen, the struggle of the slaveholders against the Free Soil and Union party, cul- minating in the war of the rebellion, makes upon one who look- ing back on its events sees them all as parts of one drama. The carefully devised machinery of the Constitution did little to solve that problem or avert that struggle. The nation asserted itself at last, but not till this machinery had failed to furnish a peace- ful means of trying the real strength of the parties, so as to give the victory to one or to settle a compromise between them.
Not wholly dissimilar was the course of events in the first years of the French Revolution. The Constitution framed by the National Assembly in 1791 so limited the functions and authority of each power in the state that no one person, no one body, was capable of leading either the nation or the legislature, or of framing and maintaining a constructive policy. Things were left to take their own course. The boat drifted to the rapids, and the rapids hurried her over the precipice.+
This want of unity is painfully felt in a crisis. When a sudden crisis comes upon a free state, the executive needs two things, a large command of money and powers in excess of those
1 This Constitution of 1791 was framed under the same idea of the need for separating the executive and legislative departments which prevailed at Philadel- phia in 1787. For want of a legitimate supreme power, power at last fell into the hands of the Committee of Public Safety, and afterwards of the Directory.
| OHAP, XXV AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 289
allowed at ordinary times. Under the European system the duty of meeting such a crisis is felt to devolve as much on the representative Chamber as on the ministers who are its agents. The Chamber is therefore at once appealed to for supplies, and for such legislation as the occasion demands. When these have been given, the ministry moves on with the weight of the people behind it ; and as it is accustomed to work at all times with the Chamber, and the Chamber with it, the piston plays smoothly and quickly in the cylinder. In America the President has at ordinary times little to do with Congress, while Congress is unaccustomed to deal with executive questions. Its machinery, and especially the absence of ministerial leaders and consequent want of organization, unfit it for promptly confronting practical troubles. It is apt to be sparing of supplies, and of that confi- dence which doubles the value of supplies. Jealousies of the executive, which are proper in quiet times and natural towards those with whom Congress has little direct intercourse, may now be perilous, yet how is Congress to trust persons not members of its own body nor directly amenable to its control ?.- When dangers thicken the only device may be the Roman one of a temporary dictatorship. Something like this happened in the War of Secession, for the powers then conferred upon President Lincoln, or exercised without congressional censure by him, were almost as much in excess of those enjoyed under the ordinary law as the authority of a Roman dictator exceeded that of a Roman consul.! Fortunately the habits of legality, which lie deep in the American as they did in the Roman people, re- asserted themselves after the war was over, as they were wont to do at Rome in her earlier and better days. When the squall had passed the ship righted, and she has pursued her subsequent course on as even a keel as before.
The defects of the tools are the glory of the workman. ‘The more completely self-acting is the machine, the smaller is the
1 There is a story that President Lincoln said to Salmon P. Chase, his secre- tary of the treasury, in the early days of the war: “These rebels, are violating the Constitution to destroy the Union. I will violate the Constitution if necessary to save the Union; and I suspect, Chase, that our Constitution is going to have arough time of it before we get done with this row.” Mr. Hay, however, the distinguished biographer of Lincoln, to whom I have applied for information, doubts the authenticity of the anecdote, as does also Mr. Robert T. Lincoln. President Lincoln usually argued that his use of extraordinary powers was pro-
vided for in the Constitution. See, however, the passage in his so-called Hodges Letter, quoted in a note to Chapter XXXIV.
VOL. I U
290 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
intelligence needed to work it; the more liable it is to derange- ment, so much greater must be the skill and care applied by one who tends it. The English Constitution, which we admire as a masterpiece of delicate equipoises and complicated mechanism, would anywhere but in England be full of difficulties and dangers. It stands and prospers in “virtue of the traditions that still live among English statesmen and the reverence that has ruled English citizens. It works by a body of understandings which no writer can formulate, and of habits which centuries have been needed to instil. So the American people have a practical aptitude for politics, a clearness of vision and capacity for self- control never equalled by any other nation. In 1861 they brushed aside their darling legalities, allowed the executive to exert novel powers, passed lightly laws whose constitutionality remains doubtful, raised an enormous army, and contracted a prodigious debt. Romans could not have been more energetic in their sense of civic duty, nor more trustful to their magistrates. When the emergency had passed away the torrent which had overspread the plain fell back at once into its safe and well-worn channel. The reign of legality returned ; and only four years after the power of the executive had reached its highest point in the hands of President Lincoln, it was reduced to its lowest point in those of President Johnson. Such a people can work any Constitution. The danger for them is that this reliance on their skill and their star may make them heedless of the faults of their political machinery, slow to devise improvements which are best applied in quiet times.
CHAPTER XXVI
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE FRAME OF NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
THE account which has been so far given of the working of the American Government has been necessarily an account rather of its mechanism than of its spirit. Its practical character, its tem- per and colour, so to speak, largely depend on the party system by which it is worked, and on what may be called the political habits of the people. These will be described in later chapters. Here, however, before quitting the study of the constitutional organs of government, it is well to sum up the criticisms we have been led to make, and to add a few remarks, for which no fitting place could be found in preceding chapters, on the general features of the national government.
I. No part of the Constitution cost its framers so much time and trouble as the method of choosing the -President. They saw the evils of a popular vote. They saw also the objections to placing in the hands of Congress the election of a person whose chief duty it was to hold Congress in check. The plan of having him selected by judicious persons, specially chosen by the people for that purpose, seemed to meet both difficulties, and was therefore recommended with confidence. The result has, however, so completely falsified these expectations that it is hard to comprehend how they came to be entertained. The presidential electors are mere cyphers, who vote, as a matter of course, for the candidate of the party which names them ; and the President is practically chosen by the people at large. The only importance which the elaborate machinery provided in the Constitution retains, is that it prevents a simple popular vote in which the majority of the nation should prevail, and makes the issue of the election turn on the voting in certain “pivotal”
States.
292 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
II. The choice of the President, by what is now practically a simultaneous popular vote, not only involves once in every four years a tremendous expenditure of energy, time, and money, but induces of necessity a crisis which, if it happens to coincide with any passion powerfully agitating the people, may be dangerous to the commonwealth. :
III. There is always a risk that the result of a presidential election may be doubtful or disputed on the ground of error, fraud, or violence. When such a case arises, the difficulty of finding an authority competent to deal with it, and likely to be trusted, is extreme. Moreover, the question may not be settled until the pre-existing executive has, by effluxion of time, ceased to have a right to the obedience of the citizens. The experience of the election of 1876 illustrates these dangers. Such a risk of interregna is incidental to all systems, monarchic or republican, which make the executive head elective, as witness the Romano- Germanic Empire of the Middle Ages, and the Papacy. But it is more serious where he is elected by the people than where, as in France or Switzerland, he is chosen by the Chambers.!
IV. The change of the higher executive officers, and of many of the lower executive officers also, which usually takes place once in four years, gives a jerk to the machinery, and causes a discon- | tinuity of policy, unless, of course, the President has served only one term, and is re-elected. Moreover, there is generally a loss either of responsibility or of efficiency in the executive chief magistrate during the last part of his term. An outgoing Presi- dent may possibly be a reckless President, because he has little to lose by misconduct, little to hope from good conduct. He may therefore abuse his patronage, or gratify his whims with impun- ity. But more often he is a weak President.? He has little influence with Congress, because his patronage will soon come to an end, little hold on the people, who are already speculating on
1 In Switzerland the Federal Council of seven are elected by the two Cham- bers, and then elect one of their own number to be their President, and therewith also President of the Confederation (Constit. of 1874, art. 98). In some British colonies it has been provided that, in case of the absence or death or incapacity of the Governor, the Chief Justice shall act as Governor. In India the senior member of Council acts in similar cases for the Viceroy.
2 A British House of Commons in the last few months before its impending dissolution usually presents the same alternations of recklessness (generally taking the form of electioneering bids to powerful sections of opinion in the country) and feebleness which shrinks from entering on any large scheme of policy, or giving any important decision. This was marked in the latter part of the session of 1885.
cH. xxvI REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 293
the policy of his successor. His secretary of state cannot treat boldly with foreign powers, who perceive that he has a diminished influence in the Senate, and know that the next secretary may have different views.
The above considerations suggest. the inquiry whether the United States, which no doubt needed a President in 1789 to typify the then created political unity of the nation, might not now dispense with one. This question, however, has never been raised in a practical form in America, where the people approve the office, though dissatisfied with the method of choice.!
The strength and worth of the office reside in its independence of Congress and direct responsibility to the people. Americans _ condemn any plan under which, as lately befell in France, the
legislature can drive a President from power and itself proceed to choose a new one.
V. The Vice-President’s office is ill-conceived. His only ordinary function is to act as Chairman of the Senate, but as he does not appoint the Committees of that House, and has not even a vote (except a casting vote) in it, this function is of little moment. If, however, the President dies, or becomes incapable of acting, or is removed from office, the Vice-President succeeds to the Presidency. What is the result? The place being in itself unimportant, the choice of a candidate for it excites little interest, and is chiefly used by the party managers as a means of conciliating a section of their party. It becomes what is called “a complimentary nomination.” The man elected Vice-President is therefore never a man in the front rank. But when the Presi- dent dies during his term of office, which has happened to four out of the seventeen Presidents, this second-class man steps into a great place for which he was never intended. Sometimes, as in the case of Mr. Arthur, he fills the place respectably. Some- times, as in that of Andrew Johnson, he throws the country into confusion.”
He is aut nullus aut Cesar.
VI. The defects in the structure and working of Congress, and in its relations to the executive, have been so fully dwelt on
1 The question of replacing the President by a ministerial council is rarely dis- cussed in America. It has recently been mooted in France.
2 Mr. James G. Blaine observes that a Vice-President having honour but no power is usually the malcontent centre of disappointed and discontented men, as the heir-presumptive to the throne is apt to be in monarchies.—Z'wenty Years in Congress, vol. ii. p. 57.
294 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
already that it is enough to refer summarily to them. They are—
The discontinuity of Congressional policy.
The want of adequate control over officials.
The want of opportunities for the executive to influence the
legislature.?
The want of any authority charged to secure the passing of
such legislation as the country needs.
The frequency of disputes between three co-ordinate powers,
the President, the Senate, and the House.
The maintenance of a continuous policy is a difficulty in all popular governments. In the United States it is specially so, because—
The executive headand his ministers are necessarily (unless when
a President is re-elected) changed once every four years.
One House of Congress 1 is changed every two years.
Neither House recognizes permanent leaders.
No accord need exist between Congress and the executive.
There is (as already explained) no such thing as a party in power, in the European sense of the term. The Americans use it to denote the party to which the President belongs. But this party may be in a minority in one or both Houses of Congress, in which case it cannot do anything which requires fresh legisla- tion,—may be in a minority in the Senate, in which case it can take no executive act of importance.
There is no true leadership in political actions because the most prominent man has no recognized party authority. Con- gress was not elected to support him. He cannot threaten dis- obedient followers with a dissolution of Parliament like an English prime minister. He has not even the French president’s right of dissolving the House with the consent of the Senate.
There is often no general and continuous cabinet policy, be- cause the cabinet has no authority over Congress, may perhaps have no influence with it.
1 It is remarked by Mr. Horace White (Fortnightly Review, 1879) that the quality of the President’s cabinet suffers by the exclusion of ministers from Con- gress, because if they had to hold their own and defend their master’s policy in the House, the President would be driven to select able men instead of, as has sometimes happened, his own personal friends. ‘This is true ; though Europeans may answer that under the English system it sometimes happens ‘that men are placed in great administrative office only because they are able speakers, and per-
sons of higher administrative gifts passed over because they have not a seat in Parliament or are unready in debate.
cH. xxviI REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 295
There is no general or continuous legislative policy, because the legislature, having no recognized leaders, and no one guiding committee, acts through a large number of committees, inde- pendent of one another, and seldom able to bring their measures to maturity. What continuity exists is due to the general acceptance of a few broad maxims, such as that of non-interven- tion in the affairs of the Old World, and to the fact that a large nation does not frequently or lightly change its views upon lead- ing principles. In minor matters of legislation and administration there is little settled policy. The Houses trifle with questions, take them up in one session and drop them the next, seem in- sensible to the duty of completing work once begun. It is no one’s business to press this duty on them.
There is no security that Congress will attend to such minor defects in the administrative system of the country as may need a statute to correct them. In Europe the daily experience of the administrative departments discloses small faults or omissions in the law which involve needless trouble to officials, needless cost . to the treasury, needless injustice to classes of the people. Some- times for their own sakes, sometimes from that desire to see things well done which is the life-breath of a good public servant, the permanent officials call the attention of their parliamentary chief, the minister, to the defective state of the law, and submit to him the draft of a bill to amend it. He brings in this bill, and if it involves no matter of political controversy (which it rarely does), he gets it passed.1 As an American mini- ster does not sit in Congress, and has no means of getting any- thing he proposes attended to there, it is a mere chance if such amending statutes as these are introduced or pass into law.
These defects are all reducible to two. There is an excessive friction in the American system, a waste of force in the strife of various bodies and persons created to check and balance one another. There is a want of executive unity, and therefore a possible want of executive vigour. Power is so much subdivided that it is hard at a given moment to concentrate it for prompt and effective action. In fact, this happens only when a distinct majority of the people are so clearly of one mind that the several
1 This remark applies rather to France, Germany, and Italy, than to England, because of late years the rules of the English House of Commons have enabled a single private member so to retard as usually to defeat any measure which the Government does not put forth its full strength to carry.
aia) ie ibe st o8 Bee ofan ~ i Ae eee
296 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
co-ordinate organs of government obey this majority, uniting their efforts to serve its will.
VII. The relations of the people to the legislature are far from perfect. These relations are in every free country so much the most refined and delicate, as well as so much the most im- portant part of the whole scheme and doctrine of government, that we must not expect to find perfection anywhere. But com- paring America with Great Britain from 1832 to 1885, for it is still too soon to judge the condition of things created by the Reform Acts of that year, the working of the representative system in America seems somewhat inferior.
There are four essentials to the excellence of a representative system :—
That the representatives shall be chosen from among the best men of the country, and, if possible, from its natural leaders.
That they shall be strictly and palpably responsible to their constituents for their speeches and votes.
That they shall have courage enough to resist a momentary impulse of their constituents which they think mischiev- ous, 2.¢. shall be representatives rather than mere delegates.
That they individually, and the Chamber they form, shall have a reflex action on the people, ze. that while they derive authority from the people, they shall also give the people the benefit of the experience they acquire in the Chamber, as well as of the superior knowledge and capacity they may be presumed to possess.
Americans declare, and no doubt correctly, that of these four requisites, the first, third, and fourth are not attained in their country. Congressmen are not chosen from among the best citizens. They mostly deem themselves mere delegates. They do not pretend to lead the people, being indeed seldom specially qualified to do so.
But one also learns in America that the second requisite, re- sponsibility, is not fully realized. This seems surprising in a democratic country, and indeed almost inconsistent with that conception of the representative as a delegate, which is supposed, perhaps erroneously, to be characteristic of democracies. Still the fact is there. One cause, on which'I have already dwelt, is to be found in the committee system. Another is the want of
oH. xxviI_ REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 297
organized leadership in Congress. An English member’s re- sponsibility usually takes the form of his being bound to support the leader of his party on all important divisions. In America, this obligation attaches only when the party has “gone into caucus,” and there resolved upon its course. Seeing that the member need not obey the leader, the leader cannot be held re- sponsible for the action of the rank and file. As a third cause we may note the fact that owing to the restricted competence of Congress many of the questions which chiefly interest the voter do not come before Congress at all, so that its proceedings are not followed with that close and keen attention which the debates and divisions of European Chambers excite.
One may say in general that the reciprocal action and reaction between the electors and Congress, what is commonly called the “touch” of the people with their agents, is not sufficiently close, quick, and delicate. Representatives ought to give light andleading to the people, just as the people give stimulus and momentum to their representatives. This incidental merit of the parliamentary system is among its greatest merits. But in America the action of the voter fails to tell upon Congress. He votes for a candidate of his own party, but he does not convey to that candidate an impulse towards the carrying of particular measures, because the candidate when in Congress will be practically unable to promote those measures, unless he happens to be placed on the committee to which they are referred. Hence the citizen, when he casts his ballot, can seldom feel that he is advancing any measure or policy, except the vague and general policy indicated in his party platform. He is voting for a party, but he does not know what the party will do, and for a man, but a man whom chance may deprive of the opportunity of advocating the measures he cares most for.
Conversely, Congress does not guide and illuminate its con- stituents. It is amorphous, and has little initiative. It does not focus the light of the nation, does not warm its imagination, does not dramatize principles in the deeds and characters of men.! This happens because, in ordinary times, it lacks great leaders,
1 As an illustration of the want of the dramatic element in Congress, I may mention that some at least of the parliamentary debating societies in the American colleges (colleges for women included) take for their model not either House of Congress but the British House of Commons, the students conducting their de- bates under the names of prominent members of that assembly. They say that they do this because Congress has no Ministry and no leaders of the Opposition.
298 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
n
and the most obvious cause why it lacks them, is its disconnection from the executive. As it is often devoid of such men, so neither does the country habitually come to it to look for them. In the old days, neither Hamilton, nor Jefferson, nor John Adams, in our own time, neither Stanton, nor Grant, nor Tilden, nor Cleve- land, ever sat in Congress. Lincoln sat for two years only, and owed little of his subsequent eminence to his career there.
VIII. The independence of the judiciary, due to its holding for life, has been a conspicuous merit of the Federal system, as compared with the popular election and short terms of judges in most of the States. Yet even the Federal judiciary is not secure from the attacks of the two other powers, if combined. For the legislature may by statute increase the number of Federal justices, increase it to any extent, since the Constitution leaves the number undetermined, and the President may appoint per- sons whom he knows to be actuated by a particular political bias, perhaps even prepared to decide specific questions in a particular sense. Thus he and Congress together may, if not afraid of popular displeasure, obtain such a judicial determination of any constitutional question as they join in desiring, even although that question has been heretofore differently decided by the Supreme court. The only safeguard is in the disapproval of the people.
It is worth remarking that the points in which the American frame of national government has proved least successful are those which are most distinctly artificial, i.e. those which are not the natural outgrowth of old institutions and well-formed habits, but devices consciously introduced to attain specific ends.1 The
1 See Chapter IV. ante, and Note thereto, in which it is shown that most of the provisions of the Federal Constitution which have worked well were drawn from the Constitutions of the several States.
This may seem to be another way of saying that nature, 7.¢. historical develop- ment, is wiser than the wisest men. Yet it must be remembered that what we call historical development is really the result of a great many small expedients in- vented by men during many generations for curing the particular evils in their government which from time to time had to be cured. The moral therefore is that a succession of small improvements, each made conformably to existing con- ditions and habits, is more likely to succeed than a large scheme, made all at once in what may be called the spirit of conscious experiment. The Federal Constitution has been generally supposed in Europe to have been such a scheme, and its success has encouraged other countries to attempt similar bold and large experiments. This is an error. The Constitution of the United States is almost as truly the matured result of long and gradual historical development as the English Constitution itself.
ay aod
cu. xxvr_ REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 299
election of the President and Vice-President by electors appointed ad hoc is such a device. The functions of the judiciary do not belong to this category; they are the natural outgrowth of common law doctrines and of the previous history of the colonies and States ; all that is novel in them, for it can hardly be called artificial, is the creation of Courts co-extensive with the sphere of the national government.
All the main features of American government may be de- duced from two principles. One is the sovereignty of the people, which expresses itself in the fact that the supreme law—the Constitution—is the direct utterance of their will, that they alone can amend it, that it prevails against every other law, that whatever powers it does not delegate are deemed to be reserved to it, that every power in the State draws its authority, whether directly, like the House of Representatives, or in the second degree, like the President and the Senate, or in the third degree, like the Federal judiciary, from the people, and is legally re- sponsible to the people, and not to any one of the other powers.
The second principle, itself a consequence of this first one, is the distrust of the various organs and agents of government. The States are carefully safeguarded against aggression by the central government. So are the individual citizens. Each organ of government, the executive, the legislature, the judiciary, is made a jealous observer and restrainer of the others. Since the people, being too numerous, cannot directly manage their affairs, but must commit them to agents, they have resolved to prevent abuses by trusting each agent as little as possible, and subjecting him to the oversight of other agents, who will harass and check him if he attempts to overstep his instructions.
Some one has said that the American Government and Con- stitution are based on the theology of Calvin and the philosophy of Hobbes. This at least is true, that there is a hearty Puritan- ism in the view of hufman nature which pervades the instrument of 1787. It is the work of men who believed in original sin, and were resolved to leave open for transgressors no door which they could possibly shut.1 Compare this spirit with the enthusiastic optimism of the Frenchmen of 1789. It is not merely a difference of race temperaments ; it is a difference of fundamental ideas.
With the spirit of Puritanism there is blent a double portion
1 “That power might be abused,” says Marshall in his Life of Washington, “ was deemed a conclusive reason why it should not be conferred.”
|
800 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
of the spirit of legalism. Not only is there no reliance on ethical forces to help the government to work: there is an elaborate machinery of law to preserve the equilibrium of each of its organs. The aim of the Constitution seems to be not so much to attain great common ends by securing a good govern- ment as to avert the evils which will flow, not merely from a bad government, but from any government strong enough to threaten the pre-existing communities or the individual citizen.
The spirit of 1787 was an English spirit, and therefore a conservative spirit, tinged, no doubt, by the hatred to tyranny developed in the revolutionary struggle, tinged also by the nascent dislike to inequality, but in the main an English spirit, which desired to walk in the old paths of precedent, which thought of government as a means of maintaining order and securing to every one his rights, rather than as a great ideal power, capable of guiding and developing a nation’s life. And thus, though the Constitution of 1789 represented a great ad- vance on the still oligarchic system of contemporary England, it was yet, if we regard simply its legal provisions, the least democratic of democracies. Had the points which it left un- determined been dealt with in an aristocratic spirit, had the legislation of Congress and of the several States taken an aristo- cratic turn, it might have grown into an aristocratic system.! The democratic character which it now possesses is largely the result of subsequent events, which have changed the conditions under which it had to work, and have delivered its development into the hands of that passion for equality which has become a powerful factor in the modern world everywhere.
He who should desire to draw an indictment against the American scheme of government might make it a long one, and might for every count in it cite high American authority and adduce evidence from American history. Yet a European reader would greatly err were he to conclude‘that this scheme of government is a failure, or is, indeed, for the purposes of the country, inferior to the political system of any of the great nations of the Old World.
All governments are faulty; and an equally minute analysis of the constitutions of England, or France, or Germany would
1 The point most vital for determining the character of Congress, viz. the qualification of the electors, was left to the States. They have determined it by establishing manhood suffrage.
oH. xxvI REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 301
ee
disclose mischiefs as serious, relatively to the problems with which those states have to deal, as those we have noted in the American system. To any one familiar with the practical work- ing of free governments it is a standing wonder that they work at all. The first impulse of mankind is to follow and obey ; servitude rather than freedom is their natural state. With free- dom, when it emerges among the more progressive races, there come dissension and faction ; and it takes many centuries to form those habits of compromise, that love of order, and that respect for public opinion which make democracy tolerable. What keeps a free government going is the good sense and patriotism of the people, or of the guiding class, embodied in usages and traditions which it is hard to describe, but which find, in moments of diffi- culty, remedies for the inevitable faults of the system. Now, this good sense and that power of subordinating sectional to national interests which we call patriotism, exist in higher measure in America than in any of the great states of Europe. And the United States, more than any other country, are governed by public opinion, that is to say, by the general sentiment of the mass of the nation, which all the organs of the national govern- ment and of the State governments look to and obey.
A philosopher from Jupiter or Saturn who should examine the constitution of England or that of America would probably pronounce that such a body of complicated devices, full of oppor- tunities for conflict and deadlock, could not work at all. Many of those who examined the American constitution when it was launched did point to a multitude of difficulties, and confidently predicted its failure. Still more confidently did the European enemies of free government declare in the crisis of the War of Secession that “the republican bubble had burst.” Some of these censures were well grounded, though there were also defects which had escaped criticism, and were first disclosed by experience. But the Constitution has lived on in spite of all defects, and seems stronger now than at any previous epoch.
Every Constitution, like every man, has “the defects of its good qualities.” If a nation desires perfect stability it must put up with a certain slowness and cumbrousness; it must face the possibility of a want of action where action is called for. If, on the other hand, it seeks to obtain executive speed and vigour by
1 The nature of public opinion and the way in which it governs are discussed in Part IV.
302 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
a complete concentration of power, it must run the risk that power will be abused and irrevocable steps too hastily taken. Those faults on which I have laid stress, the waste of power by friction, the want of unity and vigour in the conduct of affairs by executive and legislature, are the price which the Americans pay for the autonomy of their States, and for the permanence of the equilibrium among the various branches of their government. They pay this price willingly, because these defects are far less dangerous to the body politic than they would be in a European country. Take for instance the shortcomings of Congress as a legislative authority. Every European country is surrounded by difficulties which legislation must deal with, and that promptly. But in America, where those relics of medizval privilege and injustice that still cumber most parts of the Old World either never existed, or were long ago abolished, where all the conditions of material prosperity exist in ample measure, and the development of material resources occupies men’s minds, where nearly all social reforms lie within the sphere of State action,—in America there is less need and less desire than in Europe for a perennial stream of federal legislation. People are contented if things go on fairly well as they are. Political philosophers, or philanthropists, perceive some improvements which federal statutes might effect, but the mass of the nation does not complain. ‘The barrenness of session after session is no such crying evil as the less conspicuous barrenness deplored by reformers in England.
“In matters of government,” says Judge Cooley,! “ America has become the leader and the example for all enlightened nations. England and France alike look across the ocean for lessons which may form and guide their people. Italy and Spain follow more distantly ; and the liberty-loving people of every country take courage from American freedom, and find augury of better days for themselves from American prosperity. But America is not so much an example in her liberty as in the covenanted and enduring securities which are intended to prevent liberty degenerating into licence, and to establish a feeling of trust and repose under a beneficent government, whose excellence, so obvious in its freedom, is still more conspicuous in its careful provision for permanence and stability.”
Every European state has to fear not only the rivalry but
1 Address to the South Carolina Bar Association, Dec. 1886.
Dy eae.
oH, xxvI REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 303
the aggression of its neighbours. Even Britain, so long safe in her insular home, has lost some of her security by the growth of steam navies, and has in her Indian and colonial possessions given pledges to Fortune all over the globe. She, like the Powers of the European Continent, must maintain her system of government in full efficiency for war as well as for peace, and cannot afford to let her armaments decline, her finances become disordered, the vigour of her executive authority be impaired, sources of internal discord continue to prey upon her vitals. But America lives in a world of her own, ipsa suis pollens opibus, mihil indiga nostri. Safe from attack, safe even from menace, she hears from afar the warring cries of European races and faiths, as the gods of Epicurus listened to the murmurs of the unhappy earth spread out beneath their golden dwellings,
‘«Sejuncta a rebus nostris semotaque longe.”
Had Canada or Mexico grown to be a great power, had France not sold Louisiana, or had England, rooted on the American continent, become a military despotism, the United States could not indulge the easy optimism which makes them tolerate the faults of their government. As it is, that which might prove to a European state a mortal disease is here nothing worse than a teasing ailment. Since the War of Secession ended, no serious danger has arisen either from within or from without to alarm transatlantic statesmen. Social convulsions from within, war- like assaults from without, seem now as unlikely to try the fabric of the American Constitution, as an earthquake to rend the walls of the Capitol. This is why the Americans submit, not merely patiently but hopefully, to the defects of their government. The vessel may not be any better built, or found, or rigged than are those which carry the fortunes of the great nations of Europe. She is certainly not better navigated. But for the present at least—it may not always be so—she sails upon a summer sea.
It must never be forgotten that the main object which the framers of the Constitution set before themselves has been achieved. When Siéyes was asked what he had done during the Reign of Terror, he answered, “I lived.” The Constitution as a whole has stood and stands unshaken. The scales of power have continued to hang fairly even. The President has not corrupted and enslaved Congress : Congress has not paralysed
304 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
and cowed the President. The legislative may have gained somewhat on the executive department; yet were George Washington to return to earth, he might be as great and useful a President as he was a century ago. Neither the legislature nor the executive has for a moment threatened the liberties of the people. The States have not broken up the Union, and the Union has not absorbed the States. No wonder that the Americans are proud of an instrument under which this great result has been attained, which has passed unscathed through the furnace of civil war, which has been found capable of embracing a body of commonwealths three times as numerous, and with twenty-fold the population of the original States, which has cultivated the political intelligence of the masses to a point reached in no other country, which has fostered and been found compatible with a larger measure of local self-govern- ment than has existed elsewhere. Nor is it the least of its merits to have made itself beloved. Objections may be taken to particular features, and these objections point, as most American thinkers are agreed, to practical improvements which would preserve the excellences and remove some of the incon- veniences. But reverence for the Constitution has become so potent a conservative influence, that no proposal of fundamental change seems likely to be entertained. And this reverence is itself one of the most wholesome and hopeful elements in the character of the American people.
CHAPTER XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM
HAVING examined the several branches of the National government and the manner in which they work together, we may now proceed to
'- examine the American Commonwealth as a Federation of States.
The present chapter is intended to state concisely the main features which distinguish the Federal system, and from which it derives its peculiar character. ‘Three other chapters will describe its practical working, and summarize the criticisms that may be passed upon it.
The contests in the Convention of 1787 over the framing of the Constitution, and in the country over its adoption, turned upon two points: the extent to which the several States should be recognized as independent and separate factors in the con- struction of the National government, and the quantity and nature of the powers which should be withdrawn from the States to be vested in that government. It has been well remarked that “the first of these, the definition of the structural powers, gave more trouble at the time than the second, because the line of partition between the powers of the States and the Federal government had been already fixed by the whole experience of the country.” } But since 1791 there has been practically no dispute as to the former point, and little as to the propriety of the provisions which define the latter. On the interpretation of these provisions there has, of course, been endless debate, some deeming the Constitution to have taken more from the States, some less ; while still warmer controversies have raged as to the matters which the instrument does not expressly deal with, and particu- larly whether the States retain their sovereignty, and with it the right of nullifying or refusing to be bound by certain acts of the
1 T quote from an acute and concise essay on this subject by Mr. Richard M. Venable of Baltimore, entitled ‘‘The Partition of Powers between the Federal and State Governments,” being a paper read at the 1885 meeting of the American Bar Association.
VOL. i x
306 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT parry
national government, and in the last resort of withdrawing from _ the Union. As these latter questions (nullification and secession) have now been settled by the Civil War, we may say that in the America of .to-day there exists a general agreement—
That every State on entering the Union finally renounced its sovereignty, and is now for ever subject to the Federal authority as defined by the Constitution.
That the functions of the States as factors of the national government are satisfactory, i.e. sufficiently secure its strength and the dignity of these communities.
That the delimitation of powers between the national govern- ment and the States, contained in the Constitution, is convenient, and needs no fundamental alteration.
The ground which we have to tread during the remainder of this chapter is therefore no longer controversial ground, but that of well-established law and practice.”
J. The distribution of powers between the National and the State governments is effected in two ways—Positively, by confer- ring certain powers on the National government ; Negatively, by imposing certain restrictions on the States. It would have been superfluous to confer any powers on the States, because they retain all powers not actually taken from them. <A lawyer may think that it was equally unnecessary and, so to speak, inartistic, to lay any prohibitions on the National government, because it could ex hypothesi exercise no powers not expressly granted. However, the anxiety of the States to fetter the master they were giving themselves caused the introduction of provisions qualifying the grant of express powers, and interdicting the National government from various kinds of action on which it might otherwise have been tempted to enter.* The matter is
1 The view that the power of Congress to legislate might properly be extended,
by a constitutional amendment, to such a subject as marriage and divorce, is of course compatible with an acquiescence in the general scheme of delimitation of powers,
2 A remarkably clear view of the limits of Federal and State authority may be found in the treatise of Mr. C. 8. Patterson (published since this chapter was written), Federal Restraints on State Action: Philadelphia, 1888.
3 Judge Cooley observes to me, ‘The prohibitions imposed by the Federal Constitution on the exercise of power by the general government were not, for the most part, to prevent its encroaching on the powers left with the States, but to preclude tyrannical exercise of powers which were unquestionably given to the . Federal government. ‘Thus Congress was forbidden to pass any bill of attainder ; this was to prevent its dealing with Federal offences by legislative conviction and sentence. It was forbidden to pass ex post facto laws, and this undoubtedly is a
CHAP. XXVII_ THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 307
further complicated by the fact that the grant of power to the National government is not in all cases an exclusive grant: i.e. there are matters which both, or either, the States and the National government may deal with. “The mere grant of a power to Congress does not of itself, in most cases, imply a pro- hibition upon the States to exercise the like power. . . . It is not the mere existence of the National power, but its exercise, which is incompatible with the exercise of the same power by the States.” Thus we may distinguish the following classes of governmental powers :—
Powers vested in the National government alone.
Powers vested in the States alohe.
Powers exercisable by either the National government or the
States.
Powers forbidden to the National government.
Powers forbidden to the State governments.
It might be thought that the two latter classes are super- fluous, because whatever is forbidden to the National government is permitted to the States, and conversely, whatever is forbidden to the States is permitted to the National government. But this is not so. For instance, Congress can grant no title of nobility (Art. i. § 9). But neither can a State do so (Art. i. § 10). The National government cannot take private property for public use without just compensation (Amendment v.) Apparently neither can any State do so (Amendment xiv. as interpreted in several cases). So no State can pass any law impairing the obligation of a contract (Art. i. § 10). But the National government, although not subject to a similar direct prohibition, has received no general power to legislate as regards ordinary contracts, and might therefore in some cases find itself equally unable to pass a law which a State legislature, though for a different reason, could not pass.? So no State can pass any ex post facto law. Neither can Congress.
What the Constitution has done—and this is to Englishmen one of its most singular features—is not to cut in half the
limitation upon power granted ; for with the same complete power in respect to offences against the general government which a sovereignty possesses, it might have passed such laws if not prohibited.”
1 Cooley, Principles, p. 35; cf. Sturges v. Crowninshield, 4 Wheat. 122.
2 Of course Congress can legislate regarding some contracts, and can impair their obligation. It has power to regulate commerce, it can pass bankrupt laws, it can make paper money legal tender.
308 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
totality of governmental functions and powers, giving part to the national government and leaving all the rest. to the States, but to divide up this totality of authority into a number of parts which do not exhaust the whole, but leave a residuum of powers neither granted to the Union nor continued to the States. but reserved to the people, who, however, can put them in force only by the difficult process of amending the Constitution. In other words, there are things in America which there exists no organized and permanent authority capable of legally doing, not a State, because it is expressly forbidden, not the national government, because it either has not received the competence or has been expressly forbidden. Suppose, for instance, that there should arise a wish to pass for California such a measure as the Irish Land Act passed by the British Parliament in 1881, or the Irish Land Act passed by that body in 1887. Neither the State legislature of California, nor the people of California assembled in a constitutional convention, could pass such a measure, because it would violate the obligation of contracts, and thereby transgress Art i. § 10 of the Federal Constitution. Whether the Federal Congress could pass such a measure is at least extremely doubtful, because the Constitution, though it has imposed no prohibition such as that which restricts a State, does not seem to have conferred on Congress the right of legislating on such a matter at all.’ If, therefore, an absolute and overwhelming necessity for the enactment of such a measure should arise, the safer if not the only course would be to amend the Federal Constitution, either by striking out the prohibition on the States or by conferring the requisite power on Congress, a process which would probably occupy more than a year, and which requires the concurrence of two- thirds of both Houses of Congress and of three-fourths of the thirty-eight States.
II. The powers vested in the National government alone are such as relate to the conduct of the foreign relations of the country and to such common national purposes as the army and navy, internal commerce, currency, weights and measures, and the post-office, with provisions for the management of the
1 Jt may of course be suggested that in case of urgent public necessity, such as the existence of war or insurrection, Congress might extinguish debts either generally or in a particular district. No such legislative power seems, however, to have been exerted or declared by the courts to exist, unless the principles of the last Legal Tender decision can be thought to reach so far.
OHAP. XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 3809
machinery, legislative, executive, and judicial, charged with these purposes.!
~ The powers which remain vested in the States alone are all the other ordinary powers of internal government, such as legis- lation on private law, civil and criminal, the maintenance of law and order, the creation of local institutions, the provision for education and the relief of the poor, together with taxation for the above purposes.
III. The powers which are exercisable concurrently by the National government and by the States are—
Powers of legislation on some specified subjects, such as bankruptcy and certain commercial matters (¢.g. pilot laws and harbour regulations), but so that State legislation shall take effect only in the absence of Federal legislation.
Powers of taxation, direct or indirect, but so that neither Congress nor a State shall tax exports from any State, and so that neither any State shall, except with the consent of Con- gress, tax any corporation or other agency created for Federal purposes or any act done under Federal authority, nor the National government tax any State or its agencies or property.
Judicial powers in certain classes of cases where Congress might have legislated, but has not, or where a party to a suit has a choice to proceed either in a Federal or a State court.
Powers of determining matters relating to the election of representatives and senators (but if Congress determines, the State law gives way).
IV. The prohibitions imposed on the National government are set forth in Art. i. § 9, and in the first ten amendments. The most important are—
Writ of habeas corpus may not be suspended, nor bill of attainder or ex post facto law passed.”
No commercial preference shall be given to one State over another.
No title of nobility shall be granted.
No law shall be passed establishing or prohibiting any religion, or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press, or of public meeting, or of bearing arms.
1 See Art. i. § 8, Art. ii. § 2, Art. iii. § 2, Art. iv. §§ 3 and 4; Amendments xiii. xiv. xv. of the Constitution. 2 Limitations of a nature generally similar to these are now pretty frequent
in recent European Constitutions, e.g. in that of Belgium. The term ea post facto law is deemed to refer to criminal laws only..
310 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ‘PART I
No religious test shall be required as a qualification for any — office under the United States.
No person shall be tried for a capital crime unless on the pre- sentment of a grand jury, or be subjected to a second capital trial for the same offence, or be compelled to be a witness against himself, or be tried otherwise than by a jury of his State and district.
No common law action shall be decided except by a jury where the value in dispute exceeds $20, and no fact determined by a jury shall be re-examined otherwise than by the rules of the common law.!
V. The prohibitions imposed on the States are contained in Art. i. § 10, and in the three last amendments. They are intended to secure the National government against attempts by the States to trespass on its domain, and to protect individuals against oppressive legislation.
No State shall make any treaty or alliance: coin money: make anything but gold and silver coin a legal tender: pass any bill of attainder, ea post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts: grant any titles of nobility.
No State shall without the consent of Congress—Lay duties on exports or imports (the produce of such, if laid, going to the national treasury): keep troops or ships of war in peace time: enter into an agreement with another State or with any foreign power : engage in war, unless actually invaded or in imminent danger.
Every State must—Give credit to the records and judicial proceedings of every other State: extend the privileges and im- munities of citizens to the citizens of other States: deliver up fugitives from justice to the State entitled to claim them.
No State shall have any but a republican form of govern- ment.
No State shall maintain slavery: abridge the privileges of any citizen of the United States, or deny to him the right of voting, in respect of race, colour, or previous servitude: deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law: deny to any person the equal protection of the laws.
Note that this list contains no prohibition to a State to do any of the following things :—Kstablish a particular form of
* Chiefly intended to prevent the methods of courts of equity from being applied in the Federal courts as against the findings of a jury.
CHAP, XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 311
religion: endow a particular form of religion, or educational or charitable establishments connected therewith: abolish trial by jury in criminal or civil cases: suppress the freedom of speaking, writing, and meeting (provided that this be done equally as between different classes of citizens, and provided also that it be not done to such an extent as to amount to a deprivation of liberty without due process of law): limit the electoral franchise to any extent: extend the electoral franchise to women, minors, aliens.
These omissions are significant. They show that the framers of the Constitution had no wish to produce uniformity among the States in government or institutions, and little care to protect the citizens against abuses of State power.! Their chief aim was to secure the National government against encroachments on the part of the States, and to prevent causes of quarrel both between the central and State authorities and between the several States. The result has, on the whole, justified their action. So far from abusing their power of making themselves unlike one another, the States have tended to be too uniform, and have made fewer experiments in institutions than one could wish.
VI. The powers vested in each State are all of them original and inherent powers, which belonged to the State before it entered the Union.” Hence they are prima facie unlimited, and if a question arises as to any particular power, it is presumed to be enjoyed by the State, unless it can be shown to have been taken away by the Federal Constitution; or, in other words, a State is not deemed to be subject to any restriction which the Constitution has not distinctly imposed.
The powers granted to the National government are delegated
owers, enumerated in and defined by the instrument which has created the Union. Hence the rule that when a question arises whether the national government possesses a particular power, proof must be given that the power was positively granted. If not granted, it is not possessed, because the Union is an artificial 1 The fourteenth and fifteenth amendments are in this respect a novelty. The only restrictions of this kind to be found in the instrument of 1789 are those relating to contracts and ex post facto laws. Of course the rights of State citizens were adequately protected already by the provisions of State constitutions. 2 When I speak of a State, I do not mean merely a State legislature, because that body is usually restrained by the State constitution from exercising the
totality of the powers which the State possesses, but include the people of the State assembled in convention, or voting on a State constitution or on an amend-
ment proposed thereto.
312 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
creation, whose government can have nothing but what the people have by the Constitution conferred. The presumption is therefore against the national government in such a case, just as it is for the State in a like case.?
VII. The authority of the National government over the citizens of every State is direct and immediate, not exerted through the State organization, and not requiring the co-opera- tion of the State government. For most purposes the National government ignores the States; and it treats the citizens of different States as being simply its own citizens, equally bound by its laws. The Federal courts, revenue officers, and post-office draw no help from any State officials, but depend directly on — Washington. Hence, too, of course, there is no local self- government in Federal matters. No Federal official is elected by the people of any local area. Local government is purely a State affair.
On the other hand, the State in no wise depends on the National government for its organization or its effective working. It is the creation of its own inhabitants. They have given it its constitution. They administer its government. It goes on its own way, touching the national government at but few points. That the two should touch at the fewest possible points was the intent of those who framed the Federal Constitution, for they saw that the less contact, the less danger of collision. Their aim was to keep the two mechanisms as distinct and independent of each other as was compatible with the still higher need of subordinat- ing, for national purposes, the State to the Central government.
VIII. It is a further consequence of this principle that the National government has but little to do with the States as States. Its relations are with their citizens, who are also its citizens, rather than with them as ruling commonwealths. In the following points, however, the Constitution does require certain services of the States :—
1 Congress must not attempt to interfere with the so-called “police power” of the States within their own limits. So when a statute of Congress had made it punishable to sell certain illuminating fluids inflammable at less than a certain specified temperature, it was held that this statute could not operate within a State, but only in the District of Columbia and the Territories, and a person
convicted under it in Detroit was discharged (United States v. De Witt, 9 Wall. 41),
2 For a comparison of the Federal system of the United States with the Federal system of the two ancient English Universities, see note to this chapter printed at the end of the volume.
- CHAP, XXVIT THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 313
It requires each State government to direct the choice of, and accredit to the seat of the national government, two senators and so many representatives as the State is entitled to send.
It requires similarly that presidential electors be chosen, meet, and vote in the States, and that their votes be transmitted to the national capital.
It requires each State to organize and arm its militia, which, when duly summoned for active service, are placed under the command of the President.
It requires each State to maintain a republican form of government.!
Note in particular that the National government does not, as in some other federations—
Call upon the States, as commonwealths, to contribute funds to its support :
Issue (save in so far as may be needed in order to secure a re- publican form of government) administrative orders to the States, directing their authorities to carry out its laws or commands :
Require the States to submit their laws to it, and veto such as it disapproves.
The first two things it is not necessary for the National government to do, because it levies its taxes directly by its own collectors, and enforces its laws, commands, and judicial decrees _by the hands of its own servants. The last can be dispensed with because the State laws are ipso jure invalid, if they conflict with the Constitution or any treaty or law duly made under it (Art. vi. § 2), while if they do not so conflict they are valid whether the National government should approve of them or not.
Neither does the National government allow its structure to be dependent on the action of the States. ‘“'To make it impos- sible for a State or group of States to jeopard by inaction or hostile action the existence of the central government,” ? was a prime object with the men of 1787, and has greatly contributed to the solidity of the fabric they reared. The de facto secession of eleven States in 1860-61 interfered with the regular legal conduct neither of the presidential election of 1864 nor of the congressional elections from 1861 to 1865. Those States were not
1 Conversely, the National government may be required by any State to afford protection against invasion and against domestic violence. 2 Venable, ut supra.
314 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
represented in Congress ; but Congress.itself went on diminished in numbers yet with its full legal powers, as the British Parlia- ment would go on though all the peers and representatives from Scotland might be absent.
IX. A State is, within its proper sphere, just as legally supreme, just as well entitled to give effect to its own will, as is the National government within its sphere; and for the same reason. All authority flows from the people. The people have given part of their supreme authority to the Central, part to the State governments. Both hold by the same title, and therefore the National government, although superior wherever there is a concurrence of powers, has no more right to trespass upon the domain of a State than a State has upon the domain of Federal action. ‘When a particular power,” says Judge Cooley, “is found to belong to the States, they are entitled to the same com- plete independence in its exercise as is the National government in wielding its own authority.” That the course which a State is following is pernicious, that its motives are bad and its senti- ments disloyal to the Union, makes no difference until or unless it infringes on the sphere of Federal authority. It may be thought that however distinctly this may have been laid down as a matter of theory, in practice the State will not obtain the same justice as the National government, because the court which decides points of law in dispute between the two is in the last resort a Federal court, and therefore biassed in favour of the Federal government. In practice, however, little or no unfair- ness has arisen from this cause! The Supreme court may, as happened for twenty years before the War of Secession, be chiefly composed of States’ Rights men. In any case the court cannot stray far from the path which previous decisions have marked out.
X. There are several remarkable omissions in the constitution of the American federation. :
One is that there is no grant of power to the National govern- ment to coerce a recalcitrant or rebellious State. Another is
1 “Whatever fluctuations may be seen in the history of public opinion during the period of our national existence, we think it will be found that the Supreme court, so far as its functions required, has always held with a steady and even hand the balance between State and Federal power, and we trust that such may continue to be the history of its relation to that subject so long as it shall have duties to perform which demand of it a construction of the Constitution,’ — Judgment of the Supreme court in The Slaughter House Cases, 16 Wall, 82.
OHAP, XXVII ‘THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 315
that nothing is said as to the right of secession. Any one can understand why this right should not have been granted. But neither is it mentioned to be negatived.
There is no abstract or theoretic declaration regarding the nature of the federation and its government, nothing as to the ultimate supremacy of the central authority outside the particular sphere allotted to it, nothing as to the so-called sovereign rights of the States. . As if with a prescience of the dangers to follow, the wise men of 1787 resolved to give no opening for abstract inquiry and metaphysical dialectic. But in vain. The human mind is not to be so restrained. If the New Testament had consisted of no other writings than the Gospel of St. Matthew and the Epistle of St. James, there would have been scarcely the less a crop of speculative theology. The drily legal and prac- tical character of the Constitution did not prevent the growth of a mass of subtle and, so to speak, scholastic metaphysics regard- ing the nature of the government it created. ‘The inextricable knots which American lawyers ‘and publicists went on tying, down till 1861, were cut by the sword of the North in the Civil War, and need concern us no longer. It is now admitted that the Union is not a mere compact between commonwealths, dis- soluble at pleasure, but an instrument of perpetual efficacy,!
1 This view received judicial sanction in the famous case of Texas v. White (7 Wall. 700), decided by the Supreme court after the war. It is there said by Chief- Justice Chase, ‘‘ The Union of the States never was a purely artificial and arbi- trary relation. . . . It received definite form and character and sanction by the Articles of Confederation. By these the Union was solemnly declared to be ‘perpetual.’ And where these articles were found to be inadequate to the exigencies of the country, the Constitution was ordained ‘to form a more perfect Union.’ It is difficult to convey the idea of indissoluble unity more clearly than ‘by these words. What can be indissoluble if a perpetual union, made more per- fect, isnot? But the perpetuity and indissolubility of the Union by no means implies the loss of distinct and individual existence, or of the right of self-govern- ment by the States, . . . It may be not unreasonably said that the preservation of the States and the maintenance of their governments are as much within the design and care of the Constitution as the preservation of the Union and the maintenance of the national government. ‘The Constitution, in all its provisions, looks to an indestructible Union composed of indestructible States. When, therefore, Texas became one of the United States she entered into an indissoluble relation. . . . There was no place for reconsideration or revocation except through revolution or through consent of the States. Considered therefore as transactions under the Constitution, the ordinance of secession adopted by the Convention, and ratified by ¢ majority of the citizens of Texas, was absolutely null and utterly without operation in law. The obligations of the State as a member of the Union, and of every citizen of the State as a citizen of the United States, remained perfect and unimpaired.” The State did not cease to be a State,
316 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
emanating from the whole people, and alterable by them only in the manner which its own terms prescribe. It is “an inde- structible Union of indestructible States.”
It follows from the recognition of the indestructibility of the Union that there must somewhere exist a force capable of pre- serving it. The National government is now admitted to be such a force. “It can exercise all powers essential to preserve and protect its own existence and that of the States, and the consti- tutional relation of the States to itself, and to one another.” 1
“May it not,” some one will ask, “abuse these powers, abuse them so as to extinguish the States themselves, and turn the federation into a unified government. What is there but the Federal judiciary to prevent this catastrophe? and the Federal judiciary has only moral and not also physical force at its command.”
No doubt it may, but not until public opinion supports it in so doing—that is to say, not until the mass of the nation which now maintains, because it values, the Federal system, is possessed by a desire to overthrow that system. Such a desire may express itself in proper legal form by carrying amendments to the Con- stitution which will entirely change the nature of the govern- ment. Or if the minority be numerous enough to prevent, the
nor her citizens to be citizens of the Union. See also the cases of White v. Hart (13 Wall. 646) and Keith v. Clark (97 U.S. 451).
As respects the argument that the Union established by the Constitution of 1789 must be perpetual, because it is declared to have been designed to make a previous perpetual Union more perfect, it may be remarked, as matter of history, that this previous Union (that resting on the Articles of Confederation) had not proved perpetual, but was in fact put an end to by the acceptance in 1788 of the new Constitution by the nine States who first ratified that instrument. After that ratification the Confederation was dead, and the States of North Carolina and Rhode Island, which for some months refused to come into the new Union, were clearly out of the old one, and stood alone in the world. May it not then be said that those who destroyed a Union purporting to be perpetual were thereafter estopped from holding it to have been perpetual, and from founding on the word ‘perpetual’ an argument against those who tried to upset the new Union in 1861, as the old one had been upset in 1788. The answer to this way of putting the point seems to be to admit that the proceedings of 1788 were in fact revolutionary. In ratifying their new Constitution in that year, the nine States broke through and flung away their previous compact which purported to have been made for ever. But they did so for the sake of forming a better and more enduring compact, and their extra-legal action was amply justified by the necessities of the case.
An elaborate discussion of the legal relation of the States to the Union will be found in the learned treatise of Mr. Hurd, Lhe Theory of our National Existence « Boston, 1881. 2 Venable, ut supra.
rvs
es HE FEDE
RAL SYSTEM
passing of such amendments, and if the desire of the majority
be sufficiently vehement, the majority which sways the National
government may disregard legal sanctions and effect its object
_. by a revolution. In either event—and both are improbable—
the change which will have passed upon the sentiments of the American people will be a sign that Federalism has done its work, and that the time has arrived for new forms of political life.
ny
CHAPTER XXVIII
WORKING RELATIONS OF THE NATIONAL AND THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
THE characteristic feature and special interest of the American Union is that it shows us two governments covering the same ground, yet distinct: and separate in their action. It is like a great factory wherein two sets of machinery are at work, their revolving wheels apparently intermixed, their bands crossing one another, yet each set doing its own work without touching or hampering the other. To keep the National government and the State governments each in the allotted sphere, preventing collision and friction between them, was the primary aim of those who formed the Constitution, a task the more needful and the more delicate because the States had been until then almost independent and therefore jealous of their privileges, and because, if friction should arise, the National government could not remove it by correcting defects in the machinery. For the National government had not been made supreme and omnipotent. It was itself the creature of the Constitution. It was not per- mitted to amend the Constitution, but could only refer it back for amendment to the people of the States or to their legis- latures. Hence the men of 1787, feeling the cardinal importance of anticipating and avoiding occasions of collision, sought to accomplish their object by the concurrent application of two devices. One was to restrict the functions of the National government to the irreducible minimum of functions absolutely needed for the national welfare, so that everything else should be left to the States. The other was to give that government, so far as those functions extended, a direct and immediate relation to the citizens, so that it should act on them not through the States but of its own authority and by its own officers. These are fundamental principles whose soundness experience
oHAP. xxvitr_ WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM ~ 819
has approved, and which will deserve to be considered by those who in time to come may have in other countries to frame federal or quasi-federal constitutions. They were studied, and to a large extent, though in no slavish spirit, adopted by the founders of the present constitution of the Swiss Confederation, a con- stitution whose success bears further witness to the soundness of the American doctrines. ;
The working relations of the National government to the States may be considered under two heads, viz. its relations to the States as corporate bodies, and its relations to the citizens of the States as individuals, they being also citizens of the Union.
The National government touches the States as corporate commonwealths in three points. One is their function in helping to form the National government ; another is the control exercised over them by the Federal Constitution through the Federal courts; the third is the control exercised over them by the Federal Legislature and Executive in the discharge of the governing functions which these latter authorities possess.
I. The States serve to form the National government by choosing presidential electors, by choosing senators, and by fixing the franchise which qualifies citizens to vote for members of the House of Representatives.t No difficulty has ever arisen (except during the Civil War) from any unwillingness of the States to discharge these duties, for each State is eager to exercise as much influence as it can on the national executive and Congress. But note how much latitude has been left to the States. A State may appoint its presidential electors in any way it pleases. All States now do appoint them by popular vote. But during the first thirty years of the Union many States left the choice of electors to their respective legislatures. So a State may, by its power of prescribing the franchise for its State elections, prescribe whatever franchise it pleases for the election of its members of the Federal House of Representatives, and may thus admit persons who would in other States be excluded from the suffrage, or exclude persons who would in other States be admitted. For instance, thirteen States now allow aliens (i.e. foreigners not yet naturalized) to vote; and any State which should admit women to vote at its own State elections would
1 Congress may, if it pleases, regulate by statute the times, places, and manner of holding elections for representatives (Const., Art. i. § 4).
320 - THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
thereby admit them also to vote at congressional elections.1 The only restriction imposed on State discretion in this respect is that of the fifteenth amendment, which forbids any person to be deprived of suffrage, on “account of race, colour, or previous con- dition of servitude.” ?
IL The Federal Constitution deprives the States of certain powers they would otherwise. enjoy. Some of these, such as that of making treaties, are obviously unpermissible, and such as the State need not regret.? Others, however, seriously restrain their daily action. They are liable to be sued in the Federal courts by another State or by a foreign Power. ‘They cannot, except with the consent of Congress, tax exports or imports, or in any case pass a law impairing the obligation of a contract. They must surrender fugitives from the justice of any other State. Whether they have transgressed any of these restrictions is a question for the courts of law, and, if not in the first in- stance, yet always in the last resort a question for the Federal Supreme court. If it is decided that they have transgressed, their act, be it legislative or executive, is null and void.+
The President as national executive, and Congress as national legislature, have also received from the Constitution the right of interfering in certain specified matters with the governments of the States. Congress of course does this by way of legislation,
1 So in some States tribal Indians are permitted to vote. It is odd that the votes of persons who are not citizens of the United States might, in a State where parties are nearly equal, turn the choice of presidential electors in that State, and thereby perhaps turn the presidential election in the Union.
2 The Constitutions of some States retain the old exclusion of negroes from the suffrage, and two exclude natives of China; but these provisions are over- ridden by the fifteenth constitutional amendment.
3 As the States had not been accustomed to act as sovereign commonwealths in international affairs, they yielded this right to the National government with- out demur ; whereas Swiss history shows the larger cantons to have been un- willing to drop the practice of sending their own envoys to foreign powers and making bargains on their own behalf.
4 Mr. Justice Miller observes (Centennial Address at Philadelphia) that ‘at no time since the formation of the Union has there been a period when there were not to be found on the statute books of some of the States acts passed in violation of the provisions of the Constitution regarding commerce, acts imposing taxes and other burdens upon the free interchange of commodities, discriminating against the productions of other States, and attempting to establish regulations of commerce, which the Constitution says shall only be done by Congress.” All such acts are of course held invalid by the courts when questioned before them.
It has very recently been held that a State cannot forbid a common carrier to bring into its jurisdiction intoxicating liquors from another State (Bowman v. C.& N. W. Rly. 125 U.S.)
CHAP, xxvilI WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 821
and when an Act of Congress, made within the powers conferred by the Constitution, conflicts with a State statute, the former prevails against the latter. It prevails by making the latter null and void, so that if a State statute has been duly passed upon a matter not forbidden to a State by the Constitution, and subsequently Congress passes an act on the same matter, being one whereon Congress has received the right to legislate, the State statute, which was previously valid, now becomes invalid to the extent to which it conflicts with the Act of Congress. For instance, Congress has power to establish a uniform law of bankruptcy over the whole Union. It has formerly, in the exercise of this power, passed bankruptcy laws; but these have been repealed, and at present the subject is left to the State laws, which are accordingly in full force in the several States... Were Congress again to legislate on the subject, these State laws would lose their force ;? and if the law passed by Congress were again repealed, they would again spring into life. The field of this so-called concurrent legislation is large, for Con- gress has not yet exercised all the powers vested in it of superseding State action. :
It was remarked in last chapter that in determining the powers of Congress on the one hand and of a State government on the other, opposite methods have to be followed. The pre- sumption is always in favour of the State; and in order to show that it cannot legislate on a subject, there must be pointed out within the four corners of the Constitution some express pro- hibition of the right which it prima facie possesses, or some implied prohibition arising from the fact that legislation by it would con- flict with legitimate federal authority.* On the other hand, the pre- sumption is always against Congress, and to show that it can legislate, some positive grant of power to Congress in the Constitution must be pointed out.4 When the grant is shown,
1 The lawyer may refer on this subject to the interesting case of Sturges v. Crowninshield, 4 Wheat. 196.
2 And in this instance they would lose their force altogether, because the power of Congress being to establish a “uniform” Jaw, the continued existence of statutes differing in the different States would prevent the law of bankruptcy from being uniform over the Union.
3 Otherwise in the Federal Constitution of Canada. See Note to Chapter XXX.
4 The grant need not, however, be express, for it has frequently been held that a power incidental or instrumental to a power expressly given may be con- ferred upon Congress by necessary implication. See JM‘Culloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. p. 816, and post, Chapter XXXIII.
VOL. I Md
322 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
then the Act of Congress has, so long as it remains on the statute book, all the force of the Constitution itself. In some instances the grant of power to Congress to legislate is auxiliary to a prohibition imposed on the States. This is notably the case as regards the amendments to the Constitution, passed for the protection of the lately liberated negroes. They interdict the States from either recognizing slavery, or discriminating in any way against any class of citizens; they go even beyond citizens in their care, and declare that “no State shall deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.” Now, by each of these amendments, Congress is also em- powered, which practically means enjoined, to “enforce by © appropriate legislation” the prohibitions laid upon the States.
Congress has done so, but some of its efforts have been held to
go beyond the directions of the amendments, and to be therefore
void. The grant of power has not covered them.
Where the President interferes with a State, he does so either. under his duty to give effect to the legislation of Congress, or under the discretionary executive functions which the Con- stitution has entrusted to him. So if any State were to depart from a republican form of government, it would be his duty to bring the fact to the notice of Congress in order that the guarantee of that form contained in the Constitution might be made effective. If an insurrection broke out against the authority of the Union, he would (as in 1861) send Federal troops to suppress it. If there should be rival State govern- ments, each claiming to be legitimate, the President might, especially if Congress were not sitting, recognize and support the one which he deemed regular and constitutional.”
Are these, it may be asked, the only cases in which Federal authority can interfere within the limits of a State to maintain order? Are law and order, i.e. the punishment of crimes and the enforcement of civil rights, left entirely to State authorities ? The answer is :—
1 See the Appendix (by Judge Cooley) to the last edition of Story’s Com-
mentaries, and the cases on the three last amendments collected in Desty’s Constitution of the United States Annotated.
2 In 1874-75 a contest having arisen in Louisiana between two governments each claiming to be the legal government of the State, Federal military aid was supplied to one of them by the President, and his action was afterwards approved by Congress. It has been doubted, however, whether the case could properly be deemed one of “domestic violence” within the meaning of Art. iv. § 4 of the Constitution,
onar, xxvia1 WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 328
Offences against Federal statutes are justiciable in Federal courts, and punishable under Federal authority. There is no Federal common law of crimes.
Resistance offered to the enforcement of a Federal statute may be suppressed by Federal authority.
Attacks on the property of the Federal government may be repelled, and disturbances thence arising may be quelled by Federal authority.
The judgments pronounced in civil causes by Federal courts are executed by the officers of these courts.
All other offences and disorders whatsoever are left to be dealt with by the duly constituted authorities of the State, who are, however, entitled in one case to summon the power of the Union to their aid.
This case is that of the breaking out in a State of serious disturbances. The President is bound on the application of the State legislature or executive to quell. such disturbances by the armed forces of the Union, or by directing the militia of another State to enter. Thus in 1794 Washington suppressed the so- called Whisky Insurrection in Pennsylvania by the militia of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Virginia, and Maryland. President Grant was obliged to use military force during the troubles which disturbed several of the Southern States after the Civil War ; as was President Hayes, during the tumults in Pennsyl- vania caused by the great railway strikes of 1877. There have, however, been cases, such as the Dorr rebellion in Rhode Island in 1842,? in which a State has itself suppressed an insurrection against its legitimate government. It is the duty of a State to do so if it can, and to seek Federal aid only in extreme cases, when resistance is formidable.
So far we have been considering the relations of the National government to the States as political communities. Let us now ‘see what are its relations to the individual citizens of these States. They are citizens of the Union as well as of the States, and owe allegiance to both powers. Each power has a right to
1 See Hildreth’s History of the United States, iv. p. 504. This was the first assertion by arms of the supreme authority of the Union, and produced an enor- mous effect upon opinion,
2 President Tyler ordered the militia of Connecticut and Massachusetts to be prepared to enter Rhode Island and suppress the rebellion, but the Rhode Island militia proved equal to the occasion and succeeded in suppressing Dorr. Instances of Federal intervention have been very rare.
‘
324 F THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
command their obedience. To which then, in case of conflict, is obedience due ?
The right of the State to obedience is wider in the area of matters which it covers. Prima facie, every State law, every order of a competent State authority, binds the citizen, whereas the National government has but a limited power: it can legis- late or command only for certain purposes or on certain subjects. But within the limits of its power, its authority is higher than that of the State, and must be obeyed even at the risk of dis- obeying the State. A recent instance in which a State official suffered for obeying his State where its directions clashed with a provision of the Federal Constitution may set the point in a clear light. A statute of California had committed to the city and county authority of San Francisco the power of making regula- tions for the management of gaols. This authority had in 1876 passed an ordinance directing that every male imprisoned in the county gaol should “immediately on his arrival have his hair clipped to a uniform length of one inch from the scalp.” The sheriff having, under this ordinance, cut off the queue of a Chinese prisoner, Ho Ah Kow, was sued for damages by the prisoner, and the court, holding that the ordinance had been passed with a special view to the injury of the Chinese, who consider the preservation of their queue a matter of religion as well as of honour, and that it operated unequally and oppressively upon them, in contravention of the fourteenth amendment to the Con- stitution of the United States, declared the ordinance invalid, and gave judgment against the sheriff. Similar subsequent attempts against the Chinese, made under cover of the constitu- tion of California of 1879 and divers statutes passed thereunder, have been defeated by the courts.
The safe rule for the private citizen may be thus expressed : “Ascertain whether the Federal law is constitutional (ie. such as Congress has power to pass). If it is, conform your conduct to it at all hazards. If it is not, disregard it, and obey the law of your State.” This may seem hard on the private citizen. How shall he settle for himself such a delicate point of law as whether Congress had power to pass a particular statute, seeing that the question may be doubtful and not have come before the
1 Case of Ho Ah Kow v. Matthew Numan (July 1879), 5 Sawyer, Circuit Court Reports, p. 552. A similar ordinance had been some years before courage- ously vetoed by Mr, Alvord, then mayor of San Francisco.
CHAP, ‘XXVIII WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM . 825
courts? But in practice little inconvenience arises, for Congress and the State legislatures have learnt to keep within their respective spheres, and the questions that arise between them are seldom such as need disturb an ordinary man.
The same remarks apply to conflicts between the commands of executive officers of the National government on the one hand, and _ those of State officials on the other. If the national officer is acting within his constitutional powers, he is entitled to be obeyed in pre- - ference to a State official, and conversely, if the State officialis within his powers, and the national officer acting in excess of those which _ the Federal Constitution confers, the State official is to be obeyed.
The limits of judicial power are more difficult of definition. _Every citizen can sue and be sued or indicted both in the courts of his State and in the Federal courts, but in some classes of eases the former, in others the latter, is the proper tribunal, while in many it is left to the choice of the parties before which tribunal they will proceed. Sometimes a plaintiff who has brought his action in a State court finds when the case has gone a certain length that a point of Federal law turns up which entitles either himself or the defendant to transfer it to a Federal court, or to appeal to such a court should the decision have gone against the applicability of the Federal law. Suits are thus constantly transferred from State courts to Federal courts, but you can never reverse the process and carry a suit from ia Federal court to a State court. Within its proper sphere of pure State law, and of course the great bulk of the cases turn on pure State law, there is no appeal from a State court to a Federal court; and though the point of law on which the case turns may be one which has arisen and been decided in the Supreme court of the Union, a State judge, in a State case, is not bound to regard that decision. It has only a moral weight, such as might be given to the decision of an English court, and where the question is one of State law, whether common law or’ statute law, in which State courts have decided one way and a Federal court the other way, the State judge ought to follow his own courts. So far does this go, that a Federal court in ad- ministering State law, ought to reverse its own previous decision rather than depart from the view which the highest State court has taken.!_ All this seems extremely complex. I can only say
1 This is especially the rule in cases involving the title to land. See Cooley, Principles, p. 181. But though the theory is as stated in the text, the Federal
326 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I*
that it is less troublesome in practice than could have been expected, because American lawyers are accustomed to the intricacies of their system.
When a plaintiff has the choice of proceeding in a State court or in a Federal court, he is sometimes, especially if he has a strong case, inclined to select the latter, because the Federal judges are more independent than those of most of the States, and less likely to be influenced by any bias. So, too, if he thinks that local prejudice may tell against him, he will prefer a Federal court, because the jurors are summoned from a wider area, and because the judges are accustomed to exert a larger authority in guiding and controlling the jury. But it is usually more convenient to sue in a State court, seeing that there is such a court in every county, whereas Federal courts are compara- tively few ; in many States there is but one.?
How does the Federal authority, be it executive or judicial, act upon the citizens of a State? It acts on them directly by means of its own officers, who are quite distinct from and inde- pendent of the State officials. Federal indirect taxes, for instance, are levied all along the coast and over the country by Federal custom-house collectors and excisemen, acting under the orders of the treasury department at Washington. The judgments of Federal courts are carried out by United States marshals, like- wise dispersed over the country and supplied with a staff of assistants. This is a provision of the utmost importance, for it enables the central national government to keep its finger upon the people everywhere, and make its laws and the commands of its duly constituted authorities respected whether the State within whose territory it acts be heartily loyal or not, and whether the law which is being enforced be popular or obnoxious. The machinery of the National government ramifies over the whole Union as the nerves do over the human body, placing every point in direct con- nection with the central executive. The same is, of course, true of the army: but the army is so small and stationed in so few spots, mostly in the Far West where Indian raids are feared, that it scarcely comes into a view of the ordinary working of the system. courts not unfrequently act upon their own view of the State law, and have some- times been accused of going so far as to create a sort of Federal common law.
1 Of course a plaintiff who thinks local prejudice will befriend him will choose the State court, but the defendant may have the cause removed to a Federal
court if he be a citizen of another State or an alien, or if the question at issue is such as to give Federal jurisdiction.
CHAP. xxviiI WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 827
What happens if the authority of the National government is opposed, if, for instance, an execution levied in pursuance of a judgment of a Federal court is resisted, or Federal excisemen are impeded in the seizure of an illicit distillery ?
Supposing the United States marshal or other Federal officer to be unable to overcome the physical force opposed to him, he may summon all good citizens to assist him, just as the sheriff may summon the posse comitatus. If this appeal proves insufficient,
‘he must call upon the President, who may either order national troops to his aid or may require the militia of the State in which resistance is offered to overcome that resistance. Inferior Federal officers are not entitled to make requisitions for State force. The common law principle that all citizens are bound to assist
the ministers of the law holds good in America as in England, but it is as true in the one country as in the other, that what is everybody’s business is nobody’s business. Practically, the Federal authorities are not resisted in the more orderly States and more civilized districts.. In such regions, however, as the mountains of Tennessee and North Carolina the inland revenue officials find it very hard to enforce the excise laws, because the country is wild, concealment is easy among the woods and rocks, and the population sides with the smugglers. And in some of the western States an injunction granted by a court, whether a Federal or a State court, is occasionally disregarded! Things
‘were, of course, much worse before the War of Secession had established the authority of the central government on an im- movable basis. Federal law did not prove an unquestioned protection either to persons who became in some districts un- popular from preaching Abolitionism, or who, like the Southern slave-catchers, endeavoured, under the Fugitive Slave laws, to recapture in the northern States slaves who had escaped from their masters.2_ Passion ran high, and great as is the respect for law, passion in America, as everywhere else in the world, will have its way.
If the duly constituted authorities of a State resist the laws
1 The attacks upon the Chinese which Federal authorities have had to check have mostly taken place not in States but in Territories, such as Washington Territory and Montana, where the direct power of the Federal Government is greater than in a State. See Chapter XLVII.
2 It was held that a State could not authorize its courts to enforce the Fugi- tive Slave laws. Being Federal statutes, they must be left to be enforced by the National government only. See Prigg v. Pennsylvania, 16 Pet. 539.
328 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
and orders of the National government, a more difficult question arises. This has several times happened.
In 1798 the legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia adopted resolutions whereby they declared that the Constitution was not a submission of the States to a general government, but a mere compact between the States vesting in such a government certain strictly specified powers, that the general government had not been made the final and exclusive judge of the extent of its own powers, and that when it went beyond the powers actually granted, its assumptions were unauthoritative and its acts in- valid. They then went on to declare that certain statutes re- cently passed by Congress were void, and asked the other States to join in this pronouncement and to co-operate in securing the repeal of the statutes.?
In 1808 the legislatures of some of the New England States passed resolutions condemning the embargo which the National government had laid upon shipping by an Act of that year. The State judges, emboldened by these resolutions, “took an attitude consistently hostile to the embargo,” holding it to be unconstitutional ; and the Federal courts in New England “sel- dom succeeded in finding juries which would convict even for the most flagrant violation of its provisions.” In 1812 the governors of Massachusetts and Connecticut refused to allow the State militia to leave their State in pursuance to a requisition made by the President under the authority of an Act of Congress, alleging © the requisition to be unconstitutional. In 1828-30 Georgia re- fused to obey an Act of Congress regarding the Cherokee Indians, and to respect the treaties which the United States had made with this tribe and the Creeks. The Georgian legislature passed and enforced Acts in contempt of Federal authority, and dis- regarded the orders of the Supreme court, President Jackson,
1 There have been endless discussions in America as to the true meaning and intent of these famous resolutions, a lucid account of which may be found in the article (by Mr. Alex. Johnston) “Kentucky Resolutions,” in the American Cyclopedia of Political Science. The Kentucky resolutions were drafted by Jefferson, who however did not acknowledge his authorship till long afterwards, the Virginia resolutions by Madison.
Judge Cooley observes to me, “The most authoritative exponents of the States’ Rights creed would probably have said that ‘the nullification by the States of all unauthorized acts done under cover of the Constitution’ intended by the Resolu- tions, was a nullification by constitutional means,”
> See article “Embargo” (by Mr. Alex. Johnston) in the American Cyclopedia of Political Science.
CHAP, xxvil1_ WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 329
who had an old frontiersman’s hatred to the Indians, declining to interfere.
Finally, in 1832, South Carolina, first in a State convention and then by her legislature, amplified while professing to repeat the claim of the Kentucky resolutions of 1798, declared the tariff imposed by Congress to be null and void as regarded her- self, and proceeded to prepare for secession and war. In none of these cases was the dispute fought out either in the courts or in the field;' and the questions as to the right of a State to resist Federal authority, and as to the means whereby she could be coerced, were left over for future settlement. Settled they finally were by the Civil War of 1861-65, since which time the following doctrines may be deemed established :—
No State has a right to declare an act of the Federal govern- ment invalid.?
No State has a right to secede from the Union.
The only authority competent to decide finally on the con- stitutionality of an act of Congress or of the national executive is the Federal judiciary.?
Any act of a State legislature or State executive conflicting with the Constitution, or with an act of the National government done under the Constitution, is really an act not of the State govern- ment, which cannot legally act against the Constitution, but of persons falsely assuming to act as such government, and is there-
1 The Acts complained of by Kentucky and Virginia provoked a reaction which led to the overthrow of the Federalist party which had passed them. Of the most important among them, one was repealed and the other, the Sedition Act, expired in 1801 by effluxion of time. Jefferson, when he became President in that year, showed his disapproval of it by pardoning persons convicted under it, The Embargo was raised by Congress in consequence of the strong opposition of New England. In these cases, therefore, it may be thought that the victory sub- stantially remained with the protesting States, while the resistance of South Carolina to the tariff was settled by a compromise,
2 Of course, as already observed, a State officer or a private citizen may dis- regard an act of the Federal government if he holds it unconstitutional. But he does so at his peril.
3 Any court, State or Federal, may decide on such a question in the first in- stance. But if the question be a purely political one, it may be incapable of being decided by any court whatever (see Chapter XXIV.), and in such cases the decision of the political departments (Congress or the President, as the case may be) of the Federal government is necessarily final, though, of course, liable to be reversed by a subsequent Congress or President. The cases which arose on the Reconstruction Acts, after the War of Secession, afford an illustration, The attempts made to bring these before the courts failed, and the acts were en- forced. See Georgia vy. Stanton, 6 Wall. p. 57; and Cooley, Principles, pp. 138, 198,
330 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PAR! 1
fore ipso jure void.1_ Those who disobey Federal authority on the ground of the commands of a State authority are therefore insurgents against the Union who must be coerced by its power. The coercion of such insurgents is directed not against the State. but against them as individual though combined wrongdoers. A. State cannot secede and cannot rebel. Similarly, it cannot be coerced.
This view of the matter, which seems on the whole to be that taken by the Supreme court in the cases that arose after the Civil War, disposes, as has been well observed by Judge Hare,” of the difficulty which President Buchanan felt (see his message of 3d December 1860) as to the coercion of a State by the Union. He argued that because the Constitution did not provide for such coercion, a proposal in the Convention of 1787 to authorize it having been ultimately dropped, it was legally impossible. The best answer to this contention is that such a provision would have been superfluous, because a State cannot legally act against the Constitution. All that is needed is the power, unquestion- ably contained in the Constitution (Art. iii. § 3), to subdue and punish individuals guilty of treason against the Union.?
Except in the cases which have been already specified, the National government has no right whatever of interfering either with a State as a commonwealth or with the individual citizens thereof, and may be lawfully resisted should it attempt to do so.
“What then?” the European reader may ask. “Is the National government without the power and the duty of correct- ing the social and political evils which it may find to exist in a particular State, and which a vast majority of the nation may condemn. Suppose widespread brigandage to exist in one of the States, endangering life and property. Suppose contracts to be habitually broken, and no redress to be obtainable in the State courts. Suppose the police to be in league with the assassins.
1 It may, however, happen that a State law is unconstitutional in part only, perhaps in some trifling details, and in such cases that part only will be invalid, and the rest of the law will be upheld. For instance, a criminal statute might be framed so as to apply retrospectively as well as prospectively. So far as retrospective it would be bad, but good for all future cases, (See Constit., Art. i. § 10, par. 1.)
2 Lectures on American Constitutional Law, p. 45.
3 The Swiss Constitution allows the Federal government to coerce a disobedient canton, This is commonly done by quartering Federal troops in it at its expense till its government yields—a form of coercion which Swiss frugality dislikes, or by withholding its share of Federal grants,
CHAP. XXVIII WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 331
. Suppose the most mischievous laws to be enacted, laws, for instance, which recognize polygamy, leave homicide unpunished, drive away capital by imposing upon it an intolerable load of taxation. Is the nation obliged to stand by with. folded arms while it sees a meritorious minority oppressed, the prosperity of the State ruined, a pernicious example set to other States? Is it to be debarred from: using its supreme authority to rectify these mischiefs ?”
The answer is, Yes. Unless the legislation or administration of such a State transgresses some provision of the Federal Con- stitution (such as that forbidding ex post facto laws, or laws impair- ing the obligation of a contract), the National government not only ought not to interfere but cannot interfere. The State must go its own way, with whatever injury to private rights and common interests. its folly or perversity may cause.
Such a case is not imaginary. In the Slave States before the war, although the negroes were not generally ill treated, many shocking laws were passed, and society was going from bad to worse. In parts of a few of the western, and especially of the south-western States at this moment, the roads and even the rail- ways are infested by robbers, justice is uncertain and may be unattainable when popular sentiment does not support the law. Homicide often goes unpunished by the courts, though sometimes punished by Judge Lynch. So, too, in a few of these States statutes opposed to sound principles of legislation have been passed, and have brought manifold evils in their train. But the Federal government looks on unperturbed, with no remorse for neglected duty.
The obvious explanation of this phenomenon is that the large measure of independence left to the States under the Federal system makes it necessary to tolerate their misdoings in some directions. As a distinguished authority! observes, “The Federal Constitution provided for the protection of contracts, and against those oppressions most likely to result from popular passion and demoralization ; and if it had been proposed to go further and give to the Federal authority a power to intervene in still more extreme cases, the answer would probably have been that such cases were far less likely to arise than was the Federal power to intervene improperly under the pressure of party passion or policy, if its intervention were permitted. To have authorized
1 Judge Cooley, in a letter to the author.
832 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
such intervention would have been to run counter to the whole spirit of the Constitution, which kept steadily in view as the wisest policy local government for local affairs, general govern- ment for general affairs only. Evils would unquestionably arise. ‘But the Philadelphia Convention believed that they would be kept at a minimum and most quickly cured by strict adherence to this policy. The scope for Federal interference was consider- ably enlarged after the Civil War, but the general division of authority between the States and the nation was not disturbed.”
So far from lamenting as a fault, though an unavoidable fault, of their Federal system, the State independence I have described, the Americans are inclined to praise it as a merit. They argue, not merely that the best way on the whole is to leave a State to itself, but that this is the only way in which a permanent cure of its diseases will be effected. ‘They are con- sistent not only in their Federal principles but in their demo- cratic principles. ‘‘ As laissez aller,” they say, “is the necessary course in a Federal government, so it is the right course in all free governments. Law will never be strong or respected unless it has the sentiment of the people behind it. If the people of a State make bad laws, they will suffer for it. They will be the first to suffer. Let them suffer. Suffering, and nothing else, will implant that sense of responsibility which is the first step to reform. ‘Therefore let them stew in their own juice: let them make their bed and lie upon it. If they drive capital away, there will be less work for the artisans: if they do not enforce contracts, trade will decline, and the evil will work out its remedy sooner or later. Perhaps it will be later rather than sooner: if so, the experience will be all the more conclusive. Is it said that the minority of wise and peaceable citizens may suffer? Let them exert themselves to bring their fellows round to a better mind. Reason and experience will be on their side. We cannot be democrats by halves; and where self-government is given, the majority of the community must rule. Its rule will in the end be better than that of any external power.” No doctrine more completely pervades the American people, the instructed as well as the uninstructed. Philosophers will tell you that it is the method by which Nature governs, in whose economy error is followed by pain and suffering, whose laws carry their own sanction with them. Divines will tell you that it is the method by which God governs: God is a righteous
vf et
CHAP, xxvil WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 333
Judge and God is provoked every day, yet He makes His sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends His rain upon the just and the unjust. He does not directly intervene to punish faults, but leaves sin to bring its own appointed penalty. Statesmen will point to the troubles which followed the attempt to govern the reconquered seceding States, first by military force and then by keeping a great part of their population disfranchised, and will declare that such evils as still exist in the South are far less grave than those which the denial of ordinary self-government involved. “So,” they pursue, “Texas and California will in time unlearn their bad habits and come out right if we leave them alone: Federal interference, even had we the machinery needed for prosecuting it, would check the natural process by which the better elements in these raw communities are purging away the maladies of youth, and reaching the settled health of manhood.”
A European may say that there is a dangerous side to this application of democratic faith in local majorities and in Jaissez aller. Doubtless there is: yet those who have learnt to know the Americans will answer that no nation so well understands its own business.
CHAPTER XXIX CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM
Aut Americans have long been agreed that the only possible form of government for their country is a Federal one. All have perceived that a centralized system would be inexpedient, if not unworkable, over so large an area, and have still more strongly felt that to cut up the continent into absolutely inde- pendent States would not only involve risks of war but injure commerce and retard in a thousand ways the material develop- ment of every part of the country. But regarding the nature of the Federal tie that ought to exist there have been keen and frequent controversies, dormant at present, but which might break out afresh should there arise a new question of social or economic change capable of bringing the powers of Congress into collision with the wishes of any State or group of States. The general suitability to the country of a Federal system is there- fore accepted, and need not be discussed. I pass to consider the strong and weak points of that which exists.
The faults generally charged on federations as compared with unified governments are the following :—
I. Weakness in the conduct of foreign affairs.
II. Weakness in home government, that is to say, deficient
authority over the component States and the individual citizens.
III. Liability to dissolution by the secession or rebellion of States.
IV. Liability to division into groups and factions by the formation of separate combinations of the component States.
V. Want of uniformity among the States in legislation and administration.
VI. Trouble, expense, and delay due to the complexity of a double system of legislation and administration.
The first four of these are all due to the same cause, viz. the
iy pies
CHAP. xxix CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 335
existence within one government, which ought to be able to speak and act in the name and with the united strength of the nation, of distinct centres of force, organized political bodies into which part of the nation’s strength has flowed, and whose resist- ance to the will of the majority of the whole nation is likely to be more effective than could be the resistance of individuals, because such bodies have each of them a government, a revenue, a militia, a local patriotism to unite them, whereas individual recalcitrants, however numerous, would be unorganized, and less likely to find a legal standing ground for opposition. The gravity of the first two of the four alleged faults has been exaggerated by most writers, who have assumed on rather scanty grounds that Federal governments are necessarily weak govern- ments. History does not warrant so broad a_ proposition. Assuming, however, for the sake of argument, that troubles may be expected to flow from these four. features of a Federal system, let us see how far America has experienced such troubles.
I. In its early years, the Union was not successful in the management of its foreign relations. Few popular governments are, because a successful foreign policy needs in a world such as ours conditions which popular governments seldom enjoy Some of the faults which marked American policy may however be set down to the Federal character of the government. In the days of Adams, Jefferson, and Madison, the Union put up with a great deal of ill-treatment from France as well as from England. It drifted rather than steered into the war of 1812. The conduct of that war was hampered by the opposition of the New England States. The Mexican war of 1846 was due to the slaveholders ; but the combination among the Southern leaders which entrapped the nation into that conflict might have been equally successful in a unified country. Of late years the prin- ciple of abstention from Old World complications has been so heartily and consistently adhered to that the capacities of the Federal system for the conduct of foreign affairs have been little tried ; and the likelihood of any danger from abroad is so slender that it may be practically ignored. But when a question of external policy arises which interests only one part of the Union, the existence of States feeling themselves specially affected may have a strong and probably an unfortunate influence. It is only in this way that the American government
‘
336 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
can be deemed likely to suffer in its foreign relations from its Federal character.
II. For the purposes of domestic government the Federal authority is now, in ordinary times, sufficiently strong. How- ever, as was remarked in last chapter, there have been occasions when the resistance of even a single State disclosed its weakness. Had a man less vigorous than Jackson occupied the presidential chair in 1832, South Carolina would probably have prevailed against the Union. In the Kansas troubles of 1855-56 the national executive played a sorry part; and even in the resolute hands of President Grant it was hampered in the re-establish- ment of order in the reconquered southern States by the rights which the Federal Constitution secured to those States. The only general conclusion on this point which can be drawn from history is that while the central government is likely to find less and less difficulty in enforcing its will against a State or dis- obedient subjects, because the prestige of its success in the Civil War has strengthened it, because the Union sentiment is still growing, and because the facilities of communication make the raising and moving of troops more easy, nevertheless recalcitrant States, or groups of States, still enjoy certain advantages for resistance, advantages due partly to their legal position, partly to their local sentiment, which rebels might not have in unified countries like England, France, or Italy.
II. Everybody knows that it was the Federal system and the doctrine of State sovereignty grounded thereon, and not expressly excluded, though certainly not recognized, by the Constitution, which led to the secession of 1861, and which gave European powers a plausible ground for recognizing the insur- gent minority as belligerents. Nothing seems now less probable than another secession, not merely because the supposed legal basis for it has been abandoned, and because the advantages of continued union are more obvious than eyer before, but because the precedent of the victory won by the North will discourage like attempts in the future. This is so strongly felt that it has not even been thought worth while to add to the Constitution an amendment negativing the right to secede.
1 The Roman Catholic cantons of Switzerland (or rather the majority of them) formed a separate league (the so-called Sonderbund) which it needed the war of 1846 to put down. And the effect of that war was, as in the parallel case of America, to tighten the Federal bond for the future.
7 es Kg Pe:
CHAP. xxix CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 337
The doctrine of the legal indestructibility of the Union is now well established. To establish it, however, cost thousands of millions of dollars and the lives of a million of men.
IV. The combination of States into groups was a familiar feature of politics before the war. South Carolina and the Gulf States constituted one such, and the most, energetic, group; the ‘New England States frequently acted as another, especially during the war of 1812. At present, though there are several sets of States whose common interests lead their representatives in Congress to act together, it is no longer the fashion for States to combine in an official way through their State organizations, and their doing so would excite reprehension. It is easier, safer, and more effective to act through the great national parties. Any considerable State interest (such as that of the silver-miners, or cattle-men, or Protectionist manufacturers) can generally com- pel a party to conciliate it by threatening to forsake the party if neglected. Political action runs less in State channels than it did formerly, and the only really threatening form which the combined action of States could take, that of using for a common disloyal purpose State revenues and the machinery of State _ governments, has become, since the failure of secession, most improbable.
V. The want of uniformity in private law and methods of administration is an evil which different minds will judge by different standards. Some may think it a positive benefit to secure a variety which is interesting in itself and makes possible the trying of experiments from which the whole country may profit. Is variety within a country more a gain or a loss? Diversity in coinage, in weights and measures, in the rules re- garding bills and cheques and banking and commerce generally, is obviously inconvenient. Diversity in dress, in food, in the habits and usages of society, is almost as obviously a thing to rejoice over, because it diminishes the terrible monotony of life. Diversity in religious opinion and worship excited horror in the Middle Ages, but now passes unnoticed unless where accompanied by intolerance. In the United States the possible diversity of laws is immense. Each State can play whatever tricks it pleases with the law of family relations, of inheritance, of contracts, of torts, of crimes.! But the actual diversity is not great, for all the States, save Louisiana, have taken the English common and
1 Subject to a few prohibitions contained in the Constitution. VOL. I Z
y}
838 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
statute law of 1776 as their point of departure, and have ad- hered to its main principles. A more complete uniformity as regards marriage and divorce might be desirable, for it is par- ticularly awkward not to know whether you are married or not, nor whether you have been or can be divorced or not; and several States have tried bold experiments in divorce laws.! But, on the whole, far less inconvenience than could have been expected seems to be caused by the varying laws of different States, partly because commercial law is the de- partment in which the diversity is smallest, partly because American practitioners and judges have become expert in apply- ing the rules for determining which law, where those of different States are in question, ought to be deemed to govern .a given case.”
VI. He who is conducted over an iron-clad warship, and sees the infinite intricacy of the machinery and mechanical appliances which it contains and by which its engines, its guns, its turrets, its torpedoes, its apparatus for anchoring and making sail, are worked, is apt to think that it must break down in the rough practice of war. He is told, however, that the more is done by machinery, the more safely and easily does everything go on, because the machinery can be relied on to work accurately, and the performance by it of the heavier work leaves the crew free to attend to the general management of the vessel and her arma- ment. So in studying the elaborate devices with which the Federal system of the United States has been equipped, one fancies that with so many authorities and bodies whose functions are intricately interlaced, and some of which may collide with others, there must be a great risk of break-downs and deadlocks, not to speak of an expense much exceeding that which is incident
1 Judge Cooley, however, observes to me that there is little substantial diversity in the laws of marriage in different States, the general rule everywhere being that no special ceremony is requisite, and the statutory forms not being deemed imperative. He adds that even as regards divorce far more trouble arises from frauds practised on the laws than from divergent provisions in the laws themselves. 1t may be observed that although the law of Scotland still differs in many material points from that of England and Ireland, having had a wholly different origin, British subjects and courts do not find the practical inconveniences arising from the diversities to be serious except as respects
marriage and the succession to property. The mercantile law of the two countries tends to become practically the same,
2 American jurists, and especially Mr. Justice Story, have done much to elucidate this difficult branch of law, to which the name of Private International Law is usually (though not very happily) applied.
CHAP. xxIx CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 339
to a simple centralized government. The Americans do not seem to feel this. They tell you that smoothness of working is secured by elaboration of device, that complex as the mechanism of their government may appear, the citizens have grown so familiar with it that its play is smooth and easy, attended with less trouble, and certainly with less suspicion on the part, of the people, than would belong to a scheme which vested all powers in one administration and one legislature. The expense is ad- mitted, but is considered no grave defect when compared with the waste which arises from untrustworthy officials and legislators whose depredations would, it is thought, be greater were their sphere of action wider, and the checks upon them fewer. He who examines a system of government from without is generally disposed to overrate the difficulties in working which its com- plexity causes. Few things, for instance, are harder than to explain to a person who has not been a student in one of the two ancient English universities the nature of their highly com- plex constitution and the relation of the colleges to the university. If he does apprehend it he pronounces it too intricate for the purposes it has to serve. ‘To those who have grown up under it, nothing is simpler and more obvious.
There is a blemish characteristic of the American federation which Americans seldom notice because it seems to them un- avoidable. This is the practice in selecting candidates for Federal office of regarding not so much the merits of the candidate as the effect which his nomination will have upon the vote of the State to which he belongs. Second-rate men are run for first- rate posts, not because the party which runs them overrates their capacity, but because it expects to carry their State either by their local influence or through the pleasure which the State feels in the prospect of seeing one of its own citizens in high office. This of course works in favour of the politicians who come from _a large State. No doubt the leading men of a large State are prima facie more likely to be men of high ability than those of a small State, because the field of choice is wider, the competition probably keener. One is reminded of the story of the leading citizen in the isle of Seriphus who observed to Themistocles, “You would not have been famous had you been born in Seri- phus,” to which Themistocles replied, “Neither would you had you been born in Athens.” The two great States of Virginia and Massachusetts reared one half of the men who won dis-
340 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
tinction in the first fifty years of the history of the Republic.? Nevertheless it often happens that a small State produces a first- rate man, whom the country ought to have in its highest places, as President, or as Speaker of the House of Representatives, but who is passed over because the Federal system gives great weight to the voice of a State, and because State sentiment is so strong that the voters of a State which has a large and perhaps a doubtful vote to cast in national elections, prefer an inferior man in whom they are directly interested to a superior one who is a stranger.
I have left to the last the gravest reproach which Europeans have been wont to bring against Federalism in America. They attributed to it the origin, or at least the virulence, of the great struggle over slavery which tried the Constitution so severely. That struggle created parties which, though they had adherents everywhere, no doubt tended more and more to become identified with States, controlling the State organizations and bending the State governments to their service. It gave tremendous im- portance to legal questions arising out of the differences between the law of the Slave States and the Free States, questions which | the Constitution had either evaded or not foreseen. It shook the credit of the Supreme court by making the judicial decision of those questions appear due to partiality to the Slave States. It disposed the extreme men on both sides to hate the Federal Union which bound them in the same body with their antagon- ists. It laid hold of the doctrine of State rights and State sovereignty as entitling a commonwealth which deemed itself agerieved to shake off allegiance to the national government. Thus at last it brought about secession and the great civil war. Even when the war was over, the dregs of the poison continued to haunt and vex the system, and bred fresh disorders in it. The constitutional duty of re-establishing the State governments of the conquered States on the one hand, and on the other hand the practical danger of doing so while their people remained disaffected, produced the military governments, the “carpet bag” — governments, the Ku Klux Klan outrages, the gift of suffrage to a negro population unfit for such a privilege, yet apparently capable of being protected in no other way. All these mischiefs, it has often been argued, are the results of the Federal structure
1 Webster may be fairly counted to Massachusetts, as he settled there in early life, and sat for many years as senator from it,
CHAP. xxIx CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM: 341
of the government, which carried in its bosom the seeds of its own destruction, seeds sure to ripen so soon as there arose a question that stirred men deeply.
It may be answered not merely that the National government has survived this struggle and emerged from it stronger than before, but also that Federalism did not produce the struggle, but only gave to it the particular form of a series of legal con- troversies over the Federal pact followed by a war of States against the Union. Where such vast economic interests were involved, and such hot passions roused, there must anyhow have been a conflict, and it may well be that a conflict raging within the vitals of a centralized government would have proved no less terrible and would have left as many noxious sequelae behind.
In blaming either the conduct of a person or the plan and scheme of a government for evils which have actually followed, one is apt to overlook those other evils, perhaps as great, which might have flowed from different conduct or some other plan. All that can fairly be concluded from the history of the American Union is that Federalism is obliged by the law of its nature to leave in the hands of States powers whose exercise may give to political controversy a peculiarly dangerous form, may impede the assertion of national authority, may even, when long-continued exasperation has suspended or destroyed the feeling of a common patriotism, threaten national unity itself. Against this danger is to be set the fact that the looser structure of a Federal govern- ment and the scope it gives for diversities of legislation in different parts of a country may avert sources of discord, or prevent local discord from growing into a contest of national magnitude.
CHAPTER XXX MERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM
I po not propose to discuss in this chapter the advantages of Federalism in general, for to do this we should have to wander off to other times and countries, to talk of Achaia and the Han- seatic League and the Swiss Confederation. I shall comment on those merits only which the experience of the American Union illustrates.
There are two distinct lines of argument by which their Federal system was recommended to the framers of the Constitu- tion, and upon which it is still held forth for imitation to other countries. These lines have been so generally confounded that it is well to present them in a precise form.
The first set of arguments point to Federalism proper, and are the following :—
1. That Federalism furnishes the means of uniting common- wealths into one nation under one national government without extinguishing their separate administrations, legislatures, and local patriotisms. As the Americans of 1787 would probably
have preferred complete State independence to the fusion of their |
States into a unified government, Federalism was the only re- source. So when the new Germanic Empire, which is really a Federation, was established in 1870, Bavaria and Wurtemberg could not have been brought under a national government save by a Federal scheme. Similar suggestions, as every one knows, have been made for re-settling the relations of Ireland to Great Britain, and of the self-governing British colonies to the United Kingdom. There are causes and conditions which dispose nations living under a loosely compacted government, or under a number of almost independent governments, to form a closer union in a Federal form. There are other causes and conditions which dis- pose the subjects of one government, or sections of these subjects,
CHAP, XXX MERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 843
to desire to make their governmental union less close by substi- tuting a system of a Federal character. In both sets of cases, the centripetal or centrifugal forces spring from the local posi- tion, the history, the sentiments, the economic needs of those among whom the problem arises ; and that which is good for one people or political body is not necessarily good for another. Federalism may be an equally legitimate resource where it is adopted for the sake of tightening or of loosening a pre-existing bond.
2. That Federalism supplies the best means of developing a new and vast country. It permits an expansion whose extent, and whose rate and manner of progress, cannot be foreseen to proceed with more variety of methods, more adaptation of laws and administration to the circumstances of each part of the terri- tory, and altogether in a more truly natural and spontaneous way, than can be expected under a centralized government, which is disposed to apply its settled system through all its dominions. Thus the special needs of a new region are met by the inhabit- ants in the way they find best: its special evils are cured by special remedies, perhaps more drastic than an old country ' demands, perhaps more lax than an old country would tolerate ; while at the same time the spirit of self-reliance among those who build up these new communities is stimulated and respected.
3. That it prevents the rise of a despotic central government, absorbing other powers, and menacing the private liberties of the citizen. This may now seem to have been an idle fear, so far as America was concerned. It was, however, a very real fear among the great-grandfathers of the present Americans, and nearly led to the rejection even of so undespotic an instrument as the Federal Constitution of 1789. Congress (or the President, as the case may be) is still sometimes described as a tyrant by the party which does not control it, simply because it is a central government: and the States are represented as bulwarks against its encroachments.
The second set of arguments relate to and recommend not so much Federalism as local self-government. I state them briefly because they are familiar.
4, Self-government stimulates the interest of people in the affairs of their neighbourhood, sustains local political life, educates the citizen in his daily round of civic duty, teaches him that per- petual vigilance and the sacrifice of his own time and labour are
844 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
the price that must be paid for individual liberty and collective prosperity.
5. Self-government secures the good administration of local affairs by giving the inhabitants of each locality due means of overseeing the conduct of their business.
That these two sets of grounds are distinct appears from the fact that the sort of local interest which local self-government evokes is quite a different thing from the interest men feel in the affairs of a large body like an American State. So, too, the con- trol over its own affairs of a township, or even a small county, where everybody can know what is going on, is quite different from the control exercisable over the affairs of a commonwealth with a million of people. Local self-government may exist in a unified country like England, and may be wanting in a Federal country like Germany. And in America itself, while some States, like those of New England, possessed an admirably complete system of local government, others, such as Virginia, the old champion of State sovereignty, were imperfectly provided with it. Nevertheless, through both sets of arguments there runs the general principle, applicable in every part and branch of govern- ment, that, where other things are equal, the more power is given to the units which compose the nation, be they large or small, and the less to the nation as a whole and to its central authority, so much the fuller will be the liberties and so much greater the energy of the individuals who compose the people. This prin- ciple, though it had not been then formulated in the way men formulate it now, was heartily embraced by the Americans. Per- haps it was because they agreed in taking it as an axiom that they seldom referred to it in the subsequent controversies regard- ing State rights. These controversies proceeded on the basis of the Constitution as a law rather than on considerations of general political theory. A European reader of the history of the first seventy years of the United States is surprised how little is said, through the interminable discussions regarding the relation of the Federal government to the States, on the respective advantages of centralization or localization of powers as a matter of historical experience and general expediency.
Three further benefits to be expected from a Federal system may be mentioned, benefits which seem to have been unnoticed or little regarded by those who established it in America.
6. Federalism enables a people to try experiments in legisla-
CHAP, XXX MERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 345
tion and administration which could not be safely tried in a large centralized country. A comparatively small commonwealth like an American State easily makes and unmakes its laws; mistakes are not serious, for they are soon corrected; other States profit by the experience of a law or a method which has worked well or ill in the State that has tried it.
7. Federalism, if it diminishes the collective force of a nation, diminishes also the risks to which its size and the diversities of its parts expose it. A nation so divided is like a ship built with water-tight compartments. When a leak is sprung in one com- partment, the cargo stowed there may be damaged, but the other compartments remain dry and keep the ship afloat. So if social discord or an economic crisis has produced disorders or foolish legislation in one member of the Federal. body, the mischief may stop at the State frontier instead of spreading through and taint- ing the nation at large.
8. Federalism, by creating many local legislatures with wide powers, relieves the national legislature of a part of that large mass of functions which might otherwise prove too heavy for it. Thus business is more promptly despatched, and the great central council of the nation has time to deliberate on those questions which most nearly touch the whole country.
All of these arguments-recommending Federalism have proved valid in American experience.
To create a nation while preserving the States was the main reason for the grant of powers which the National government received ; an all-sufficient reason, and one which holds. good to- day. ‘The several States have changed greatly since 1789, but they are still commonwealths whose wide authority and jurisdic- tion practical men are agreed in desiring to maintain.
Not much was said in the Convention of 1787 regarding the best methods of extending government over the unsettled terri- tories lying beyond the Alleghany mountains! It was, however, assumed that they would develop as the older colonies had devel- oped, and in point of fact each district, when it became sufficiently populous, was formed into a self-governing State, the less populous divisions still remaining in the status of semi-self-governing Terri- tories. Although many blunders have been committed in the process of development, especially in the reckless contraction of
1 In 1787, however, the great Ordinance regulating the North-West Territory was enacted by the Congress of the Confederation.
346 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
debt and the wasteful disposal of the public lands, greater evils might have resulted had the creation of local institutions and the control of new communities been left to the Central government.’ Congress would have been not less improvident than the State governments, for it would have been even less closely watched. The opportunities for jobbery would have been irresistible, the growth of order and civilization probably slower. It deserves to be noticed that, in granting self-government to all those of her colonies whose population is of English race, England has practically adopted the same plan as the United States have done with their western territory. The results have been gene- rally satisfactory, although England, like America, has found that her colonists are disposed to treat the aboriginal inhabitants, whose lands they covet and whose persons they hate, with a harshness and injustice which the mother country would gladly check.
The arguments which set forth the advantages of local self government were far more applicable to the States of 1787 than to those of 1887. Virginia, then the largest State, had only half a million free inhabitants, less than the present population of Chicago or Liverpool. Massachusetts had 450,000, Pennsylvania 400,000, New York 300,000 ; while Georgia, Rhode Island, and ~ Delaware had (even counting slaves) less than 200,000 between them.? These were communities to which the expression “local self-government” might be applied, for, although the population was scattered, the numbers were small enough for the citizens to have a personal knowledge of their leading men, and a personal interest (especially as a large proportion were landowners) in the economy and prudence with which common affairs were managed. Now, however, when of the thirty-eight States twenty-two have more than a million inhabitants, and four have more than three
1 The United States is proprietor of the public domain in the Territories, and when a new State is organized the ownership is not changed. The United States, however, makes grants of wild lands to the new State as follows :—(1) Of every section numbered 16 (being one thirty-sixth of all) for the support of common schools. (2) Of lands to endow a university. (8) Of the lands noted in the surveys as swamp lands, and which often are valuable. (4) It has usually made further grants to aid in the construction of railroads, and for an agricultural college. The grants commonly leave the United States a much larger landowner within the State than is the State itself, and when all the dealings of the National government with its lands are considered, it is more justly chargeable with squandering the public domain than the States are.
2 I give the round numbers, reducing them a little from the numbers which appear in the census of 1790.
OHAP. XXX MERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 347
millions, the newer States, being, moreover, larger in area than most of the older ones, the stake of each citizen is relatively smaller, and generally too small to sustain his activity in politics, and the party chiefs of the State are known to him only by the newspapers or by their occasional visits on a stumping tour.!
All that can be claimed for the Federal system under this head of the argument is that it provides the machinery for a better control of the taxes raised and expended in a given region of the country, and a better oversight of the public works undertaken there than would be possible were everything left to the Central government.” As regards the educative effect of numerous and frequent elections, a European observer is apt to think that elections in America are too many and come too frequently. Overtaxing the attention of the citizen and frittering away his interest, they leave him at the mercy of knots of selfish adventurers. Of this, however, more will be said in a subsequent chapter.
The utility of the State system in localizing disorders or discontents, and the opportunities it affords for trying easily and safely experiments which ought to be tried in legislation and administration, constitute benefits to be set off against the risk, referred to in the last preceding chapters, that evils may continue in a district, may work injustice to a minority and invite imita- tion by other States, which the wholesome stringency of the Central government might have suppressed. Europeans are startled by the audacity with which Americans apply the doctrine of laissez aller ; Americans declare that their method is not only the most consistent but in the end the most curative.
A more unqualified approval may be given to the division of legislative powers. The existence of the State legislatures relieves Congress of a burden too heavy for its shoulders ; for although it has far less foreign policy to discuss than the Parliaments of England, France, or Italy, and although the
1 To have secured the real benefits of local self-government the States ought to have been kept at a figure not much above that of their original population, their territory being cut up into new States as the population increased, Had this been done—no doubt at the cost of some obvious disadvantages, such as the undue en- largement of the Senate, and the predominance of a single large city in a State,— there would now be more than two hundred instead of only thirty-eight States.
2 It must, of course, be remembered that in most parts of the Union the local self-government of cities, counties, townships, and school districts exists ina more complete form than in any of the great countries of Europe.—As to this, see Chapters XLVILI.-LII. post.
348 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
separation of the executive from the legislative department gives it less responsibility for the ordinary conduct of the administration than devolves on those Chambers, it could not possibly, were its competence as large as theirs, deal with the multiform and increasing demands of the different parts of the Union. There is great diversity in the material conditions of different parts of the country, and at present the people, particularly in the West, are eager to have their difficulties handled, their economic and social needs satisfied, by the State and the law. Having only a limited field of legislation left to it, Congress may be thought to enjoy better opportunities than the overtasked English Parlia- ment of cultivating that field well. Nevertheless, as has been shown in a previous chapter, its public legislation is scanty, and its private legislation careless and wasteful.
These merits of the Federal system of government which I have enumerated are the counterpart and consequences of that limitation of the central authority whose dangers were indicated in last chapter. They are, if one may reverse the French phrase, the qualities of Federalism’s defects. The problem which all federalized nations have to solve is how to secure an efficient central government and preserve national unity, while allowing free scope for the diversities, and free play to the authorities, of the members of the federation. It is, to adopt that favourite astronomical metaphor which no American panegyrist of the Constitution omits, to keep the centrifugal and centripetal forces in equilibrium, so that neither the planet States shall fly off into space, nor the sun of the Central government draw them into its consuming fires. The characteristic merit of the American Constitution lies in the method by which it has solved this problem. It has given the National government a direct authority over all citizens, irrespective of the State governments, and has therefore been able safely to leave wide powers in the hands of those governments. And by placing the Constitution above both the National and the State governments, it has referred the arbitrament of disputes between them to an independent body, charged with the interpretation of the Constitution, a body which is to be deemed not so much a third authority in the government as the living voice of the Constitution, the unfolder of the mind of the people whose will stands expressed in that supreme instrument.
The application of these two principles, unknown to, or at any
sg 9° )
CHAP, Xxx MERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 349
rate little used by, any previous federation,! has contributed more than anything else to the stability of the American system, and to the reverence which its citizens feel for it, a reverence which is the best security for its permanence. Yet even these devices would not have succeeded but for the presence of a mass of moral and material influences stronger than any political devices, which have maintained the equilibrium of centrifugal and centri- petal forces. On the one hand there has been the love of local independence and self-government; on the other, the sense of community in blood, in language, in habits and ideas, a common pride in the national history and the national flag.
Quid leges sine moribus? The student of institutions, as well as the lawyer, is apt to overrate the effect of mechanical contrivances in politics. I admit that in America they have had one excellent result ; they have formed a legal habit in the mind of the nation. But the true value of a political contrivance resides not in its ingenuity but in its adaptation to the temper and circumstances of the people for whom it is designed, in its power of using, fostering, and giving a legal form to those forces of sentiment and interest which it finds in being. So it has been with the American system. Just as the passions which the question of slavery evoked strained the Federal fabric, disclosing unforeseen weaknesses, so the love of the Union, the sense of the material and social benefits involved in its preservation, appeared in un- expected strength, and manned with zealous defenders the ramparts of the sovereign Constitution. It is this need of determining the suitability of the machinery for the workmen and its probable influence upon them, as well as the capacity of the workmen for using and their willingness to use the machinery, which makes it so difficult to predict the operation of a political contrivance, or, when it has succeeded in one country, to advise its imitation in another. The growing strength of the national government in the United States is largely due to sentimental forces that were weak a century ago, and to a development of internal communications which was then undreamt of. . And the devices which we admire in the Constitution might prove un- workable among a people less patriotic and self-reliant, less law- loving and law-abiding, than are the English of America.
1 The central government in the Achaian League had apparently a direct authority over the citizens of the several cities, but it was so ill defined and so little employed that we can hardly cite that instance as a precedent.
CHAPTER XXxXI GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
THERE is another point of view from which we have still to consider the Constitution. It is not only a fundamental law, but an unchangeable law, unchangeable, that is to say, by the national legislature, and changeable even by the people only through a slow and difficult process. How can a country whose very name suggests to us movement and progress be governed by a system and under an instrument which remains the same from year to year and from century to century ? ‘
When we talk of the Constitution of a state or a nation we mean those of its rules or laws which determine the form of its government, and the respective rights and duties of the govern- ment towards the citizens and of the citizens towards the government. These rules, or the most important among them, may be contained in one document, such as the Swiss or Belgian Constitution, or may be scattered through a multitude of statutes and reports of judicial decisions, as is the case with regard to what men call the English Constitution. This isa distinction of practical consequence. But a still more important difference exists in the fact that in some countries the rules or laws which make up the Constitution can be made and changed by the ordinary legislature just like any other laws, while in other countries such rules are placed above and out of the reach of the legislature, having been enacted and being changeable only by some superior authority. In countries of the former class the so-called Consti- tution is nothing more than the aggregate of those laws—taking law in its widest sense to include customs and judicial decisions— which have a political character ; and this description is too vague to be scientifically useful, for no three jurists would agree as to which laws ought to be deemed political. In such countries there is nothing either in the form of what are commonly called
PP
‘CHAP. xxx DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 351
constitutional laws, or in the source from which they emanate, or in the degree of their authority, to mark them off from other laws. The Constitution of England is constantly changing, for as the legislature, in the ordinary exercise of its powers, frequently passes enactments which affect the methods of government and the political rights of the citizens, there is no certainty that what is called the Constitution will stand the same at the end of a given session of Parliament as it stood at the beginning! A constitution of this kind, capable at any moment of being bent or turned, expanded or contracted, may properly be called a Flexible Constitution.
In countries of the other class the laws and rules which pre- scribe the nature, powers, and functions of the government are contained in a document or documents emanating from an authority superior to that of the legislature. This authority may be a monarch who has octroyé a charter alterable by himself only. Or it may be the whole people voting at the polls; or it may be a special assembly, or combination of assemblies, appointed az hoc. In any case we find in such countries a law or group of laws distinguished from other laws not merely by the character of their contents, but by the source whence they spring and by the force they exert, a force which overrides and breaks all enactments passed by the ordinary legislature. Where the Con-
1 The first statesman who remarked this seems to have been James Wilson, who said in 1788, “ The idea of a constitution limiting and superintending the operations of legislative authority, seems not to have been accurately understood in Britain. There are at least no traces of practice conformable to such a principle. The British Constitution is just what the British Parliament pleases. When the Parliament transferred legislative authority to Henry VIII., the act transferring could not, in the strict acceptation of the term, be called unconstitutional. To control the powers and conduct of the legislature by an overruling constitution was an improve- ment in the science and practice of government reserved to the American States.” — Elliot’s Debates, ii. 482. Paley said this in his Moral Philosophy, published just before. See the observations of Mr. Theodore W. Dwight on Harrington’s proposals for a supreme constitution (Pol. Sc. Quarterly, for March 1887) ; and Oliver Cromwell’s Instrument, called ‘‘ The Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,” printed in the Partiamentary History, vol. iii. p. 1417. It was provided by this instrument that statutes passed in Parliament should take effect, even if not assented to by the Lord Protector, but only if they were agreeable to the articles of the instrument, which would therefore appear to have been a genuine rigid constitution within the terms of the definition here given. Some of the provisions of the articles are so minute that they can hardly have been intended to be placed above change by Parliament ; but Cromwell seems from the remarkable speech which he delivered on 16th December 1653, in promulgating the Instrument, to have conceived that what he called the Fundamentals should be unchangeable.
352 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
stitution consists of such a law or laws, I propose to call it a Rigid Constitution, i.e. one which cannot be bent or twisted by the action of the legislature, but stands stiff and solid, opposing a stubborn resistance to the attacks of any majority who may desire to transgress or evade its provisions. As the English Constitution is the best modern instance of the flexible type, so is the American of the rigid type.
It will at once be asked, How can any constitution be truly rigid? Growth and decay are the necessary conditions of the life of institutions as well as of individual organisms. One con- stitution may be altered less frequently or easily than another, but an absolutely unchangeable constitution is an impossibility.}
The question is pertinent; the suggestion is true. No con- stitution can be made to stand unsusceptible of change, because if it were, it would cease to be suitable to the conditions amid which it has to work, that is, to the actual forces which sway politics. And being unsuitable, it would be weak, not rooted in the nature of the State and in the respect of the citizens for whom it exists; and being weak, it would presently be over- thrown. If therefore we find a rigid constitution tenacious of life, if we find it enjoying, as Virgil says of the gods, a fresh and green old age, we may: be sure that it has not stood wholly changeless, but has been so modified as to have adapted itself to the always altering circumstances that have grown up round it. Most of all must this be true of a new country where men and circumstances change faster than in Europe, and where, owing to the equality of conditions, the leaven of new ideas works more thoroughly upon the whole lump.
We must therefore be prepared to expect that the American
1 The constitutions of the ancient world were all or nearly all flexible, because the ancient republics were governed by primary assemblies, all whose laws were of equal validity. By far the most interesting and instructive example is the Con- stitution of Rome. It presents some striking resemblances to the Constitution of England—both left many points undetermined, both relied largely upon non-legal usages and understandings—and any English constitutional lawyer who should compare the practical workings of the two in an exact and philosophical way would render a service to history and political science.
‘However, one finds here and there in Greek constitutions provisions intended to secure certain laws from change. At Athens, for instance, there was a distinc- tion between Laws (véu0c) which required the approval of a committee called the ‘Nomothetae, and Decrees (Wn¢icuara), passed by the Assembly alone, and any person proposing a decree inconsistent with a law was liable to an action (ypap} mapavouwv) for having, so to speak, led the people into illegality. His conviction in this action carried with it a declaration of the invalidity of the decree.
OHAP, XXXI DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 353
Constitution will, when its present condition is compared with its _ fire-new condition in 1789, prove to have felt the hand of time and change.
Historical inquiry verifies this expectation. The Constitution of the United States, rigid though it be, has changed, has devel- oped. It has developed in three ways to which I devote the three following chapters.
It has been changed by ‘Amendment. Certain provisions have been struck out of the original document of 1787-88 ; certain other, and more numerous, provisions have been added. This method needs little explanation, because it is open and direct. It resembles the method in which laws are changed in England, the difference being that whereas in England statutes are changed by the legislature, here in the United States the fundamental law is changed in a more roundabout fashion by the joint action of Congress and the States.
It has been developed by Interpretation, that is, by the un- folding of the meaning implicitly contained in its necessarily brief terms; or by the extension of its provisions to cases which they do not directly contemplate, but which their general spirit must be deemed to cover.
It has been developed by Usage, that is, by the establishment of rules not inconsistent with its express provisions, but giving them a character, effect, and direction which they would not have if they stood alone, and by which their working is materially modified. These rules are sometimes embodied in statutes passed by Congress and repealable by Congress. Sometimes they remain in the stage of a mere convention or understanding which has no legal authority, but which everybody knows and accepts. What- ever their form, they must not conflict with the letter of the Constitution, for if they do conflict with it, they will be deemed invalid whenever a question involving them comes before a court of law.
It may be observed that of these three modes of change, the first is the most obvious, direct, and effective, but also the most difficult to apply, because it needs an agreement of many inde- pendent bodies which is rarely attainable. The second mode is less potent in its working, because an interpretation put on a provision may be recalled or modified by the same authority, viz. the courts of law (and especially the Supreme Federal Court), which has delivered it. But while a particular interpretation
VOL. I 2A
854 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
stands, it is as strong as the Constitution itself, being indeed in- corporated therewith, and therefore stronger than anything which — does not issue from the same ultimate source of power, the will of the people. The weakest, though the easiest and most fre- quent method, is the third: For, legislation and custom are alto- gether subordinate to the Constitution, and can take effect only where the letter of the Constitution is silent, and where no authorized interpretation has extended the letter to an unspecified case. But they work readily, quickly, freely ; and the develop- ments to be ascribed to them are therefore as much larger in quantity than those due to the two other methods as they are inferior in weight and permanence.
We shall perceive after examining these three sources of change not only that the Constitution as it now stands owes much to them, but that they are likely to modify it still further as time goes on. We shall find that, rigid as it is, it suffers constant qualification and deflection, and that while its words continue in the main the same, it has come to mean something different to the men of 1888 from what it meant to those of 1808, when it had been at work for twenty years, or even to those of 1858, when the fires of protracted controversy might be thought to have thrown a glare of light into every corner of its darkest chambers.
CHAPTER XXXII THE AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
THE men who sat in the Convention of 1787 were not sanguine enough, like some of the legislating sages of antiquity, or like such imperial codifiers. as the Emperor Justinian, to suppose that their work could stand unaltered for all time to come. They provided (Art. v.) that ‘‘ Congress, whenever two-thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or on the application of the legislatures of two-thirds of the several States, shall call a convention for proposing amendments, which, in either case, shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of this Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States, or by conventions in three- fourths thereof, as the one or the other mode may be prescribed by Congress.”
- There are therefore two methods of framing and proposing amendments.
(A) Congress may itself, by a two-thirds vote in each house, prepare and propose amendments.
(B) The legislatures of two-thirds of the States may require Congress’ to summon a Constitutional Convention. Congress shall thereupon do so, having no option to refuse ; and the Con- vention when called shall draft and submit amendments. No provision is made as to the election and composition of the Con- vention, matters which would therefore appear to be left to the discretion of Congress.
There are also two methods of enacting amendments framed and proposed in either of the foregoing ways. It is left to Congress to prescribe one or other method as Congress may think fit.
(X) The legislatures of three-fourths of the States may ratify any amendments submitted to them.
356 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
(Y) Conventions may be called in the several States, and three-fourths of these conventions may ratify.
On all the occasions on which the amending power has been exercised, method A has been employed for proposing and method X for ratifying—z.e. no drafting conventions of the whole Union or ratifying conventions in the several States have ever been summoned. The preference of the action of Congress and the State legislatures may be ascribed to the fact that it has never been desired to remodel the whole Constitution, but only to make changes or additions on special points. Moreover, the procedure by National and State conventions might be slower, and would involve controversy over the method of electing those bodies. The consent of the President is not required to a constitutional amendment.1 A two-thirds majority in Congress can override his veto of a Bill, and at least that majority 1s needed to bring a constitutional amendment before the people.
There is only one provision of the Constitution which cannot be changed by this process. It is that which secures to each and every State equal representation in one branch of the legislature. “No State without its consent shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate” (Art. v.) It will be observed that this provision does not require unanimity on the part of the States to a change diminishing or extinguishing State repre- sentation in the Senate, but merely gives any particular State proposed to be affected an absolute veto on the proposal. If a State were to consent to surrender its rights, and three- fourths of the whole number to concur, the resistance of the remaining fourth would not prevent the amendment from taking effect.
Following President Lincoln, the Americans speak of the Union as indestructible ; and the expression, “An indestructible Union of indestructible States,” has been used by the Supreme court in a famous case.” But looking at the constitution simply as a legal document, one finds nothing in it to prevent the adop- tion of an amendment providing a method for dissolving the existing Federal tie, whereupon such method would be applied so as to form new unions, or permit each State to become an
1 The point was decided by the Supreme court in 1794 in the case of Hollings- worth v. State of Vermont (8 Dall. 878) ; and the Senate came to the same con- clusion in 1865. See Jameson on Constitutional Conventions, § 560.
2 Texas v. White, see ante, p. 315.
Ls gaat
omap. xxx11 AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 357
absolutely sovereign and independent commonwealth. The power of the people of the United States appears competent to effect this, should it ever be desired, in a perfectly legal way, just as the British Parliament is legally competent to re-divide Great Britain into the sixteen or eighteen independent kingdoms which existed within the island in the eighth century.
The amendments made by the above process (A + X) to the Constitution have been in all fifteen in number. These have been made on four occasions, and fall into four groups, two of which consist of one amendment each. The first group, includ- ing ten amendments made immediately after the adoption of the Constitution, ought to be regarded as a supplement or postscript to it, rather than as changing it. They constitute what the Americans, following the English precedent, call a Bill of Rights, securing the individual citizen and the States against the en- croachments of Federal power.! The second and third groups, if a single amendment can be properly called a group (viz. amend- ments xi. and xii.) are corrections of minor defects which had disclosed themselves in the working of the Constitution,” The fourth group is the only one which marked a political crisis and registered a political victory. It comprises three amendments (xiii. xiv. xv.) which forbid slavery, define citizenship, secure the suffrage of citizens against attempts by States to discriminate to the injury of particular classes, and extend Federal protection to those citizens who may suffer from the operation of certain kinds of unjust State laws. These three amendments are the outcome of the War of Secession, and were needed in order to confirm and secure for the future its results. The requisite majority of States was obtained under conditions altogether abnormal, some of the lately conquered States ratifying while actually controlled by the northern armies, others as the price which they were obliged to pay for the re-admission to Congress of their senators and representatives.* The details belong to history: all we need
1 These ten amendments were proposed by the first Congress, having been framed by it out of 103 amendments suggested by various States, and were ratified by all the States but three, They took effect in December 1791.
2 The eleventh amendment negatived a construction which the Supreme court had put upon its own judicial powers (see above, p. 232); the twelfth corrected a fault in the method of choosing the President.
3 The thirteenth amendment was proposed by Congress in February 1865, ratified and declared in force December 1865; the fourteenth was proposed by Congress June 1866, ratified and declared in force July 1868 ; the fifteenth was proposed by Congress February 1869, ratified and declared in force March 1870.
358 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
here note is that these deep-reaching, but under the circum- stances perhaps unavoidable, changes were carried through not by the free will of the peoples of three-fourths of the States, but under the pressure of a majority which had triumphed in a great war, and used its command of the military strength and Federal government of the Union to effect purposes deemed indispensable to the reconstruction of the Federal system.!
Many amendments to the Constitution have been at various times suggested to Congress by Presidents, or brought forward in Congress by members, but very few of these have ever obtained the requisite two-thirds vote of both Houses. In 1789, however, and again in 1807, amendments were passed by Con- egress and submitted tothe States for which the requisite majority of three-fourths of the States was not obtained ; and in February and March 1861 an amendment forbidding the Con- stitution to be ever so amended as to authorize Congress to inter- fere with the “domestic institutions,” including slavery, of any State, was passed in both Houses, but never submitted to the States, because war broke out immediately afterwards. It would doubtless, had peace been preserved, have failed to obtain the acceptance of three-fourths of the States, and its effect could only have been to require those who might thereafter propose to
The fourteenth amendment had given the States a strong motive for enfranchising the negroes by cutting down the representation in Congress of any State which excluded male inhabitants (being citizens of the United States) from the suffrage ; the fifteenth went further and forbade “race, colour, or previous condition of servitude,” to be made a ground of exclusion. The grounds for this bold step were succinctly set forth by Senator Willey (of West Virginia) when he said that the suffrage was the only sure guarantee the negro could have in many parts of the country for the enjoyment of his civil rights ; that it would be a safer shield than law, and that it was required by the demands of justice, the principles of human liberty, and the spirit of Christian civilization.
The effect of these three amendments was elaborately considered by the Supreme court (in 1872) in the so-called Slaughter-house Cases (16 Wall. 82); the effect of which is thus stated by Mr. Justice Miller: ‘‘ With the exception of the specific provisions in the three amendments for the protection of the personal rights of the citizens and people of the United States, and the necessary restric- tions upon the power of the States for that purpose, with the additions to the power of the general government to enforce those. provisions, no substantial change has been made in the relations of the State governments to the Federal eee coe delivered before the University of Michigan, June 1887.
1 But though military coercion influenced the adoption of the thirteenth amendment, while political coercion bore a large part in securing the adoption of the others, it must be remembered that some changes in the Constitution were an absolutely necessary corollary to the war which had just ended.
CHAP, xxx1I AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 359
amend the Constitution so as to deal with slavery, to propose also the repeal of this particular amendment itself.
The moral of these facts is not far to seek. Although it has long been the habit of the Americans to talk of their Constitution with almost superstitious reverence, there have often been times when leading statesmen, perhaps even political parties, would have materially altered it if they could have done so. There have, moreover, been some alterations suggested in it, which the impartial good sense of the wise would have approved, but which have never been submitted to the States, because it was known they could not be carried by the requisite majority.” If, there- fore, comparatively little use has been made of the provisions for amendment, this has been due, not solely to the excellence of the original instrument, but also to the difficulties which surround the process of change. Alterations, though perhaps not large alterations, have been needed, to cure admitted faults or to supply dangerous omissions, but the process has been so difficult that it has never been successfully applied, except either to matters of minor consequence involving no party interests (Amendments xi. and xii.), or in the course of a revolutionary
1 The Greek republics of antiquity sometimes placed some particular law under a special sanction by denouncing the penalty of death on any one who should propose to repeal it. In such cases, the man who intended to repeal the law so sanctioned of course began by proposing the repeal of the law which im- posed the penalty. So it would have been in this case: so it must always be. No sovereign body can limit its own powers. The British Parliament seems to have attempted to bind itself by providing in the Act of Union with Ireland (39 and 40 George III., c. 67) that the maintenance of the Protestant Episcopal Church as an Established Church in Ireland should be ‘‘ deemed an essential and fundamental part of the Union.” That Church was, however, disestablished in 1869 with as much ease as though this provision had never existed.
2 In the Forty-ninth Congress (1884-86) no fewer than forty-seven proposi- tions were introduced for the amendment of the Constitution, some of them of a sweeping, several of a rather complex, nature. (Some of these covered the same ground, so the total number of alterations proposed was less than forty-seven.) None seems to have been voted on by Congress;° and only five or six even deserved serious consideration. One at least, that enabling the President to veto items in an appropriation bill, would, in the opinion of most judicious statesmen, have effected a'great improvement. I find among them the following proposals : To prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquors, to forbid polygamy, to confer the suffrage on women, to vest the election of the President directly in the people, to elect representatives for three instead of two years, to choose senators by popular election, to empower Congress to limit the hours of labour, to empower Congress to pass uniform laws regarding marriage and divorce, to enable the people to elect certain Federal officers, to forbid Congress to pass any local private or special enactment, to forbid Congress to direct the payment of claims legally barred by lapse of time, to forbid the States to hire out the labour of prisoners.
360 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
movement which had dislocated the Union itself (Amendments xiii. xiv. Xv.)
Why then has the regular procedure for amendment proved in practice so hard to apply ?
Partly, of course, owing to the inherent disputatiousness and perversity (what the Americans call “cussedness”) of bodies of men. It is difficult to get two-thirds of two assemblies (the Houses of Congress) and three-fourths of thirty-eight common- wealths, each of which acts by two assemblies, for the State legis- latures are all double-chambered, to agree to the same practical proposition. Except under the pressure of urgent troubles, such as were those which procured the acceptance of the Constitution itself in 1788, few persons or bodies will consent to forego objections of detail, perhaps in themselves reasonable, for the mere sake of agreeing to what others have accepted. They want to have what seems to themselves the very best, instead of a second best suggested by some one else. Now, bodies enjoying so much legal independence as do the legislatures of the States, far from being disposed to defer to Congress or to one another, are more jealous, more suspicious, more vain and opinionated, than so many individuals. Nothing but a violent party spirit, seeking either a common party object or individual gain to flow from party success, makes them work together.
If an amendment comes to the legislatures recommended by the general voice of their party, they will be quick to adopt it. But in that case it will encounter the hostility of the opposite party, and parties are in most of the Northern States usually pretty evenly balanced. It is seldom that a two-thirds majority in either House of Congress can be secured on a party issue; and of course such majorities: in both Houses, and a three-fourths majority of State legislatures on a party issue, are still less pro- bable. Now, in a country pervaded by the spirit of party, most questions either are at starting, or soon become, controversial. A change in the Constitution, however useful its ultimate con- sequences, is likely to be for the moment deemed more advan- tageous to one party than to the other, and this is enough to make the other party oppose it. Indeed, the mere fact that a proposal comes from one side, rouses the suspicion of the other. There is always that dilemma of which England has so often felt the evil consequences. If a measure of reform is immediately pressing, it becomes matter of party contention, it excites temper
ap tas
OHAP, xxx1I AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 361
and passion. If it is not pressing, neither party, having other and nearer aims, cares to take it up and push it through! In America, a party amendment to the Constitution can very seldom be carried. A non-party amendment falls into the category of those things which, because they are everybody’s business, are the business of nobody.
It is evident when one considers the nature of a Rigid or Supreme constitution, that some method of altering it so as to make it conform to altered facts and ideas is indispensable. A _ European critic may remark that the American method has failed to answer the expectations formed of it. The belief, he will say, of its authors was that while nothing less than a pretty general agreement would justify alteration, that agreement would exist when obvious omissions preventing its smooth working were dis- covered. But this has not come to pass. There have been long and fierce controversies over the construction of several points in the Constitution, over the right of Congress to spend money on internal improvements, to charter a national bank, to impose a protective tariff, above all, over the treatment of slavery in the Territories. But the method of amendment was not applied to any of these questions, because no general agreement could be reached upon them, or indeed upon any but quite secondary matters. So the struggle over the interpretation of a document which it was found impossible to amend, passed from the law courts to the battle-field. Americans reply to such criticisms by observing that the power of amending the Constitution is one which cannot prudently be employed to conclude current political controversies, that if it were so used no constitution could be either rigid or reasonably permanent, that some latitude of con- struction is desirable, and that in the above-mentioned cases amendments excluding absolutely one or other of the construc- tions contended for would either have tied down the legislature too tightly or have hastened a probably inevitable conflict.
Ought the process of change to be made easier? say by requiring only a bare majority in Congress, and a two-thirds majority of States? American statesmen think not. A swift
1 In England, during many years, thinking men of both parties have been convinced that something ought to be done to re-construct the Upper Chamber, but since neither party had any direct gain to expect from such a reform, neither
has troubled itself to undertake a confessedly difficult task. Yet in England changes in the Constitution are effected by the comparatively simple method of a
statute.
362 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
and easy method would not only weaken the sense of security which the rigid Constitution now gives, but would increase the troubles of current politics by stimulating a majority in Congress to frequently submit amendments to the States. The habit of mending would turn into the habit of tinkering. There would be too little distinction between changes in the ordinary statute law, which require the agreement of majorities in the two Houses and the President, and changes in the more solemnly enacted fundamental law. And the rights of the States, upon which congressional legislation cannot now directly encroach, would be endangered. The French scheme, under which an absolute majority of the two Chambers, sitting together, can amend the Constitution; or even the Swiss scheme, under which a bare majority of the voting citizens, coupled with a majority of the Cantons, can ratify constitutional changes drafted by the Chambers, in pursuance of a previous popular vote for the revision of the Constitution,! is considered by the Americans dangerously lax. The idea reigns that solidity and security are the most vital attributes of a fundamental law.
From this there has followed another interesting result. Since modifications or developments are often needed, and since they can rarely be made by amendment, some other way of making them must be found. The ingenuity of lawyers has dis- covered one method in interpretation, while the dexterity of politicians has invented a variety of devices whereby legislation may extend, or usage may modify, the express provisions of the apparently immovable and inflexible instrument.
1 See the Swiss Federal Constitution, Arts, 118-121.
CHAPTER XXXIII THE INTERPRETATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
Tue Constitution of England is contained in hundreds of volumes of statutes and reported cases; the Constitution of the United States (including the amendments) may be read through aloud in twenty-three minutes. It is about half as long as St. Paul’s first Epistle to the Corinthians, and only one-fortieth part as long as the Irish Land Act of 1881. History knows few instru- ments which in so few words lay down equally momentous rules on a vast range of matters of the highest importance and com- plexity. The Convention of 1787 were well advised in making their draft short, because it was essential that the people should comprehend it, because fresh differences of view would have emerged the further they had gone into details, and because the more one specifies, the more one has to specify and to attempt the impossible task of providing beforehand for all contingencies. These sages were therefore content to lay down a few general rules and principles, leaving some details to be filled in by con- eressional legislation, and foreseeing that for others it would be necessary to trust to interpretation.
It is plain that the shorter a law is, the more general must its language be, and the greater therefore the need for interpreta- tion. So too the greater the range of a law, and the more numerous and serious the cases which it governs, the more frequently will its meaning be canvassed. There have’ been statutes dealing with private law, such as the Lex Aquilia at Rome and the Statute of Frauds in England, on which many volumes of commentaries have been written, and thousands of juristic and judicial constructions placed. Much more then must we expect to find great public and constitutional enactments sub- jected to the closest scrutiny in order to discover every shade of meaning which their words can be made to bear. Probably no
364 _ ‘THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI
writing except the New Testament, the Koran, the Pentateuch, and the Digest of the Emperor Justinian, has employed so much ingenuity and labcur as the American Constitution, in sifting, weighing, comparing, illustrating, twisting, and torturing its text, It resembles theological writings in this, that both, while taken to be immutable guides, have to be adapted to a constantly changing world, the one to political conditions which vary from year to year and never return to their former state, the other _ to new phases of thought and emotion, new beliefs in the realms of physical and ethical philosophy.. There must, therefore, be a development in constitutional formulas, just as there is in theo- logical. It will come, it cannot be averted, for it comes in virtue of a law of nature: all that men can do is to shut their eyes to it, and conceal the reality of change under the continued use of time-honoured phrases, trying to persuade themselves that these phrases mean the same thing to their minds to-day as they meant generations or centuries ago. As a great living theologian says, “In a higher world it is otherwise ; but here below to live is to change, and to be perfect is to have changed often.”!
The Constitution of the United States is so concise and so general in its terms, that even had America been as slowly moving a country as China, many questions must have arisen on the inter- pretation of the fundamental law which would have modified its aspect. But America has been the most swiftly expanding of all countries. Hence the questions that have presented themselves have often related to matters which the framers of the Constitution could not have contemplated. Wiser than Justinian before them or Napoleon after them, they foresaw that their work would need to be elucidated by judicial commentary. But they were far from conjectuiring the enormous strain to which some of their expres- sions would be subjected in the effort to apply them to new facts. _ I must not venture on any general account of the interpreta- tigw of the Constitution, nor attempt to set forth the rules of construction laid down by judges and commentators, for this is a vast matter and a matter for law books. All that this chapter has to do is to indicate, very generally, in what way and with what results the Constitution has been expanded, developed, modified, by interpretation; and with that view there are three points that chiefly need discussion: (1) the authorities entitled to interpret the Constitution, (2) the main principles followed in
1 Newman, Essay on Development, p. 39.
Nat ft
CHAP. xxx11t INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 368
determining whether or no the Constitution has granted certain powers, (3) the checks on possible abuses of the interpreting power.
I. To whom does it belong to interpret the Constitution ? Any question arising in a legal proceeding as to the meaning and application of this fundamental law will evidently be settled by the courts of law. Every court is equally bound to pronounce and competent to pronounce on such questions, a State court no less than a Federal court ;! but as all the more important ques- tions are carried by appeal to the supreme Federal court, it is practically that court whose opinion determines them.
Where the Federal courts have declared the meaning of a law, every one ought to accept and guide himself by their deliverance. But there are always questions of construction which have not been settled by the courts, some because they have not happened to arise in a law-suit, others because they are such as cannot arise in a law-suit. As regards such points, every authority, Federal or State, as well as every citizen, must be guided by the best view he or they can form of the true intent and meaning of the Constitution, taking, of course, the risk that this view may turn out to be wrong.
There are also points of construction on which every court, following a well-established practice, will refuse to decide, because they are deemed to be of “a purely political nature,” a vague description, but one which could be made more specific only by an enumeration of the cases which have settled the practice. These points are accordingly left to the discretion of the executive and legislative powers, each of which forms its view as to the matters falling within its sphere, and in acting on that view is entitled to the obedience of the citizens and of the States also.”
It is therefore an error to suppose that the judiciary is the only interpreter of the Constitution, for a large field is left open to the other authorities of the government, whose views need not coincide, so that a dispute between those authorities, although turning on the meaning of the Constitution, may be incapable of being settled by any legal proceeding. This causes no great confusion, because the decision, whether of the political or the judicial authority, is conclusive so far as regards the particular controversy or matter passed upon.
The above is the doctrine now generally accepted in America.
1 See Chapter XXIV. ante. 2 Assuming, of course, that the matter is one which comes within the range of Federal competence.
366 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT part 1
But at one time the Presidents claimed the much wider right of being, except in questions of pure private law, generally and prima facie entitled to interpret the Constitution for themselves, and to act on their own interpretation, even when it ran counter to that delivered by the Supreme court. Thus Jefferson de- nounced the doctrine laid down in the famous judgment of Chief- Justice Marshall in the case of Marbury v. Madison ;+ thus Jack- son insisted that the Supreme court was mistaken in holding that Congress had power to charter the United States bank, and that he, knowing better than the court did what the Constitution meant to permit, was entitled to attack the bank as an illegal institution, and to veto a bill proposing to re-charter it.? Majorities in Congress have more than once claimed for them- selves the same independence. But of late years both the execu- tive and the legislature have practically receded from the posi- tion which the language formerly used seemed to assert ; while, on the other hand, the judiciary, by their tendency during the whole course of their history to support every exercise of power which they did not deem plainly unconstitutional, have left a wide field to those authorities. If the latter have not used this freedom to stretch the Constitution even more than they have done, it is not solely the courts of law, but also public opinion and their own professional associations (most presidents, ministers, and congressional leaders having been lawyers) that have checked them.
II. The Constitution has been expanded by construction in two ways. Powers have been exercised, sometimes by the President, more often by the legislature, in passing statutes, and the question has arisen whether the powers so exercised were rightfully exercised, 7.¢. were really contained in the Constitution. When the question was resolved in the affirmative by the court,
1 As the court dismissed upon another point in the case the proceedings against Mr. Secretary Madison, the question whether Marshall was right did not arise in a practical form, ;
2 There was, however, nothing unconstitutional in the course which Jackson actually took in withdrawing the deposits from the United States Bank and in vetoing the bill for a re-charter. It is still generally admitted that a President has the right in considering a measure coming to him from Congress to form his own judgment, not only as to its expediency but as to its conformability to the Constitution. Judge Cooley observes to me: ‘‘If Jackson sincerely believed that the Constitution had been violated in the first and second charter, he was | certainly not bound, when a third was proposed, to surrender his opinion in obedience to precedent. The question of approving a new charter was political ;
and he was entirely within the line of duty in refusing it for any reasons which, to his own mind, seemed sufficient.”
ry rennet
cHAP, xxxlI INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 367
the power has been henceforth recognized as a part of the Con- stitution, although, of course, liable to be subsequently denied by a reversal of the decision which established it. This is one way. ‘The other is where some piece of State legislation alleged to contravene the Constitution has been judicially decided to contravene it, and to be therefore invalid. The decision, in narrowing the limits of State authority, tends to widen the pro- hibitive authority of the Constitution, and confirms it in a range and scope of action which was previously doubtful. |
Questions of the above kinds sometimes arise as questions of Interpretation in the strict sense of the term, i.e. as questions of the meaning of a term or phrase which is so far ambiguous that it might be taken either to cover or not to cover a case apparently contemplated by the people when they enacted the Constitution. Sometimes they are rather questions to which we may apply the name of Construction, i.e. the case that has arisen is one appar- ently not contemplated by the enacters of the Constitution, or one which, though possibly contemplated, has for brevity’s sake been omitted ; but the Constitution has nevertheless to be applied to its solution. In the former case the enacting power has said something which bears, or is supposed to bear, on the matter, and the point to be determined is, what do the words mean ? In the latter it has not directly referred to the matter, and the question is, Can anything be gathered from its language which covers the point that has arisen, which establishes a prin- ciple large enough to reach and include an unmentioned case, indicating what the enacting authority would have said had the matter been present to its mind, or had it thought fit to enter on an enumeration of specific instances?! As the Constitution
1 For example, the question whether an agreement carried out between a State and an individual by a legislative act of a State isa “contract” within the mean- ing of the prohibition against impairing the obligation of a contract, is a question of interpretation proper, for it turns on the determination of the meaning of the term “contract.” The question whether Congress had power to pass an act emancipating the slaves of persons aiding in a rebellion was a question of con- struction, because the case did not directly arise under any provision of the Constitution, and was apparently not contemplated by the framers thereof. It was a question which had to be solved by considering what the war powers con- tained in the Constitution might be taken to imply. ‘The question whether the National government has power to issue treasury notes is also a question of con- struction, because, although this is a case which may possibly have been contem- plated when the Constitution was enacted, it is to be determined by ascertaining whether the power “‘to borrow money” covers this particular method of borrowing. There is no ambiguity about the word “ borrow”; the difficulty is to pronounce
368 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
is not only a well-drafted instrument with few ambiguities but also a short instrument which speaks in very general terms, mere interpretation has been far less difficult than construction.’ It is through the latter chiefly that the Constitution has been, and still © continues to be, developed and expanded. ‘The nature of these expansions will appear from the nature of the Federal govern- ment. It is a government of delegated and specified powers. The people have entrusted to it, not the plenitude of their own authority but certain enumerated functions, and its lawful action is limited to these functions. Hence, when the Federal execu- tive does an act, or the Federal legislature passes a law, the question arises—Is the power to do this act or pass this law one of the powers which the people have by the Constitution dele- gated to their agents? The power may never have been exerted before. It may not be found expressed, in so many words, in the Constitution. Nevertheless it may, upon the true con- struction of that instrument, taking one clause with another, be held to be therein contained.
Now the doctrines laid down by Chief-Justice Marshall, and on which the. courts have constantly since proceeded, may be summed up in two propositions.
1. Every power alleged to be vested in the National govern- ment, or any organ thereof, must be affirmatively shown to have been granted. There is no presumption in favour of the exist- ence of a power; on the contrary, the burden of proof lies on those who assert its existence, to point out something in the Constitution which, either expressly or by necessary implication, confers it. Just as an agent, claiming to act on behalf of his principal, must make out by positive evidence that his principal gave him the authority he relies on; so Congress, or those who rely on one of its statutes, are bound to show that the people which out of various methods of borrowing, some of which probably were con- templated, can be properly deemed, on a review of the whole financial attributes
and functions of the National government, to be included within the borrowing power.
As to the provision restraining States from passing laws impairing the obliga- tion of a contract, see note at the end of this volume on the case of Dartmouth College v. Woodward.
1 It is worth remarking that as the Constitution is deemed to proceed from the People who enacted it, not from the Convention who drafted it, it is regarded for the purposes of interpretation as being the work not of a group of lawyers but of the people themselves, For a useful summary of some of the general rules of papper interpretation, see Patterson’s Federal Restraints on State Action, pp. 217,
ea ie ‘ a
CHAP. xxx111 INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 7 369
have authorized the legislature to pass the statute. The search for the power will be conducted in a gpirit of strict exactitude, and if there be found in the Constitution nothing which directly or impliedly conveys it, then whatever the executive or legisla- ture of the National government, or both of them together, may have done in the persuasion of its existence, must be deemed null and void, like the act of any other unauthorized agent.1 2. When once the grant of a power by the people to the National government has been established, that power will be construed broadly. The strictness applied in determining its existence gives place to liberality in supporting its application. The people—so Marshall and his successors have argued—when they confer a power, must be deemed to confer a wide discretion -as to the means whereby it is to be used in their service. For their main object is that it should be used vigorously and wisely, which it cannot be if the choice of methods is narrowly restricted ; and while the people may well be chary in delegating powers to their agents, they must be presumed, when they do grant these powers, to grant them with confidence in the agents’ judgment, allowing all that freedom in using one means or another to attain the desired end which is needed to ensure success.2, This, which would in any case be the common-sense view, is fortified by the language of the Constitution, which authorizes Congress “to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any department or office thereof.” The sovereignty of the National government, therefore, “though limited to specified objects, is plenary as to those objects”® and supreme in its sphere. Congress, which cannot go one step beyond the circle of action which the Constitution has traced for it, may within 1 For instance, several years ago a person summoned as a witness before a committee of the House of Representatives was imprisoned by order of the House for refusing to answer certain questions put to him. He sued the sergeant-at-arms for false imprisonment, and recovered damages, the Supreme court holding that as the Constitution could not be shown to have conferred on either House of Con- gress any power to punish for contempt, that power (though frequently theretofore exercised) did not exist, and the order of the House therefore constituted no defence for the sergeant’s act (Kilbourn v. Thompson, 103 United States, 168). 2 For instance, Congress having power to declare war, has power to prosecute it by all means necessary for success, and to acquire territory either by conquest or treaty. Having power to borrow money, Congress may, if it thinks fit, issue
treasury notes, and may make them legal tender. 3 See Gibbons v. Ogden, 9 Wheat. p. 1 sqg., judgment of Marshall, C.-J.
VOL, I 2B
370 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART f
that circle choose any means which it deems apt for executing its powers, and is in its choice of means subject to no review by the courts in their function of interpreters, because the people have made their representatives the sole and absolute judges of the mode in which the granted powers shall be employed. This doctrine of implied powers, and the interpretation of the words “necessary and proper,” were for many years a theme of bitter and incessant controversy among American lawyers and public- ists.1 The history of the United States is in a large measure a history of the arguments which sought to enlarge or restrict its import. One school of statesmen urged that a lax construction would practically leave the States at the mercy of the National government, and remove those checks on the latter which the Constitution was designed to create; while the very fact that some powers were specifically granted must be taken to import that those not specified were withheld, according to the old maxim expressio wnius exclusio alterius, which Lord Bacon concisely explains by saying, “as exception strengthens the force of a law in cases not excepted, so enumeration weakens it in cases not enumerated.” It was replied by the opposite school that to limit the powers of the government to those expressly set forth in the Constitution would render that instrument unfit to serve the purposes of a growing and changing nation, and would, by
1 “The powers of the government are limited, and its limits are not to be transcended. But the sound construction of the Constitution must allow to the national legislature that discretion with respect to the means by which the powers it confers are to be carried into execution, which will enable that body to perform the high duties assigned to it in the manner most beneficial to the people. Let the end be legitimate, let it be within the scope of the Constitution, and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited but consistent with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are constitutional.”—Marshall, C.-J., in M‘Culloch v. Maryland (4 Wheat. 316), This is really a working-out of one of the points of Hamilton’s famous argument in favour of the constitutionality of a United States bank: ‘Every power vested in a government is in its nature sovereign, and includes by force of the term a right to employ all the means requisite and fairly applicable to the attainment of the ends of such power, and which are not precluded by restrictions and excep- tions specified in the Constitution.” — Works (Lodge’s ed.), vol. iii. p. 181.
Judge Hare sums up the matter by saying, “ Congress is sovereign as regards the objects and within the limits of the Constitution. It may use all proper and suitable means for carrying the powers conferred by the Constitution into effect, The means best suited at one time may be inadequate at another; hence the need for vesting a large discretion in Congress, . . . ‘Necessary and proper’ are therefore, as regards legislation, nearly if not quite synonymous, that being ‘necessary’ which is suited to the object and calculated to attain the end in view.” —Lectures on Constitutional Law, p. 78.
CHAP, xxx111 INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 371
leaving men no legal means of attaining necessary but originally uncontemplated aims, provoke revolution and work the destruc- tion of the Constitution itself.
This latter contention derived much support from the fact that there were certain powers that had not been mentioned in the Constitution, but which were so obviously incident to a national government that they must be deemed to be raised by implication.? For instance, the only offences which Congress is expressly empowered to punish are treason, the counterfeiting of the coin or securities of the government, and piracies and other offences against the law of nations. But it was very early held that: the power to declare other acts to be offences against the United States, and punish them as such, existed as a necessary _ appendage to various general powers. So the power to regulate commerce covered the power to punish offences obstructing com- merce ; the power to manage the post-office included the right to fix penalties on the theft of letters ; and, in fact, a whole mass of criminal law grew up as a sanction to the civil laws which Congress had been directed to pass.
The three lines along which this development of the implied powers of the government has chiefly progressed, have been those marked out by the three express powers of taxing and borrowing money, of regulating commerce, and of carrying on war. Each has produced a progeny of subsidiary powers, some of which have in their turn been surrounded by an unexpected offspring. Thus from the taxing and borrowing powers there sprang the powers to charter a national bank and exempt its branches and its notes from taxation by a State (a serious restriction on State authority), to create a system of custom-houses and revenue cutters, to establish a tariff for the protection of native industry. Thus the regulation of commerce has been construed to include legislation regarding every kind of transportation of goods and passengers, whether from abroad or from one State to another, regarding navigation, maritime and internal pilotage, maritime
1 See the philosophical remarks of Story, J., in Martin v. Hunter’s Lessee (1 Wheat. p. 304 sqq.)
2 Stress was also laid on the fact that whereas the Articles of Confederation of 1781 contained (Art. ii.) the expression, ‘ Hach State retains every power and jurisdiction and right not expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled,” the Constitution merely says (Amendment x.), “The powers not granted to the United States are reserved to the States respectively or to the people,” omitting the word “expressly.” See the text of the Articles in the
Appendix to this volume.
372 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
contracts, etc., together with the control of all navigable waters,’ the construction of all public works helpful to commerce between States or with foreign countries, the power to prohibit immigra- tion, and finally a power to establish a railway commission and control all inter-State traffic.2 The war power proved itself even more elastic. The executive and the majority in Congress found themselves during the War of Secession obliged to stretch this power to cover many acts trenching on the ordinary rights of the States and of individuals, till there ensued something ap- proaching a suspension of constitutional guarantees in favour of the central government.
The courts have occasionally gone even further afield, and have professed to deduce certain powers of the legislature from the sovereignty inherent in the National government. In its last decision on the legal tender question, a majority of the Supreme court seems to have placed upon this ground, though with special reference to the section enabling Congress to borrow money, its affirmance of that competence of Congress to declare paper money a legal tender for debts, which the earlier decision of 1871 had referred to the war power. ‘This position evoked a controversy of wide scope, for the question what sovereignty involves is evidently at least as much a question of political as of legal science, and may be pushed to great lengths upon con- siderations with which law proper has little to do.
The above-mentioned instances of development have been worked out by the courts of law. But others are due to the’ action of the executive, or of the executive and Congress con- jointly. Thus, in 1803, President Jefferson negotiated and completed the purchase of Louisiana, the whole vast possessions
1 Navigable rivers and lakes wholly within the limits of a State, and not accessible from without it, are under the authority of that State.
2 The case of Gibbons v. Ogden supplies an interesting illustration of the way in which this doctrine of implied powers works itself out. The State of New York had, in order to reward Fulton and Livingston for. their services in intro- ducing steamboats, passed a statute giving them an exclusive right of navigating the Hudson river with steamers. A case having arisen in which this statute was invoked, it was alleged that the statute was invalid, because inconsistent with an Act passed by Congress. The question followed, Was Congress entitled to-pass an Act dealing with the navigation of the Hudson? and it was held that the power to regulate commerce granted to Congress by the Constitution implied a power to legislate for navigation on such rivers as the Hudson, and that Con- gress having exercised that power, the action of the States on the subject was necessarily excluded. By this decision a vast field of legislation was secured to Congress and closed to the States. ;
CHAP, xxx11I INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 373
of France beyond the Mississippi. He believed himself to be exceeding any powers which the Constitution conferred; and desired to have an amendment to it passed, in order to validate his act. But Congress and the people did not share his scruples, and the approval of the legislature was deemed sufficient ratifi- cation for a step of transcendent importance, which no provision of the Constitution bore upon. In 1807 and 1808 Congress laid, by two statutes, an embargo on all shipping in United States ports, thereby practically destroying the lucrative carry- ing trade of the New England States. Some of these States declared the Act unconstitutional, arguing that a power to regu- late commerce was not a power to annihilate it, and their courts held it to be void. Congress, however, persisted for a year, and the Act, on which the Supreme court never formally pronounced, has been generally deemed within the Constitution, though Justice Story (who had warmly opposed it when he sat in Con-
_ gress) remarks that it went to the extreme verge. More startling, and more far-reaching in their consequences, were the assump- tions. of Federal authority made during the War of Secession by the executive and confirmed, some expressly, some tacitly, by Congress and the people.1 It was only a few of these that came before the courts, and the courts, in some instances, disapproved them. But the executive continued to exert this extraordinary authority. Appeals made to the letter of the Constitution by the minority were discredited by the fact that they were made by persons sympathizing with the Secessionists who were seeking to destroy it. So many extreme things were done under the pressure of necessity that something less than these extreme things came to be accepted as a reasonable and moderate com- promise.?
1 See Judge Cooleys History of Michigan, p. 353. The same eminent authority observes to me: ‘The President suspended the writ of habeas corpus. The courts held this action unconstitutional (it was subsequently confirmed by Congress), but he did not at once deem it safe to obey their judgment. Military
‘commissioners, with the approval of the War Department and the President, condemned men to punishment for treason, but the courts released them, holding that the guaranties of liberty in the Constitution were as obligatory in war as in peace, and should be obeyed by all citizens, and all departments, and officers of government (AMilligan’s case, 4 Wall. 1). The courts held closely to the Con- stitution, but as happens in every civil war, a great many wrongs were done in the exercise of the war power for which no redress, or none that was adequate, could possibly be had.” Inter arma silent leges must be always to some extent
true, even ‘under a Constitution like that of the United States. 2 Such as the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, the emancipation of the
374 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1
The best way to give an adequate notion of the extent to which the outlines of the Constitution have been filled up by interpretation and construction, would be to take some of its more important sections and enumerate the decisions upon them and the doctrines established by those decisions. This process would, however, be irksome to any but a legal reader, and the legal reader may do it more agreeably for himself by consulting one of the annotated editions of the Constitution.1 He will there find that upon some provisions such as Art. i. § 8 (powers of Congress), Art. i. § 10 (powers denied to the States), Art. iii. § 2 (extent of judicial power), there has sprung up a perfect forest of judicial constructions, working out the meaning and application of the few and apparently simple words of the original document into a variety of unforeseen results. The same thing has more or less befallen nearly every section of the Constitution and of the fifteen amendments. The process shows no signs of stopping, nor can it, for the new conditions of economics and politics bring up new problems for solution. But the most important work was that done during the first half century, and especially by Chief-Justice Marshall during his long tenure of the presidency of the Supreme court (1801-1835). It is scarcely an exaggeration to call him, as an eminent American jurist has done, a second maker of the Constitution. I will not borrow the phrase which said of Augustus that he found Rome of brick and left it of marble, because Marshall’s function was not to change but to develop. The Constitution was, except of course as regards the political scheme of national government, which was already well established, rather a ground plan than a city. It was, if I may pursue the metaphor, much what the site of Washington was at the beginning of this century, a symmetrical ground plan for a great city, but with only some tall edifices standing here and there among fields and woods. Marshall left it what Washington has now become, a splendid and commodious capital within whose ample bounds there are still some vacant spaces and some mean dwellings, but which, built up and beautified as it has been by the taste and wealth of its rapidly growing population, is worthy to be the centre of a mighty
slaves of persons aiding in the rebellion, the suspension of the statute of limita- tions, the practical extinction of State banks by increased taxation laid on them under the general taxing power.
1 Such as Desty’s clear and compendious ederal Constitution Annotated.
cHAP, xxx111 INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 375
nation. Marshall was, of course, only one among seven judges, but his majestic intellect and the elevation of his character gave him such an ascendency, that he found himself only once in a minority on any constitutional question.! His work of building up and working out the Constitution was accomplished not so much by the decisions he gave as by the judgments in which he expounded the principles of these decisions, judgments which for their philosophical breadth, the luminous exactness of their reasoning, and the fine political sense which pervades them, have never been surpassed and rarely equalled by the most famous jurists of modern Europe or of ancient Rome. Marshall did not forget the duty of a judge to decide nothing more than the suit before him requires, but he was wont to set forth the grounds of his decision in such a way as to show how they would fall to be applied in cases that had not yet arisen. He grasped with _extraordinary force and clearness the cardinal idea that the creation of a national government implies the grant of all such subsidiary powers as are requisite to the effectuation of its main powers and purposes, but he developed and applied this idea with so much prudence and sobriety, never treading on purely political ground, never indulging the temptation to theorize, but content to follow out as a lawyer the consequences of legal principles, that the Constitution seemed not so much to rise under his hands to its full stature, as to be gradually unveiled by him till it stood revealed in the harmonious perfection of the form which its framers had designed. That admirable flexibility and capacity for growth which characterize it beyond all other rigid or supreme constitutions, is largely due to him, yet not more to his courage than to his caution.”
We now come to the third question: How is the interpreting authority restrained? If the American Constitution is capable of being so developed by this expansive interpretation, what
1 In that one case (Ogden v. Sanders) there was a bare majority against him, and professional opinion now approves the view which he took. See an extremely interesting address delivered to the American Bar Association in 1879 by Mr. Edward J. Phelps, who observes that when Marshall became Chief-Justice only two decisions on constitutional law had been pronounced by the court. Between that time and his death fifty-one were given.
2 Had the Supreme court been in those days possessed by the same spirit. of strictness and literality which the Judicial Committee of the British Privy Council has recently applied to the construction of the British North America Act of 1867 (the Act which creates the Constitution of the Canadian Federation), the United States Constitution would never have grown to be what it now is.
hin ON ees
376 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT . PART I
security do its written terms offer to the people and to the States? What becomes of the special value claimed for Rigid constitutions that they preserve the frame of government unim- paired in its essential merits, that they restrain the excesses of a transient majority, and (in Federations) the aggressions of a central authority ?
The answer is two-fold. In the first place, the interpreting authority is, in questions not distinctly political, different from the legislature and from the executive. There is therefore a probability that it will disagree with either of them when they attempt to transgress the Constitution, and will decline to stretch the law so as to sanction encroachments those authorities may have attempted. The fact that the interpreting authority is nowise amenable to the other two, and is composed of lawyers, imbued with professional habits, strengthens this probability. In point of fact, there have been few cases, and those chiefly cases of urgency during the war, in which the judiciary has been even accused of lending itself to the designs of the other organs of government. The period when extensive interpretation was most active (1800-1835) was-also the period when the party opposed to a strong central government commanded Congress and the executive, and so far from approving the course the court took, the dominant party then often complained of it.
In the second place, there stands above and behind the legis- lature, the executive, and the judiciary, another power, that of public opinion. The President, Congress, and the courts are all, the two former directly, the latter practically, amenable to the people, and anxious to be in harmony with the general current of its sentiment. If the people approve the way in which these authorities are interpreting and using the Constitution, they go on; if the people disapprove, they pause, or at least slacken their pace. Generally the people have approved of such action by the President or Congress as has seemed justified by the needs of the time, even though it may have gone beyond the letter of the Constitution: generally they have approved the conduct of the courts whose legal interpretation has upheld such legislative or executive action. Public opinion sanctioned the purchase of Louisiana, and the still bolder action of the executive in the Secession War. It approved the Missouri compromise of 1820, which the Supreme court thirty-seven years afterwards declared to have been in excess of the powers of Congress. But
cHar. xxx1 INTERPRETATION OF SENS ON 377
it ae the Alien and Sedition laws of 1798, and although these statutes were never pronounced unconstitutional by the courts, this popular censure has prevented any similar legislation since that time.' The people have, of course, much less exact notions of the Constitution. than the legal profession or the courts. But while they generally desire to see the powers of the government so far expanded as to enable it to meet the exigencies of the moment, they are sufficiently attached to its general doctrines, they sufficiently prize the protection it affords them against their own impulses, to censure any interpretation which palpably departs from the old lines. And their censure is, of course, still more severe if the court seems to be acting at the bidding of a party.
A singular result of the importance of constitutional inter- pretation in the American government may be here referred to. It is this, that the United States legislature has been very largely occupied in purely legal discussions. When it is pro- posed to legislate on a subject which has been heretofore little dealt with, the opponents of a measure have two lines of defence. They may, as Englishmen would im a like case, argue that the measure is inexpedient. But they may also, which Englishmen. cannot, argue that it is unconstitutional, z.¢. illegal, because transcending the powers of Congress. This is a question fit to be raised in Congress, not only as regards matters with which, as being purely political, the courts of law will refuse to interfere, but as regards all other matters also, because since a decision on the constitutionality of a statute can never be obtained from the judges by anticipation, the legislature ought to consider whether they are acting within their competence. And it is a question on which a stronger case can often be made, and made with less exertion, than on the issue-whether the measure be substantially expedient. Hence it is usually put in the fore-front of the battle, and argued with great vigour and acumen by leaders who are probably more ingenious as lawyers than they are far-sighted as statesmen.
A further consequence of this habit is pointed out by one of the most thoughtful among American constitutional writers. Legal issues are apt to dwarf and obscure the more substantially important issues of principle and policy, distracting from these
1 So it disapproved strongly, in the northern States, of the judgments delivered by the majority of the Supreme court in the Dred Scott case.
378 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
latter the attention of the nation as well as the skill of congres- sional debaters.
“The English legislature,” says Judge Hare, “is free to follow any course that will promote the welfare of the State, and the inquiry is not, ‘Has Parliament power to pass the Act?’ but, ‘Is it consistent with principle, and such as the circumstances demand?’ These are the material points, and if the public mind is satisfied as to them there is no further controversy. In the United States, on the other hand, the question primarily is one of power, and in the refined and subtle discussion which ensues, right is too often lost sight of or treated as if it were synony- mous with might. It is taken for granted that what the Constitution permits it also approves, and that measures which are legal cannot be contrary to morals.” !
The interpretation of the Constitution has at times become so momentous as to furnish a basis for the formation of political parties ; and the existence of parties divided upon such questions has of course stimulated the interest with which points of legal interpretation have been watched and canvassed. Soon after the formation of the National government in 1789 two parties grew up, one advocating a strong central authority, the other cham- pioning the rights of the States. Of these parties the former naturally came to insist on a liberal, an expansive, perhaps a lax construction of the words of the Constitution, because the more wide is the meaning placed upon its grant of powers, so much the wider are those powers themselves. The latter party, on the other hand, was acting in protection both of the States and of the individual citizen against the central government, when it limited by a strict and narrow interpretation of the fundamental instrument the powers which that instrument conveyed. The distinction which began in those early days has never since vanished. There has always been a party professing itself dis- posed to favour the central government, and therefore a party of broad construction. There has always been a party claiming that it aimed at protecting the rights of the States, and there- fore a party of strict construction. Some writers have gone so far as to deem these different views of interpretation to be the foundation of all the political parties that have divided America, This view, however, inverts the facts. It is not because men have differed in their reading of the Constitution that they have
1 Lectures on Constitutional Law, p. 135.
CHAP. xxx1lI INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 379
advocated or opposed an extension of Federal powers ; it is their attitude on this substantial issue that has determined their atti- tude on the verbal one. Moreover, the two great parties have several times changed sides on the very question of interpreta- tion. The purchase of Louisiana and the Embargo acts were the work of the Strict Constructionists, while it was the Loose Constructionist party which protested against the latter measure, and which, at the Hartford Convention of 1814, advanced doc- trines of State rights almost amounting to those subsequently asserted by South Carolina in 1832 and by the Secessionists of 1861. Parties in America, as in most countries, have followed their temporary interest ; and if that interest happened to differ from some traditional party doctrine, they have explained the latter away. Whenever there has been a serious party conflict, it has been in reality a conflict over some living and practical issue, and only in form a debate upon canons of legal interpreta- tion. What is remarkable, though natural enough in a country governed by a written instrument, is that every controversy has got involved with questions of constitutional construction. When it was proposed to exert some power of Congress, as for instance to charter a national bank, to grant money for internal improve- ments, to enact a protective tariff, the opponents of these schemes could plausibly argue, and therefore of course did argue, that they were unconstitutional. So any suggested interference with slavery in States or Territories was imme- diately declared to violate the State rights which the Constitu- tion guaranteed. Thus every serious question came to be fought as a constitutional question. But as regards most questions, and certainly as regards the great majority of the party combatants, men did not attack or defend a proposal because they held it legally unsound or sound on the true construction of the Consti- tution, but alleged it to be constitutionally wrong or right because they thought the welfare of the country, or at least their party interests, to be involved. Constitutional interpreta- tion was a pretext rather than a cause, a matter of form rather than of substance.
The results were both good and evil. They were good in so far as they made both parties profess themselves defenders of the Constitution, zealous only that it should be interpreted aright ; as they familiarized the people with its provisions, and made them vigilant critics of every legislative or executive act which
380 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
could affect its working. They were evil in distracting public attention from real problems to the legal aspect of those problems, and in cultivating a habit of casuistry which threatened the in- tegrity of the Constitution itself.
Since the Civil War there has been much less of this casuistry because there have been fewer occasions for it, the Broad Construction view of the Constitution having practically prevailed—prevailed so far that the Supreme court- now holds that the power of Congress to make paper money legal tender is incident to the sovereignty of the National government, and that a Democratic House of Representatives passes a bill giving a Federal commission vast powers over all the railways which pass through more than one State. There is still a party inclined to strict construction, but the strictness which it upholds would have been deemed lax by the Broad Constructionists of thirty years ago. ‘The interpretation which has thus stretched the Constitution to cover powers once undreamt of, may be deemed a . dangerous resource. But it must be remembered that even the constitutions we call rigid must make their choice between being bent or being broken. The Americans have more than once bent their Constitution in order that they might not be forced to break it.
CHAPTER XXXIV THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION BY USAGE
THERE is yet another way in which the Constitution has been developed. This is by laying down rules on matters which are within its general scope, but have not been dealt with by its words, by the creation of machinery which it has not provided for the. attainment of objects it contemplates, or, to vary the metaphor, by ploughing or planting ground which though included within the boundaries of the Constitution, was left waste and untilled by those who drew up the original instru- ment.
Although the Constitution is curiously minute upon some comparatively small points, such as the qualifications of members of Congress and the official record of their votes, it passes over in silence many branches of political action, many details essential to every government. Some may have been forgotten,
‘but some were purposely omitted, because the Convention could
not agree upon them, or because they would have provoked opposition in the ratifying conventions, or because they were thought unsuited to a document which it was desirable to draft concisely and to preserve as far as possible unaltered. This was wise and indeed necessary, but it threw a great responsibility upon those who had to work the government which the Consti- tution created. They found nothing within the four corners of
the instrument to guide them on points whose gravity was per-
ceived as soon as they had to be settled in practice. Many of such points could not be dealt with by interpretation or con- struction, however liberally extensive it might be, because there was nothing in the words of the Constitution from which such construction could start, and because they were in some in-
‘stances matters which, though important, could not be based upon
principle, but must be settled by an arbitrary determination.
382 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
i
Their settlement, which began with the first Congress, has been effected in two ways, by Congressional legislation and by usage,
Congress was empowered by the Constitution to pass statutes on certain prescribed topics. On many other topics not specially named, but within its general powers, statutes were evidently needed. For instance, the whole subject of Federal taxation, direct and indirect, the establishment of Federal courts, inferior to the Supreme court, and the assignment of particular kinds and degrees of jurisdiction to each class of courts, the organiza- tion of the civil, military, and naval services of the country, the administration of Indian affairs and of the Territories, the rules to be observed in the elections of Presidents and senators, these and many other matters of high import are regulated by statutes, statutes which Congress can change as English statutes are changed by Parliament, but which, in their main features, have been but little changed since their first enactment. Although such statutes cannot be called parts of the Consti- tution in the same sense as the interpretations and constructions judicially placed upon it, for these latter have (subject to the possibility of their reversal) become practically incorporated with its original text, still they have given to its working a character and direction which must be borne in mind in discussing it, and which have, in some instances, produced results opposed to the ideas of its framers. To take the latest instance, the passing of the Inter-State Commerce Act, which regulates all the greater railways over the whole United States, is an assertion of Federal authority over numerous and powerful corporations chartered by and serving the various States, which gives a new aspect and significance to the clause in the Constitution empowering Con- gress to regulate commerce. Legal interpretation held that clause to be sufficiently wide to enable Congress to legislate on inter-State railways; but when Congress actually exerted its power in enacting this statute a further step, and a long one, was taken towards bringing the organs of transportation under national control.1 Legislation, therefore, though it cannot in strictness enlarge the frontiers fixed by the Constitution, can
1 It need hardly be said that the now general recognition that the Constitution empowers Congress to deal with the subject does not imply that every detail of the Act is above objection. Although prima facie Congress, when competent to legislate on a subject, is free to choose its means, still it remains open to any one to challenge the constitutionality of any particular provisions in a statute.
CHAP, XXXIV DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE 383
give to certain provinces lying within those frontiers far greater importance than they formerly possessed, and by so doing, can substantially change the character of the government. It cannot engender a new power, but it can turn an old one in a new direction, and call a dormant one into momentous activity.
Next as to usage. Custom, which is a law - producing agency in every department, is specially busy in matters which pertain to the practical conduct of government. Understandings and conventions are in modern practice no less essential to the smooth working of the English Constitution, than are the prin- ciples enunciated in the Bill of Rights. Now understandings are merely long-established usages, sanctioned by no statute, often too vague to admit of precise statement,! yet in some instances deemed so binding that a breach of them would damage the character of a statesman or a ministry just as much as the transgression of a statute. In the United States there are fewer such understandings than in England, because under a Constitu- tion drawn out in one fundamental document everybody is more apt to stand upon his strict legal rights, and the spirit of institu- tions departs less widely from their letter. Nevertheless some of those features of American government to which its character is chiefly due, and which recur most frequently in its daily work- ing, rest neither upon the Constitution nor upon any statute, but upon usage alone. Here are some instances.
The presidential electors have by usage and by usage only lost the right the Constitution gave them of exercising their dis- cretion in the choice of a chief magistrate.
The President is not re-elected more than once, though the Constitution places no restriction whatever on re-eligibility.”
The Senate now never exercises its undoubted power of re-
1 For instance, it is impossible to state precisely the rights of the House of Lords’as to rejecting bills passed by the House of Commons. It is admitted that the Upper House must, as a matter of political necessity or prudence, in the long run yield to the Lower, but exactly how soon or under what circumstances is a matter on which no rule can be said to exist. A notion has grown up in some quarters that the House of Lords may properly resist till a general election, but must then bow to the will of the voters. But this idea, which of course receives no countenance from English law, cannot be deemed to have become established by custom as a part of the Constitution.
2 See ante, Chap. V. The Federalist (No. Ixviii.) says that the President will be and ought to be re-elected as often as the people think him worthy of their confidence.
384 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
fusing to confirm the appointments made by the President to cabinet offices.
The President is permitted to remove, without asking the con- sent of the Senate, officials to whose appointment the consent of the Senate is necessary. This was for a time regulated by statute, but the statute having been repealed the old usage has revived. The Constitution is silent on the point.
Both the House and the Senate conduct their legislation by means of standing committees. This vital peculiarity of the American system of government has no firmer basis than the standing orders of each House, which can be repealed at any moment, but have been maintained for many years.
The Speaker of the House is by a similar practice entrusted with the nomination of all the House committees, an arrangement which gives him an influence upon legislation greater than the President’s.
The chairmen of the chief committees of both Houses, which control the great departments of State (¢.g. foreign affairs, navy, justice, finance), have practically become an additional set of ministers for those departments.
The custom of going into caucus, by which the parties in each of the two Houses of Congress determine their action, and the obligation on individual members to obey the decision of the caucus meeting, are mere habits or understandings, without legal sanction. So is the right of the senators from a State to control the Federal patronage of that State, a right shaken (as observed in an earlier chapter) by the victory of President Gar- field over Mr. Conkling, but still largely exerted. So is the usage that appropriation bills shall be first presented to the House.
The rule that a member of Congress must be chosen from the district, as well as from the State, in which he resides, rests on no Federal enactment; indeed, neither Congress nor any State legislature would be entitled thus to narrow the liberty of choice which the words of the Constitution imply, though some State legislatures have affected so to do.
Jackson introduced, and succeeding Presidents continued the practice of dismissing Federal officials belonging to the opposite party, and appointing none but adherents of their own party to the vacant places. This is the so-called Spoils System, which, having been applied also to State and municipal offices, has been made the corner-stone of ‘practical politics” in America. The
rae
CHAP. XXXIV DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE 385
Constitution is nowise answerable for it, and legislation only partially. ;
Neither in English law nor in American is there anything regarding the re-eligibility of a member of the popular chamber ; nor can it be said that usage has established in either country any broad general rule on the subject. But whereas the English tendency has been to re-elect a member unless there is some positive reason for getting rid of him, in many parts of America men are disposed the other way, and refuse to re-elect him just because he has had his turn already. Any one can understand what a difference this makes in the character of the chamber.
We see, then, that several salient features of the present American government, such as the popular election of the Presi- dent, the influence of senators and congressmen over patronage, the immense power of the Speaker, the Spoils system, are due to usages which have sprung up round the Constitution and pro- foundly affected its working, but which are not parts of the Con- stitution, nor necessarily attributable to any specific provision which it contains. The most remarkable instance of all, the choice of presidential candidates by the great parties assembled in their national conventions, will be fully considered in a later chapter.
One of the changes which the last seventy years have brought about is so remarkable as to deserve special mention. The Con- stitution contains no provisions regarding the electoral franchise in congressional elections save the three following :—
That the franchise shall in every State be the same as that by which the members of the “most numerous branch of the State legislature” are chosen (Art. i. § 2).
That when any male citizens over twenty-one years of age are excluded by any State from the franchise (except for crime) the basis of representation in Congress of that State shall be pro- portionately reduced (Am. xiv., 1868),
That “the right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged on account of race, colour, or previous condition of servitude” (Am. xv., 1870).
Subject to these conditions every State may regulate the electoral franchise as it pleases.
In the first days of the Constitution the suffrage was in nearly all States limited by various conditions (¢.g. property qualification, length of residence, ete.) which excluded, or might have excluded, though in some States the proportion of very poor people was
VOL. I i 2C
386 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT - ~ PART I
small, a considerable number of the free inhabitants. At present the suffrage is in every State practically universal. It had be- come so in the Free States! even before the war. Here is an advance towards pure democracy effected without the action of the national legislature, but solely by the legislation of the several States, a legislation which, as it may be changed at any moment, is, so far as the national government is concerned, mere custom. And of this great step, modifying profoundly the colour and character of the government, there is no trace in the words of the Constitution other than the provisions of the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments introduced for the benefit of the liberated negroes.
It is natural, it is indeed inevitable, that there should be in every country such a parasitic growth of usages and understand- ings round the solid legal framework of government. But must not the result of such a growth be different where a rigid con- sitution exists from what it is in countries where, as in England, the constitution is flexible? In England usages of the kind de- scribed become inwoven with the law of the country as settled by statutes and decisions, and modify that law. Cases come before a court in which a usage is recognized and thereby obtains a sort of legal sanction. Statutes are passed in which an exist- ing usage is taken for granted, and which therefore harmonize
with it. Thus the always changing Constitution becomes inter- |
penetrated by custom. Custom is in fact the first stage through which a rule passes before it is embodied in binding law. But in America, where the fundamental law cannot readily be, and is in fact very rarely altered, may we not expect a conflict, or at least a want of harmony, between law and custom, due to the constant growth of the one and the immutability of the other ?
In examining this point one must distinguish between subjects on which the Constitution is silent and subjects on which it speaks. As regards the former there is little difficulty. Usage and legislation may expand the Constitution in what way they please, subject only to the control of public opinion. The courts of law will not interfere, because no provision of the Constitution is violated ; and even where it may be thought that an act of Congress or of the executive is opposed to the spirit of the Con- stitution, still if it falls within the range of the discretion which
1 Save that in many of them persons of colour were placed at a disadvantage.
Ries
CHAP, XXXIV DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE 387
these authorities have received, it will not be questioned by the judges.! If, on the other hand, either congressional legislation or usage
begins to trench on ground which the Constitution expressly
covers, the question at once arises whether such legislation is valid, or whether an act done in conformity with such usage is legal. Questions of this kind do not always come before the courts, and if they do not, the presumption is in favour of what- ever act has been done by Congress or by any legally constituted authority. When, however, such a question is susceptible of judicial determination and is actually brought before a tribunal, the tribunal is disposed rather to support than to treat as null the act done. Applying that expansive interpretation which has prevailed since the war as it prevailed in the days of Chief- Justice Marshall, the Supreme court is apt to find grounds for moving in the direction which it perceives public opinion to have taken, and for putting on the words of the Constitution a sense which legalizes what Congress has enacted or custom approved. When this takes place things proceed smoothly. The change which circumstances call for is made gently, and is controlled, perhaps modified, in its operation.
But sometimes the courts feel bound to declare some statute, or executive act done in pursuance of usage, contrary to the Constitution. What happens? In theory the judicial deter- mination is conclusive, and ought to check any further progress in the path which has been pronounced unconstitutional. But whether this result follows will in practice depend on the circum- stances of the moment. If the case is not urgent, if there is no strong popular impulse behind Congress or the President, no paramount need for the usage which had sprung up and is now disapproved, the decision of the courts will be acquiesced in ; and whatever tendency towards change exists will seek some other channel where no constitutional obstacle bars its course. But if the needs of the time be pressing, courts and Constitution may have to give way. Salus reipublicae lex swprema. Above that supreme written law stands the safety of the commonwealth, which will be secured, if possible in conformity with the Con-
1 “Tt is an axiom in our jurisprudence that an Act of Congress is not to be pronounced unconstitutional unless the defect of power to pass it is so clear as to admit of no doubt. Every doubt is to be resolved in favour of the validity of the law.”—Swayne, J., in U.S. v. Rhodes, 1 Abb. U.S. 49.
388 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART i
stitution ; but if that be not possible, then by evading, or even by overriding the Constitution. This is what happened in the Civil War, when men said that they would break the Con- stitution in order to preserve it.
Attempts to disobey the Constitution have been rare, because the fear of clashing with it has arrested many mischievous proposals in their earlier stages, while the influence of public opinion has averted possible collisions by leading the courts to lend their ultimate sanction to measures or usages which, had they come under review at their first appearance, might have been pronounced unconstitutional.? That collisions have been rare is good evidence of the political wisdom of American states- men and lawyers. But politicians in other countries will err if they suppose that the existence of a rigid or supreme con- stitution is enough to avert collisions, or to secure the victory of the fundamental instrument. A rigid constitution resembles, not some cliff of Norwegian gneiss which bears for centuries un- changed the lash of Atlantic billows, but rather a sea-wall, such as guards the seaside promenade of an English town, whose smooth surface resists the ordinary waves and currents of the Channel but may be breached or washed away by some tremendous tempest. The American Constitution has stood unbroken, because America has never seen, as some European countries have seen, angry multitudes or military tyrants bent on destroy- ing the institutions which barred the course of their passions or
1 In a remarkable letter written to Mr. Hodges (4th April 1864), President Lincoln said: “ My oath to preserve the Constitution imposed on me the duty of preserving by every indispensable means that government, that nation, of which the Constitution was the organic law. Was it possible to lose the nation and yet preserve the Constitution? By general law life and limb must be protected, yet often a limb must be amputated to save a life, but a life is never wisely given to save alimb. I felt that measures, otherwise unconstitutional, might become law- ful by becoming indispensable to the preservation of the Constitution through the preservation of the nation. Right or wrong I assumed this ground, and now avow it. I could not feel that to the best of my ability I had even tried to preserve the Constitution, if, to save slavery, or any minor matter, I should permit the wreck of government, country, and Constitution altogether.”
2 Such as the expenditure of vast sums on “internal improvements” and the assumption of wide powers over internal communications.
® Judge Cooley aptly observes: “If the great men of 1787 had been living a little later they might have seen in the experience of France that the most care- fully prepared and popular written constitution is not more secure than any other against sudden, violent, and destructive changes, and may, indeed, be more easily overturned by the assaults of faction than it possibly could be if its principles, having their roots deep in the nature of the people, were only expressed in unwritten usages.”—Address to the South Carolina Bar Association.
( : Z ?
se “ % j
ke “7. : D wile Bs = eT ne yt ; f " ; \ i.
 ouar. xxxtv. ——-«s DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE ge
ambition. And it has also stood because it has submitted to a process of constant, though sometimes scarcely perceptible, change which has adapted it to the conditions of a new age.
The solemn determination of a people enacting a fundamental law by which they and their descendants shall be governed cannot prevent that law, however great the reverence they continue to profess for it, from being worn away in one part, enlarged in another, modified in a third, by the ceaseless action of influences playing upon the individuals who compose the people. Thus the American Constitution has necessarily changed as the nation _ has changed, has changed in the spirit with which men regard it, and therefore in its own spirit. To use the words of the eminent constitutional lawyer whom I have more than once - quoted: “‘We may think,” says Judge Cooley, “that we have the Constitution all before us; but for practical purposes the Constitution is that which the government, in its several depart-
ments, and the people in the performance of their duties as
citizens, recognize and respect as such ; and nothing else is. . . ‘Cervantes says: Every one is the son of his own works. ‘This is more emphatically true of an instrument of government than it can possibly be of a natural person. What it takes to itself, though at first unwarrantable, helps to make it over into a new instrument of government, and it represents at last the acts done under it.”
CHAPTER XXXV THE RESULTS OF CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
WE have seen that the American Constitution has changed, is changing, and by the law of its existence must continue to change, in its substance and practical working even when its words remain the same. ‘Time and habit,” said Washington, “are at least as necessary to fix the true character of govern- - ments as of other human institutions:”! and while habit fixes some things, time remoulds others.
It remains to ask what has been the general result of the changes it has suffered, and what light an examination of its history, in this respect, throws upon the probable future of the instrument and on the worth of Rigid or Supreme constitutions in general.
The Constitution was avowedly created as an instrument of checks and balances. Each branch of the National government was to restrain the others, and maintain the equipoise of the whole. The legislature was to balance the executive, and the judiciary both. The two houses of the legislature were to balance one another. The National government, taking all its branches together, was balanced against the State governments. As this equilibrium was placed under the protection of a document, unchangeable save by the people themselves, no one of the branches of the National government has been able to absorb or override the others, as the House of Commons and the Cabinet, itself a child of the House of Commons, have in England overridden and subjected the Crown and the House of Lords. Each branch maintains its independence, and can, within certain — limits, defy the others.
But there is among political bodies and offices (i.¢. the persons who from time to time fill the same office) of necessity a constant
1 Farewell Address, 17th September 1796.
CHAR, XXXV RESULTS OF DEVELOPMENT 391
strife, a struggle for existence similar to that which Mr. Darwin has shown to exist among plants and animals ; and as in the case of plants and animals so also in the political sphere this struggle stimulates each body or office to exert its utmost force for its own preservation, and to develop its aptitudes in any direction wherein development is possible. Each branch of the American government has striven to extend its range and its powers; each has advanced in certain directions, but in others has been restrained by the equal or stronger pressure of other branches. I shall attempt to state the chief differences perceptible between the ideas which men entertained! regarding the various bodies and offices of the government when they first entered life, and the aspect they now wear to the nation.
The President has developed a capacity for becoming, in moments of national peril, something like a Roman dictator. He is in quiet times no stronger than he was at first, possibly weaker. Congress has in some respects encroached on him, yet his office has shown that it may, in the hands of a trusted leader and at the call of a sudden necessity, rise to a tremendous height.
The ministers of the President have not become more im- portant either singly or collectively as a cabinet. Out off from the legislature on one side, and from the people on the other, they have been a mere appendage to the President.
The Senate has come to press heavily on the executive, and at the same time has developed legislative functions which, though contemplated in the Constitution, were comparatively rudimentary in the older days. It has, in the judgment of American publicists, grown relatively stronger than it then was.
The Vice-President of the United States has become even more insignificant than the Constitution seemed to make him.
On the other hand, the Speaker of the House of Repre- sentatives, whom the Constitution mentions only once, and on whom it bestows no powers, has now secured one of the leading parts in the piece, and can affect the course of legislation more than any other single person.
An oligarchy of chairmen of the leading committees has sprung up in the House of Representatives as a consequence of
1 Tt is from these ideas that one must start in attempting such a comparison, because to endeavour to determine what the powers of each body and person really were would involve a long and difficult inquiry.
892 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT - PART I
the increasing demands on its time and of the working of the committee system.
The Judiciary was deerned to be making large strides during the first forty years, because it established its claim to powers which, though doubtless really granted, had been but faintly apprehended in 1789. After 1830 the development of those powers advanced more slowly. But the position which the Supreme court has taken in the scheme of government, if it be not greater than the framers of the Constitution would have wished, is yet greater than they foresaw.
Although some of these changes are considerable, they are far smaller than those which England has seen pass over her Govern- ment since 1789. So far, therefore, the rigid Constitution has maintained a sort of equilibrium between the various powers, whereas that which was then supposed to exist in England between the king, the peers, the House of Commons, and the people (ze. the electors) has vanished irrecoverably.
In the other struggle that has gone on in America, that be- tween the National government and the States, the results have been still more considerable, though the process of change has sometimes been interrupted. During the first few decades after 1789 the States, in spite of a steady and often angry resistance, sometimes backed by threats of secession, found themselves more and more entangled in the network of Federal powers which sometimes Congress, sometimes the President, sometimes the Judiciary, as the expounder of the Constitution, flung over them. Provisions of the Constitution whose bearing had been inade- quately realized in the first instance were put in force against a State, and when once put in force became precedents for the future. It is instructive to observe that this was done by both of the great national parties, by those who defended State rights and preached State sovereignty as well as by the advocates of a strong central government. For the former, when they saw the opportunity of effecting by means of the central legislative or executive power an object of immediate party importance, did not hesitate to put in force that central power, forgetful or heedless of the example they were setting.
It is for this reason that the process by which the National government has grown may be called a natural one. A political force has, like a heated gas, a natural tendency to expansion, a tendency which works even apart from the knowledge and inten-
er Cy
CHAP. XXXV RESULTS OF DEVELOPMENT 898
tions of those through whom it works. In the process of expan: sion such a force may meet, and may be checked or driven back by, a stronger force. The expansive force of the National government proved ultimately stronger than the force of the States, so the centralizing tendency prevailed. And it prevailed not so much by the conscious purpose of the party disposed to favour it, as through the inherent elements of strength which it possessed, and the favouring conditions amid which it acted, elements and conditions largely irrespective of either political party, and operative under the supremacy of the one as well as of the other. Now and then the centralizing process was checked. Georgia defied the Supreme court in 1830-32, and was not made to bend because the executive sided with her. South Carolina defied Congress and the President in 1832, and the issue was settled by a compromise. Acute foreign observers then and often during the period that followed predicted the dissolution of the Union. For some years before the outbreak of the Civil War the tie of obedience to the National government was palpably loosened over a large part of the country. But during and after the war the former tendency resumed its action, swifter and more potent than before.
A critic may object to the view here presented by remarking that the struggle between the National government and the States has not, as in the case of the struggles between different branches of the National government, proceeded merely by the natural development of the Constitution, but has been accelerated by specific changes in the Constitution, viz. those made by the three last amendments.
This is true. But the dominance of the centralizing tendencies is not wholly or even mainly due to those amendments. It had begun before them. It would have come about, though less completely, without them. It has been due not only to these amendments but also—
To the extensive interpretation by the judiciary of the powers
which the Constitution vests in the National government.
To the passing by Congress of statutes on topics not exclus-
ively reserved to the States, statutes which have sensibly narrowed the field of State action.
To exertions of executive power which, having been approved
by the people, and not condemned by the courts, have passed into precedents.
394 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT _ PART A
These have been the modes in which the centralizing tendency has shown itself and prevailed. What have been the underlying causes 4 ;
They belong to history. They are partly economical, partly moral, Steam and electricity have knit the various parts of the — country closely together, have made each State and group of States more dependent on its neighbours, have added to the matters in which the whole country benefits by joint action and uniform legislation. The power of the National government to stimulate or depress commerce and industries by tariff legislation has given it a wide control over the material prosperity of part of the Union, till “the people, and especially the trading and manufacturing classes, came to look more and more to the national capital for what enlists their interests, and less and less to the capital. of their own State. . . . It is the nation and not the State that is present to the imagination of the citizens as sovereign, even in the States of Jefferson and Calhoun. . . . The Constitution as it is, and the Union as it was, can no longer be the party watchword. _ There is a new Union, with new grand features, but with new engrafted evils.”! There has grown upa pride in the national flag, and in the national government as re- presenting national unity. In the North there is gratitude to that government as the power that saved the Union in the Civil War ; in the South a sense of the strength which Congress and the President then exerted; in both a recollection of the immense scope which the war powers took and might take again. All over the country there is a great army of Federal office-holders who look to Washington as the centre of their hopes and fears. As the modes in and by which these and other similar causes can work are evidently not exhausted, it is clear that the develop- ment of the Constitution as between the nation and the States has not yet stopped, and present appearances suggest that the centralizing tendency will continue to prevail.
How does the inquiry we have been conducting affect the judgment to be passed upon the worth of rigid constitutions, i.e. of written instruments of government emanating from an authority superior to that of the ordinary legislature? The question is a grave one for European countries, which seem to be passing from the older or flexible to the newer or rigid type of constitutions.
A European reader who has followed the facts stated in-the
1 Cooley, History of Michigan.
o's cian i
CHAP. XXXV , RESULTS OF DEVELOPMENT 395
last foregoing chapters may be inclined to dismiss the question summarily. “Rigid Constitutions,” he will say, “are on your own showing a delusion and a sham. The American Constitu- tion has been changed, is being changed, will continue to be changed, by interpretation and usage. It is not what it was even thirty years ago; who can tell what it will be thirty years hence ! If its transformations are less swift than those of the English Constitution, this is only because England has not even yet so completely democratized herself as America had done half a cen- tury ago, and therefore there has been more room for change in England. If the existence of the fundamental Constitution did not prevent violent stretches of executive power during the war, and of legislative power after as well as during the war, will not its paper guarantees be trodden under foot more recklessly the next time a crisis arrives? It was intended to protect not only the States against the central government, not only each branch of the government against the other branches, but the people against themselves, that is to say, the people as a whole against the impulses of a transient majority. What becomes of this pro- tection when you admit that even the Supreme court is influenced by public opinion, which is only another name for the reigning sentiment of the moment? If every one of the checks and safe- guards contained in the document may be overset, if all taken together may be overset, where are the boasted guarantees of the fundamental law? Evidently it stands only because it is not at present assailed. It is like the walls of Jericho, tall and stately, but ready to fall at the blast of the trumpet. It is worse than a delusion: it is a snare; for it lulls the nation into a fancied security, seeming to promise a stability for the institutions of government, and a respect for the rights of the individual, which are in fact baseless. A flexible constitution like that of England is really safer, because it practises no similar deceit, but by warn- ing good citizens that the welfare of the commonwealth depends always on themselves and themselves only, stimulates them to constant efforts for the maintenance of their own rights and the deepest interests of society.”
‘This statement of the case errs as much in one direction by undervaluing, as common opinion errs by overvaluing, the stabil- ity of rigid constitutions. They do not perform all that the solemnity of their wording promises. But they are not therefore useless.
396 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
To expect any form of words, however weightily conceived, with whatever sanctions enacted, permanently to restrain the passions and interests of men is to expect the impossible. Beyond a certain point, you cannot protect the people against themselves any more than you can, to use a familiar American expression, lift yourself from the ground by your own boot-straps. Laws sanctioned by the overwhelming physical power of a despot, laws sanctioned by supernatural terrors whose reality no one doubted, have failed to restrain those passions in ages of slavery and | superstition. The world is not so much advanced that in this age laws, even the best and most venerable laws, will of themselves command obedience. Constitutions which in quiet times change gradually, peacefully, almost imperceptibly, must in times of re- volution be changed more boldly, some provisions being sacrificed for the sake of the rest, as mariners throw overboard part of the cargo in a storm in order to save the other part with the ship herself. To cling to the letter of a Constitution when the welfare of the country for whose sake the Constitution exists is at stake, would be to seek to preserve life at the cost of all that makes life worth having—propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.
Nevertheless the rigid Constitution of the United States has rendered, and renders now, inestimable services. It opposes obstacles to rash and hasty change. It secures time for delibera- tion. It forces the people to think seriously before they alter it or pardon a transgression of it. It makes legislatures and statesmen slow to overpass their legal powers, slow even to pro- pose measures which the Constitution seems to disapprove. It tends to render the inevitable process of modification gradual and tentative, the result of admitted and growing necessities rather than of restless impatience. It altogether prevents some changes which a temporary majority may clamour for, but which will have ceased to be demanded before the barriers interposed by the Constitution have been overcome.
It does still more than this. It forms the mind and temper of the people. It trains them to habits of legality. It strengthens their conservative instincts, their sense of the value of stability and permanence in political arrangements.2 It makes them feel
1 The sense of these services induces some thoughtful Americans to believe that it might be prudent for England to place some fundamental constitutional rules out of the reach of the ordinary methods of parliamentary change. See note to this chapter at the end of this volume.
2. An illustration of what I mean is afforded by the history of the Roman
\
CHAP. XXXV__ RESULTS OF DEVELOPMENT 397
oe
that to comprehend their supreme instrument of government is a personal duty, incumbent on each one of them. It familiarizes them with, it attaches them by ties of pride and reverence to, those fundamental truths on which the Constitution is based.
These are enormous services to render to any free country, but above all to one which, more than any other, is governed not by the men of rank or wealth or special wisdom, but by public opinion, that is to say, by the ideas and feelings of the people at large. In no country were swift political changes so much to be apprehended, because nowhere has material growth been so rapid and immigration so enormous. In none might the political char- acter of the people have seemed more likely to be bold and prone to innovation, because their national existence began with a revolution, which even now lies only a century behind. That none has ripened into a more prudently conservative temper may be largely ascribed to the influence of the famous instrument of 1789, which, enacted in and for a new republic, summed up so
‘much of what was best in the laws and customs of an ancient
monarchy.
private law. That law surpassed the laws of all other ancient States chiefly owing to the conservative temper and habits of the Roman people and the Roman lawyers. These conservative habits were largely due to the fact that early in the history of the Republic the customary law of the nation was solemnly enacted in the form of a sort of code, the so-called Law of the Twelve Tables. The existence of this code, which summed up the law in a concise and impressive form, and which had stood almost unmodified for several generations before the need of modifying it began to be felt, caused legal changes—and these necessarily became frequent when the nation had begun to extend its dominions, and to grow in com- merce, wealth, and civilization—to be made in a cautious and gradual way, here a little and there a little, so that continuity was preserved, failures abandoned, the results of successful experiments secured. Thus development, while slower, became surer and better rooted in the sentiments of the people, who were them- selves educated into a reverential regard for the law, and taught to abstain in practice from the imprudent exercise of that power of swift legislation which they all along possessed,
PA Belt THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
CHAPTER XXXVI NATURE OF THE AMERICAN STATE
From the study of the National Government, we may go on to examine that of the several States which make up the Union. This is the part of the American political system which has received least attention both from foreign and from native writers. Finding in the Federal president, cabinet, and Congress a govern- ment superficially resembling those of their own countries, and seeing the Federal authority alone active in international rela- tions, Europeans have forgotten and practically ignored the State Governments to which their own experience supplies few parallels, and on whose workings the intelligence published on their side of the ocean seldom throws light. Even the European traveller who makes the six or seven days’ run across the American continent, from New York wa Philadelphia and Chicago to San Francisco, though he passes in this journey of 2100 miles over the territories of eleven self-governing commonwealths, hardly notices the fact. He uses one coinage and one post-office; he is stopped by no custom-houses ; he sees no officials in a state livery ; he thinks no more of the difference of jurisdictions than the passenger from London to Liverpool does of the counties traversed by the line of the North-Western Railway. So, too, our best informed English writers on the science of politics, while discussing copiously the relation of the American States to the central authority, have failed to draw on the fund of instruction which lies in the study of State Governments themselves. Mill in his Representative Government scarcely refers to them. Mr. Freeman in his learned essays, Sir H. Maine in his ingenious book on Popular Govern- ment, pass by phenomena which would have admirably illustrated some of their reasonings.!
1 The first authors known to me who have in Europe insisted with adequate
force on their value, are M. Boutmy of the Parisian Ecole Libre des Sciences Politiques, and Dr. von Holst, the constitutional historian of America.
CHAP, XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 899
American publicists, on the other hand, have been too much absorbed in the study of the Federal system to bestow much thought on the State governments. The latter seem to them the most simple and obvious things in the world, while the former, which has been the battle-ground of their political parties for a century, excites the keenest interest, and is indeed regarded as a sort of mystery, on which all the resources of their metaphysical subtlety and legal knowledge may well be expended. Thus while the dogmas of State sovereignty and State rights, made practical by the great struggle over slavery, have been discussed with extraordinary zeal and acumen by three generations of men, the character power and working of the States as separate self- governing bodies have received little attention or illustration. Yet they are full of interest ; and he who would understand the changes that have passed on the American democracy will find far more instruction in a study of the State governments than of the Federal Constitution. The materials for this study are unfor- tunately, at least to a European, either inaccessible or unmanage- able. They consist of constitutions, statutes, the records of the debates and proceedings of constitutional conventions and legis- latures, the reports of officials and commissioners, together with that continuous transcript and picture of current public opinion which the files of newspapers supply. Of these sources only one, the constitutions, is practically available to a person writing on this side the Atlantic. To be able to use the rest one must go to the State and devote one’s self there to these original authorities, correcting them, where possible, by the recollections of living men. It might have been expected that in most of the States, or at least of the older States, persons would have been found to write political, and not merely antiquarian or genealogical, State histories, describing the political career of their respective com- munities, and discussing the questions on which political contests have turned. But this has been done in comparatively few in- stances, so that the European inquirer finds a scanty measure of the assistance which he would naturally have expected from pre- vious labourers in this field.t’ I call it a field: it is rather a primeval forest, where the vegetation is rank, and through which
1 Since these lines were written, such a series of State histories has been begun under the title of American Commonwealths. Of the volumes that have already
appeared some possess high merit ; but they do not always bring the narrative down to those very recent times which are most instructive to the student of
existing institutions.
hak
OS Se ; = ead re as
400 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART; nr eS
scarcely a trail has yet been cut. The new historical school which is growing up at the leading American universities, and has _ already done excellent work on the earlier history of the Eastern States, will doubtless ultimately grapple with this task; in the meantime, the difficulties I have stated must be my excuse for treating this branch of my subject with a brevity out of propor- tion to its real interest and importance. It is better to endeavour to bring into relief a few leading features, little understood in Europe, than to attempt a detailed account which would run to inordinate length. .
The American State is a peculiar organism, unlike anything in modern Europe, or in the ancient world. The only parallel is to be found in the cantons of Switzerland, the Switzerland of our own day, for until 1815, if one ought not rather to say until 1848, Switzerland was not so much a nation or a state as a league of neighbour commonwealths. But Europe, and particularly England, so persistently ignores the history of Switzerland, that most instructive patent museum of politics, apparently only be- cause she is a small country, and because people go there to see lakes and to climb mountains, that I should perplex instead of enlightening the reader by attempting to illustrate American from Swiss phenomena.
Let me attempt to sketch the American States as separate political entities, forgetting for the moment that they are also parts of a Federation.
There are thirty-eight States in the American Union, varying in size from Texas, with an area of 265,780 square miles, to Rhode Island, with an area of 1250 square miles; and in popu- lation from New York, with 5,082,871 inhabitants, to Nevada, with 62,266.1 That is to say, the largest State is much larger than either France or the Germanic Empire; the most populous much more populous than Sweden, or Portugal, or Denmark, while the smallest is smaller than Warwickshire or Corsica, and the least populous less populous than the parish of Clerkenwell in London (69,076), or the town of Greenock in Scotland (65,884). Considering not only these differences of size, but the differences in the density of population (which in Nevada is °6, and in Oregon 1°8 to the square mile, while in Rhode Island it is 254°9 and in Massachusetts 221-8 to the square mile) ; in its
1 The population. of Nevada has declined since the census of 1880, and is now probably little over 40,000, while that of New York is now nearly 6,000,000.
 omavy. xxxvr = —Ss NATURE OF THE STATE 401
character (in South Carolina the blacks are 604,332 against 391,105 whites, in Mississippi 650,291 against 479,398 whites) ; in its birthplace (in North Carolina the foreign-born persons are less than 345 of the population, in California more than 4); in the occupations of the people, in the amount of accumulated wealth, in the proportion of educated persons to the rest of the community,—it is plain that immense differences might be looked for between the aspects of politics and conduct of govern- ment in one State and in another.
Be it also remembered that the older colonies had different historical origins. Virginia and North Carolina were unlike Massachusetts and Connecticut; New York, Pennsylvania, and Maryland different from both; while in recent times the stream of European immigration has filled some States with Irishmen, others with Germans, others with Scandinavians, and has left most of the Southern States wholly untouched.
Nevertheless, the form of government is in its main outlines, and to a large extent even in its actual working, the same in all these thirty-eight republics, and the differences, instructive as they are, relate to points of secondary consequence.
The States fall naturally into five groups :—
The New England States—Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode
Island, New Hampshire, Vermont, Maine.
The Middle States—New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware,! Maryland, Ohio, Indiana.”
The Southern, or old Slave States—Virginia, West Virginia (separated from Virginia during the war), North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Kentucky, Ten- nessee, Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, Texas.
The North-Western States— Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin,
Minnesota, Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas, Colorado.
The Pacific States—California, Nevada, Oregon.
Each of these groups has something distinctive in the character of its inhabitants, which is reflected, though more faintly now than formerly, in the character of its government and politics.
1 Delaware and Maryland were Slave States, but did not secede, and are in many respects to be classed rather with the Middle than with the Southern oup. ee 2 "Ohio and perhaps Indiana seem rather Middle than Western, because their affinities are now somewhat closer with New York or the East than with the newer States to the North-west, but of course no sharp line can be drawn, and most people would still call them Western.
VOL. I 2D
402 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS © PART
New England is the old home of Puritanism, the traces whereof, though waning under the influence of Irish and French Canadian immigration, are by no means yet extinct. The Southern States will long retain the imprint of slavery, not merely in the presence of a host of negroes, but in the degrada- tion of the poor white population, and in certain attributes, laudable as well as regrettable, of the ruling class. The North- West is the land of hopefulness, and consequently of bold experi- ments in legislation: its rural inhabitants have the honesty and the narrow-mindedness of agriculturists. The Pacific West, or rather California and Nevada, for Oregon belongs in political character to the Upper Mississippi or North-western group, tinges the energy and sanguine good nature of the Westerns with a speculative recklessness natural to mining communities, where great fortunes have rapidly grown and vanished, and into which elements have been suddenly swept together from every part of the world, as a Rocky Mountain rainstorm fills the bottom of a valley with sand and pebbles from all the surrounding heights.
As the dissimilarity of population and of external conditions seems to make for a diversity of constitutional and political arrangements between the States, so also does the large measure of legal independence which each of them enjoys under the Federal Constitution. No State can, as a commonwealth, politi- cally deal with or act upon any other State. No diplomatic relations can exist nor treaties be made between States, no coercion can be exercised by one upon another. And although the government of the Union can act on a State, it rarely does act, and then only in certain strictly limited directions, which do not touch the inner political life of the commonwealth.
Let us pass on to consider the circumstances which work for uniformity among the States, and work more powerfully as time goes on. '
He who looks at_a map of the Union will be struck by the fact that so many of the boundary lines of the States are straight lines. Those lines tell the same tale as the geometrical plans of cities like St. Petersburg or Washington, where every street runs at the same angle to every other. The States are not natural growths, Their boundaries are for the most part not natural boundaries fixed by mountain ranges, nor even historical boundaries due to a series of events, but purely artificial bound-
CHAP, XXXVI - NATURE OF THE STATE 403
aries, determined by an authority which carved the national territory into strips of convenient size, as a building company lays out its suburban lots. Of the States subsequent to the original thirteen, California is the only one with a genuine natural boundary, finding it in the chain of the Sierra Nevada on the east and the Pacific ocean on the west. No one of these later States can be regarded as a naturally developed political organism. They are trees planted by the forester, not self-sown with the help of the seed-scattering wind. This absence of physical lines of demarcation has tended and must tend to pre- vent the growth of local distinctions. Nature herself seems to have designed the Mississippi basin, as she has designed the un- broken levels of Russia, to be the dwelling-place of one people. Each State makes its own Constitution; that is, the people
agree on their form of government for themselves, with no inter-
ference from the other States or from the Union, This form is subject to one condition only: it must be republican! But in each State the people who make the constitution have lately come from other States, where they have lived under and worked constitutions which are to their eyes the natural and almost necessary model for their new State to follow; and in the absence of an inventive spirit among the citizens, it was the obvious course for the newer States to copy the organizations of the older States, especially as these agreed with certain familiar features of the Federal Constitution. Hence the outlines, and even the phrases of the elder constitutions reappear in those of the more recently formed States. The precedents set by Virginia, for instance, had much influence on Tennessee, Alabama, Missis- sippi, and Florida, when they were engaged in making or amend- ing their constitutions during the early part of this century. Nowhere is population in such constant movement as in America. In some of the newer States only one-fourth or one- fifth of the inhabitants are natives of the United States. Many of the townsfolk, not a few even of the farmers, have been till lately citizens of some other State, and will, perhaps, soon move on farther west. These Western States are like a chain of lakes through which there flows a stream which mingles the waters of
1 The case of Kansas immediately before the War of Secession, and the cases of the rebel States, which were not readmitted after the war till they had accepted the constitutional amendments forbidding slavery and protecting the freedmen, are quite exceptional cases,
404 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART a
the higher with those of the lower. In such a constant flux of population local peculiarities are not readily developed, or if they have grown up when the district was still isolated, they disappear as the country becomes filled. Each State takes from its neigh- bours and gives to its neighbours, so that the process of assimila- tion is always going on over the whole wide area.
Still more important is the influence of railway communica- tion, of newspapers, of the telegraph. A Greek city like Samos or Mitylene, holding her own island, preserved a distinctive character in spite of commercial intercourse and the sway of Athens. A Swiss canton like Uri or Appenzell, entrenched behind its mountain ramparts, remains, even now under the strengthened central government of the Swiss nation, unlike its neighbours of the lower country. But an American State traversed by great trunk lines of railway, and depending on the markets of the Atlantic cities and of Europe for the sale of its grain, cattle, bacon, and minerals, is attached by a hundred always tightening ties to other States, and touched by their weal or woe as nearly as by what befalls within its own limits. The leading newspapers are read over a vast area. The inhabitants of each State know every morning the events of yesterday over the whole Union.
Finally the political parties are the same in all the States. The tenets (if any) of each party are the same everywhere, their methods the same, their leaders the same, although of course a prominent man enjoys especial influence in his own State. Hence, State politics are largely swayed by forces and motives external to the particular State, and common to the whole country, or to great sections of it; and the growth of local parties, the emergence of local issues and development of local political schemes, are correspondingly restrained.
These considerations explain why the States, notwithstanding the original diversities between some of them, and the wide scope for political divergence which they all enjoy under the Federal Constitution, are so much less dissimilar and less peculiar than might have been expected. European statesmen have of late years been accustomed to think of federalism and local autonomy as convenient methods either for recognizing and giving free scope to the sentiment of nationality which may exist in any part of an empire, or for meeting the need for local institutions and dis- tinct legislation which may arise from differences between such a
CHAP, XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 405
part and the rest of the empire. It is one or other or both of these reasons that have moved statesmen in such cases as those
of Finland in her relations to Russia, Hungary in her relations
to German-Austria, Iceland in her relations to Denmark, Bulgaria in her relations to the Turkish Sultan, Ireland in her ations to the United Kingdom. But the final causes, so to speak, of the recognition of ies States of the American mien as autonomous
_commonwealths, have been different. Their self-government is not
the consequence of differences which can be made harmless to the whole body politic only by being allowed free course. It has been due primarily to the historical fact that they existed as common- wealths before the Union came into being; secondarily, to the belief that localized government is the best guarantee for civic freedom, and to a sense of the difficulty of administering a vast territory and population from one centre and by one government. I return to indicate the points in which the legal independ- ence and right of self-government of the several States appears. Each of the thirty-eight has its own—
Constitution (whereof more anon).
Executive, consisting of a governor, and various other officials.
Legislature of two Houses.
System of local government in counties, cities, townships, and school districts.
System of State and local taxation.
Debts, which it may (and sometimes does) repudiate at its own pleasure.
Body of private law, including the whole law of real and personal property, of contracts, of torts, and of family relations.
Courts, from which no appeal lies (except in cases touching Federal legislation or the Federal constitution) to any Federal court.
System of procedure, civil and criminal.
Citizenship, which may admit persons (e.g. recent immi- grants) to be citizens at times, or on conditions, wholly different from those prescribed by other States.
Three points deserve to be noted as illustrating what these
attributes include.
I. A man gains active citizenship of the United States
(i.¢. a share in the government of the Union) only by becom- ing a,citizen of some particular State. Being such citizen, he is
406 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
forthwith entitled to the national franchise. That is to say, voting power in the State carries voting power in Federal elec- tions, and however lax a State may be in its grant of such power, ¢g. to foreigners just landed or to persons convicted of crime, these State voters will have the right of voting in con- eressional and presidential elections.1 The only restriction on the States in this matter is that of the fourteenth and fifteenth Constitutional amendments, which have already been discussed. | They were intended to secure equal treatment to the negroes, and incidentally they declare the protection given to all citizens of the United States.2 Whether they really enlarge it, that is to say, whether it did not exist by implication before, is a legal question, which I need not discuss.
1 Congress has power to pass a uniform rule of naturalization (Const. Art. i. § 8).
Under the present naturalization laws a foreigner must have resided in the United States for five years, and for one year in the State or Territory where he seeks admission to United States citizenship, and must declare two years before he is admitted that he renounces allegiance to any foreign prince or state. Naturalization makes him a citizen not only of the United States, but of the State or Territory where he is admitted, but does not necessarily confer the electoral franchise, for that depends on State laws.
In more than a third of the States the electoral franchise is now enjoyed by persons not naturalized as United States citizens.
2 “The line of distinction between the privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States, and those of citizens of the several States, must be traced along the boundary of their respective spheres of action, and the two classes must be as different in their nature as are the functions of their respective govern- ments. <A citizen of the United States as such has a right to participate in foreign and inter-state commerce, to have the benefit of the postal laws, to make use in common with others of the navigable waters of the United States, and to pass from State to State, and into foreign countries, because over all these subjects the jurisdiction of the United States extends, and they are covered by its laws. The privileges suggest the immunities. Wherever it is the duty of the United States to give protection to a citizen against any harm, inconvenience, or depriva- tion, the citizen is entitled to an immunity which pertains to Federal citizenship. One very plain immunity is exemption from any tax, burden, or imposition under State laws as a condition to the enjoyment of any right or privilege under the laws of the United States. . . . Whatever one may claim as of right under the Constitution and laws of the United {States by virtue of his citizenship, is a privilege of a citizen of the United States. Whatever the Constitution and laws of the United States entitle him to exemption from, he may claim an exemption in respect to. And such a right or privilege is abridged whenever the State law interferes with any legitimate operation of Federal authority which concerns his interest, whether it be an authority actively exerted, or resting only in the express or implied command or assurance of the Federal Constitution or law. But the United States can neither grant nor secure to its citizens rights or privileges which are not expressly or by reasonable implication placed under its jurisdiction and all not so placed are left to the exclusive protection of the States.” —Cooley, Principles, pp. 245-247. . ;
OMAP, XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 407
II. The power of a State over all communities within its limits is absolute. It may grant or refuse local government as it pleases. The population of the city of Providence is more than one-third of that of the State of Rhode Island, the population of New York city more than one-fifth that of the State of New York. But the State might in either case extinguish the muni- cipality, and govern the city by a single State commissioner appointed for the purpose, or leave it without any government whatever. ‘The city would have no right of complaint to the Federal President or Congress against such a measure. Massa- chusetts has lately remodelled the city government of Boston just as the British Parliament might remodel that of Birming- ham. Let an Englishman imagine a county council for War- wickshire suppressing the municipality of Birmingham, or a Frenchman imagine the department of the Rhone extinguishing the municipality of Lyons, with no possibility of intervention by the central authority, and he will measure the difference between the American States and the local governments of Western Europe.
Ill. A State commands the allegiance of its citizens, and may punish them for treason against it. The power has rarely been exercised, but its undoubted legal existence had much to do with inducing the citizens of the Southern States to follow their governments into secession in 1861. They conceived themselves to owe allegiance to the State as well as to the Union, and when it became impossible to preserve both, because the State had declared its secession from the Union, they might hold the earlier and nearer authority to be paramount. Allegiance to the State must now, since the war, be taken to be subordinate to allegiance to the Union. But allegiance to the State still exists ; treason against the State is still possible. One cannot think of treason against Warwickshire or the department of the Rhone.
These are illustrations of the doctrine which Europeans often fail to grasp, that the American States were originally in a certain sense, and still for certain purposes remain, sovereign States. Each of the original thirteen became sovereign when it revolted from the mother country in 1776. By entering the Confederation of 1781-88 it parted with one or two of the attri- butes of sovereignty, by accepting the Federal Constitution in 1788 it subjected itself for certain specified purposes to a
408 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I
central government, but claimed to retain its sovereignty for all other purposes. That is to say, the authority of a State is an inherent, not a delegated, authority. It has all the powers which any independent government can have, except such as it can be affirmatively shown to have stripped itself of, while the Federal Government has only such powers as it can be affirma- tively shown to have received. To use the legal expression, the presumption is always for a State, and the burden of proof lies upon any one who denies its authority in a particular matter.1
What State sovereignty means and includes is a question which incessantly engaged the most active legal and political minds of the nation, from 1789 down to 1870. Some thought it paramount to the rights of the Union. Some considered it as held in suspense by the Constitution, but capable of reviving as soon as a State should desire to separate from the Union. Some maintained that each State had in accepting the Constitution finally renounced its sovereignty, which thereafter existed only in the sense of such an undefined domestic legislative and admin- istrative authority as had not been conferred upon Congress. The conflict of these views, which became acute in 1830 when South Carolina claimed the right of nullification, produced Seces- sion and the war of 1861-65. Since the defeat of the Secession- ists, the last of these views may be deemed to have been established, and the term “State sovereignty” is now but seldom heard. Even “States rights” have a different meaning from that which they had thirty years ago.”
A European who now looks calmly back on this tremendous controversy of tongue, pen, and sword, will be apt to express his ideas of it in the following way. He will remark that much
1 It may of course be said that as the colonies associated themselves into a league, at the very time at which they revolted from the British Crown, and as their foreign relations were always managed by the authority and organs of this league, no one of them ever was for international purposes a free and independent sovereign State. This is true, and Abraham Lincoln was in this sense justified in saying that the Union was older than the States. But what are we to say of North Carolina and Rhode Island, after the acceptance of the Constitution of 1787-89 by the other eleven States? They were out of the old Confederation, for it had expired. They were not in the new Union, for they refused during many months to enter it. What else can they have been during those months except sovereign commonwealths ?
? States rights was a watchword in the South for many years. In 1851 there was a student at Harvard College from South Carolina who bore the name of States Rights Gist, baptized, so to speak, into Calhounism. He rose to be a brigadier- general in the Confederate army, and fell in the Civil War.
CHAP, XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 409
of the obscurity and perplexity arose from confounding the sovereignty of the American nation with the sovereignty of the Federal Government.1 The Federal Government clearly was sovereign only for certain purposes, %.¢. only in so far as it had received specified powers from the Constitution. These powers
‘did not, and in a strict legal construction do not now, abrogate
the supremacy of the States. A State still possesses one import- ant attribute of sovereignty—immunity from being sued except by another State. But the American nation which had made the Constitution, had done so in respect of its own sovereignty, and might well be deemed to retain that sovereignty as para- mount to any rights of the States. The feeling of this ultimate supremacy of the nation was what swayed the minds of those who resisted Secession, just as the equally well-grounded persua- sion of the limited character of the central Federal Government satisfied the conscience of the seceding South.
The Constitution of 1789 was a compromise, and a compro- mise arrived at by allowing contradictory propositions to be represented as both true. It has been compared to the declara- tions made with so much energy and precision of language in the ancient hymn Quicunque Vult, where, however, the apparent con- tradiction has always been held to seem a contradiction only because the human intellect is unequal to the comprehension of such profound mysteries. To every one who urged that there were thirteen States, and therefore thirteen governments, it was answered, and truly, that there was one government, because the people were one. To every one who declared that there was one government, it was answered with no less truth that there were thirteen. Thus counsel was darkened by words without knowledge ; the question went off into metaphysics, and found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
There was, in fact, a divergence between the technical and the practical aspects of the question. ‘Technically, the seceding States had an arguable case; and if the point had been one to be decided on the construction of the Constitution as a court decides on the construction of a commercial contract, they were possibly entitled to judgment. Practically, the defenders of the Union stood on firmer ground, because circumstances had changed since 1789 so as to make the nation more completely
1 Of course I do not mean that lawyers fell into this confusion, but that it affected the view of the world at large.
PO Pa”. Fal a cena ne 6 Ea": 22
4 - q ‘ + ae
eke) a
1 \ S (P 7
410 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
one nation than it then was, and had so involved the fortunes of the majority which held to the Union with those of the minority seeking to depart that the majority might feel justified in forbidding their departure. Stripped of legal technicalities, the dispute resolved itself into the problem often proposed but capable of no general solution: When is a majority entitled to use force for the sake of retaining a minority in the same poli- tical body with itself? To this question, when it appears in a concrete shape, as to the similar question when an insurrec- tion is justifiable, an answer can seldom be given beforehand. The result decides. When treason prospers, none dare call it treason.
The Constitution, which had rendered many services to the American people, did them an inevitable dis-service when it fixed their minds on the legal aspects of the question. Law was meant to be the servant of politics, and must not be suffered to become the master. A case had arisen which its formule were unfit to deal with, a case which had to be settled on large moral and historical grounds. It was not merely the superior physical force of the North that prevailed; it was the moral forces which rule the world, forces which had long worked against slavery, and were ordained to save North America from the curse of hostile nations established side by side.
The word “sovereignty,” which has in many ways clouded the domain of public law and jurisprudence, confused men’s minds by making them assume that there must in every country exist, and be discoverable by legal inquiry, either one body invested legally with supreme power over all minor bodies, or several bodies which, though they had consented to form part of a larger body, were each in the last resort independent ot it, and responsible to none but themselves.1 They forgot that a Consti- tution may not have determined where legal supremacy shall dwell. Where the Constitution of the United States placed it was at any rate doubtful, so doubtful that it would have been
1 A further confusion arises from the fact that men are apt in talking of sovereignty to mix up legal supremacy with practical predominance. . They ought to go together, and law seeks to make them go together. But it may happen that the person or body in whom law vests supreme authority is unable to enforce that authority : so the legal sovereign and the actual sovereigzn—that is to say, the force which will prevail in physical conflict—are different. There is always a strongest force ; but the force recognized by Jaw may not be really the strongest ; and of several forces it may be impossible to tell, till they have come into actual physical conflict, which is the strongest. :
9-77
CHAP, XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 411
better to drop technicalities, and recognize the broad fact that the legal claims of the States had become incompatible with the historical as well as legal claims of the nation. In the un- certainty as to where legal right resided, it would have been prudent to consider where physical force resided. The South however thought herself able to resist any physical force which the rest of the nation might bring against her. Thus encouraged, she took her stand on the doctrine of States Rights: and then followed a pouring out of blood and treasure such as was never spent on determining a point of law before, not even when Edward III. and his successors waged war for a hundred years to establish the claim of females to inherit the crown of France.
What, then, do the rights of a State now include? Every right or power of a Government except :—
The right of secession (not abrogated in terms, but admitted since the war to be no longer claimable. It is expressly negatived in the recent Constitutions of several Southern States).
Powers which the Constitution withholds from the States (including that of intercourse with foreign governments).
Powers which the Constitution expressly confers on the Federal Government.
As respects some powers of the last class, however, the States may act concurrently with, or in default of action by, the Federal Government. It is only from contravention of its action that they must abstain. And where contravention is alleged to exist, whether legislative or executive, it is by a court of law, and, in case the decision is in the first instance favourable to the pre- tensions of the State, ultimately by a Federal court, that the question falls to be decided.?
A reference to the preceding list of what each State may create in the way of distinct institutions will show that these rights practically cover nearly all the ordinary relations of citizens to one another and to their Government.2 An American may, through a long life, never be reminded of the Federal Government, except when he votes at presidential and congressional elections,
1 See Chapter XXII. ante.
2 A recent American writer well observes that nearly all the great questions which have agitated England during the last sixty years would, had they arisen in America, have fallen within the sphere of State legislation. — Jameson,
“Tntroduction to the Constitutional and Political History of the States,” in Johns Hopkins University Studies.
412 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
lodges a complaint against the post-office, and opens his trunks for a custom-house officer on the pier at New York when he returns from a tour in Europe. His direct taxes are paid to officials acting under State laws. The State, or a local authority constituted by State statutes, registers his birth, appoints his guardian, pays for his schooling, gives him a share in the estate of his father deceased, licenses him when he enters a trade (if it be one needing a licence), marries him, divorces him, entertains civil actions against him, declares him a bankrupt, hangs him for murder. ‘The police that guard his house, the local boards which look after the poor, control highways, impose water rates, manage schools—all these derive their legal powers from his State alone. Looking at this immense compass of State functions, Jefferson would seem to have been not far wrong when he said that the Federal government was nothing more than the American de- partment of foreign affairs. But although the National govern- ment touches the direct interests of the citizen less than does the State government, it touches his sentiment more. Hence the strength of his attachment to the former and his interest in it must not be measured by the frequency of his dealings with it. In the partitionment of governmental functions between nation and State, the State gets the most but the nation the highest, so the balance between the two is preserved.
Thus every American citizen lives in a duality of which Europeans, always excepting the Swiss, and to some extent the Germans, have no experience. He lives under two governments and two sets of laws; he is animated by two patriotisms and owes two allegiances. That these should both be strong and rarely be in conflict is must fortunate. It is the result of skilful adjustment and long habit, of the fact that those whose votes control the two sets of governments are the same persons, but above all of that harmony of each set of institutions with the other set, a harmony due to the identity of the principles whereon both are founded, which makes each appear necessary to the stability of the other, the States to the nation as its basis, the National Government to the States as their protector.
CHAPTER XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS
THE government of each of the thirty-eight States is determined by and set forth in its Constitution, a comprehensive funda- mental law, or rather group of laws included in one instrument, which has been directly enacted by the people of the State, and is capable of being repealed or altered, not by their representatives, but by themselves alone. As the Constitution of the United States stands above Congress and out of its reach, so the Con- stitution of each State stands above the legislature of that State, cannot be varied in any particular by Acts of the State legislature, and involves the invalidity of any statute passed by the legis- lature which a court of law may find to be inconsistent with it. The State Constitutions are the oldest things in the political his. tory of America, for they are the continuations and representatives of the royal colonial charters, whereby the earliest English settle- ments in America were created, and under which their several local governments were established, subject to the authority of the English Crown and ultimately of the British Parliament. But, like most of the institutions under which English-speaking peoples now live, they have a pedigree which goes back to a time anterior to the discovery of America itself. It begins with the English Trade Guild of the middle ages, itself the child of still more ancient corporations, dating back to the days of im- perial Rome, and formed under her imperishable law. Charters were granted to merchant guilds in England as far back as the days of King Henry I. Edward IV. gave an elaborate one tc the Merchant Adventurers trading with Flanders in 1463.1. In it we may already discern the arrangements which are more fully set forth in two later charters of greater historical interest, the
1 See upon this subject an interesting article by Mr. Brooks Adams in the Atlantic Monthly magazine for November 1884,
at
a. THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Ir
charter of Queen Elizabeth to the East India Company in 1599, and the charter of Charles I. to the “Governor and Company of the Mattachusetts Bay in Newe-England” in 1628. Both these instruments establish and incorporate trading companies, with power to implead and be impleaded, to use a common seal, to possess and acquire lands tenements and hereditaments, with provisions for the making of ordinances for the welfare of the company. The Massachusetts Charter creates a frame of govern- ment consisting of a governor, deputy-governor, and eighteen assistants (the term still in use in many of the London city guilds), and directs them to hold four times a year a general meeting of the company, to be called the “greate and generall Court,” in which general court “the Governor or deputie Governor, and such of the assistants and Freemen of the Company as shall be present, shall have full power and authority to choose other persons to be free of the Company, and to elect and con- stitute such officers as they shall thinke fitt for managing the affaires of the saide Governor and Company, and to make Lawes and Ordinances for the Good and Welfare of the saide Company, and for the Government and Ordering of the saide Landes and Plantasion, and the People inhabiting and to inhabite the same, soe as such Lawes and Ordinances be not contrary or repugnant to the Lawes and Statuts of this our realme of England.” In 1691, the charter of 1628 having been declared forfeited in 1684, a new one was granted by King William and Queen Mary, and this instrument, while it retains much of the language and some of the character of the trade guild charter, is really a political frame of government for a colony. ‘The assistants receive the additional title of councillors ; their number is raised to twenty-eight ; they are to be chosen by the general court, and the general court itself is to consist, together with the governor and assistants, of freeholders elected by towns or places within the colony, the electors being persons with a forty shilling free- hold or other property worth £40. The governor is directed to appoint judges, commissioners of oyer and terminer, etc. ; the general court receives power to establish judicatories and courts of record, to pass laws (being not repugnant to the laws of England), and to provide for all necessary civil offices. An appeal from the courts shall always be to the King in his privy council. This is a true political Constitution! Under it the
1 The oldest truly political Constitution in America is the instrument called the
CS ee oer
tig ef tse
CHAP, XXxVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 415
‘colony was governed, and in the main well and wisely governed,
till 1780. Much of it, not merely its terms, such as the name General Court, but its solid framework, was transferred bodily to the Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, which is now in force, and which profoundly influenced the Convention that prepared the Federal Constitution in 1787. Yet the charter of 1691 is nothing but an extension and development of the trading charter of 1628, in which there already appears, as there had appeared in Edward IV.’s charter of 1463,! and in the East India Company’s charter of 1599, the provision that the power of law-giving, otherwise unlimited, should be restricted by the terms of the charter itself, which required that every law for the colony should be agreeable to the laws of England. We have therefore in the three charters which I have named, those of 1463, 1599, and 1628, as well as in that of 1691, the essential and capital characteristic of a rigid or supreme Constitution—viz. a frame of government established by a superior authority, creating a subordinate law-making body, which can do everything except violate the terms and transcend the powers of the instrument to which it owes its own existence. So long as the colony remained under the British Crown, the superior authority, which could amend or remake the frame of government, was the British Crown or Parliament. When the connection with Britain was severed, that authority passed over, not to the State legislature, which remained limited, as it always had been, but to the people of the now independent commonwealth, whose will speaks through what is now the State Constitution, just as the will of the Crown or of Parliament had spoken through the charters of 1628 and 1691.
I have taken the case of Massachusetts as the best example of the way in which the trading Company grows into a colony, and the colony into a State. But some of the other colonies furnish illustrations scarcely less apposite. The oldest of them all, the acorn whence the oak of English dominion in America has
Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, framed by the inhabitants of Windsor, Hartford, and Wethersfield in 1638, memorable year, when the ecclesiastical revolt of Scotland saved the liberties of England. Connecticut was afterwards regularized by Charles II.’s charter of 1662 to “the Governor and Company of the English colony of Connecticut.”
1 The charter to the Flanders Company of 1468 forbids the making of any law contrary to the intent of the charter, and provides that any such law shall be null.
416 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT
sprung, the colony of Virginia, was, by the second charter, of ©
1609, established under the title of “'The Treasurer and Company of Adventurers and Planters of the City of London for the first colony in Virginia.” 4
Within the period of ten years, under the last of the Tudors and the first of the Stuarts, two trading charters were issued to two Companies of English adventurers. One of these charters is the root of English title to the East and the other to the West. One of these Companies has grown into the Empire of India; the other into the United States of North America. If England had done nothing else in history, she might trust for her fame to the work which these charters began. And the foundations of both dominions were laid in the age which was adorned by the greatest of all her creative minds, and gave birth to the men who set on a solid basis a frame of representative government which all the free nations of the modern world have copied.
When, in 1776, the thirteen colonies threw off their allegiance to King George IIL, and declared themselves independent States, the colonial charter naturally became the State Constitution.? In most cases it was remodelled, with large alterations, by the revolting colony. But in three States it was maintained un- changed, except, of course, so far as Crown authority was con- cerned, viz. in Massachusetts till 1780, in Connecticut till 1818, and in Rhode Island till 1842.3 The other twenty-five States
1 The phrase First colony distinguishes what afterwards became the State of Virginia from the more northerly parts of Virginia, afterwards called New Eng- land. The Second colony was to be Plymouth, one of the two settlements which became Massachusetts.
2 Even in declaring herself independent, New Jersey clung to the hope that the mother country would return to wiser counsels, and avert the departure of her children. She added at the end of her Constitution of 2d July 1776 the following proviso—* Provided always, and it is the true intent and meaning of this Con- gross, that if a reconciliation between Great Britain and these colonies should take place, and the latter be taken again under the protection and government of the Crown of Britain, this charter shall be null and void, otherwise remain firm and inviolable.” The truth is that the colonists, till alienated by the behaviour of England, had far more kindly feelings towards her than she had towards them. To them she was the old home, to her they were simply customers. Some in- teresting illustrations of the views then entertained as to the use of colonies may be found in the famous discussion in the fourth book of Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations, which appeared in 1776.
3 Rhode Island simply passed a statute by her legislature in May 1776, sub- stituting allegiance to the colony for allegiance to the King. Connecticut passed the following statute :—‘‘ Be it enacted by the Governor and Council and House of Representatives, in general court assembled, that the ancient form of civil government contained in the charter from Charles II., King of England, and
OHAP. XXXVII
STATE CONSTITUTIONS 417
admitted to the Union in addition to the original thirteen, have all entered it as organized self-governing communities, with their Constitutions already made by their respective peoples. Each Act of Congress which admits a new State admits it as a sub- sisting commonwealth, recognizing rather than affecting to sanc- tion its Constitution. Congress may impose conditions which the State Constitution must fulfil But the authority of the State Constitutions does not flow from Congress, but from accept- ance by the citizens of the States for which they are made. Of these instruments, therefore, no less than of the Constitutions of the thirteen original States, we may say that although subsequent in date to the Federal Constitution, they are,-so far as each State is concerned, de jure prior to it. Their authority over their own citizens is nowise derived from it.1 Nor is this a mere piece of technical law. The antiquity of the older States as separate commonwealths, running back into the heroic ages of the first colonization of America and the days of the Revolutionary War, is a potent source of the local patriotism of their inhabitants, and gives these States a sense of historic growth and indwelling cor- porate life which they could not have possessed had they been the mere creatures of the Federal Government.
The State Constitutions of America well deserve to be com- pared with those of the self-governing British colonies. But one
adopted by the people of this State, shall be and remain the civil Constitution of this State, under the sole authority of the people thereof, independent of any king or prince whatever ; and that this republic is, and shall for ever be and remain, a free, sovereign, and independent State, by the name of the State of Connecticut.” (Three paragraphs follow containing a short ‘‘ Bill of Rights,” and securing to the inhabitants of any other of the United States the same law and justice as natives of the State enjoyed.) This is all that Connecticut thought necessary. She had possessed, as did Rhode Island also, the right of appointing her own governor, and therefore did not need to substitute any new authority for a royal governor.
1 Of course in practice it is possible for Congress to influence the character of a State Constitution, because a State whose Constitution contains provisions which Congress disapproves may be refused admission. But. since the extinction of slavery and completion of the process of reconstruction, occasions for the exercise of such a power rarely arise. It was used to compel the seceding States to modify their Constitutions so as to get rid of all taint of slavery before their senators and representatives were readmitted to Congress after the war. Of course Congress is not bound to admit a community desiring to be recognized as a State. Utah has been kept knocking at the door of the Union for many years, because the majority of her inhabitants lie under suspicion, and the nation wishes to retain for the purpose of preventing polygamy that full control which can be exercised over a Territory but not over a State. And sometimes a dominant party postpones the admission of a State likely to strengthen by its vote the opposite party.
VOL. I 25
418 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS © PART II
remarkable difference must be noted here. The constitutions of British colonies have all proceeded from the Imperial Parliament of the United Kingdom, which retains its full legal power of legislating for every part of the British dominions. In many cases a colonial constitution provides that it may be itself altered by the colonial legislature,.of course with the assent of the Crown; but inasmuch as in its origin it is a statutory constitu- tion, not self-grown, but planted as a shoot by the Imperial Parliament at home, Parliament may always alter or abolish it. Congress, on the other hand, has no power to alter a State con- stitution. And whatever power of alteration has been granted to a British colony is exercisable by the legislature of the colony, not, as in America, by the citizens at large.
The original Constitutions of the States, whether of the old thirteen or of the newer twenty-five, have been in nearly every case subsequently recast, in some instances five, six, or even seven times, as well as amended in particular points. Thus Con- stitutions of all dates are now in force in different States, from that of Massachusetts, enacted in 1780, but largely amended since, to that of Florida enacted in 1886.
Every existing Constitution is the work of the people, not of the legislature of the State. The Constitutions of the revolutionary period were in a few instances enacted by the State legislature, acting as a body with plenary powers, but more usually by the people acting through a Convention, 7.2. a body especially chosen by the voters at large for the purpose, and invested with full powers, not only of drafting, but of adopting the instrument of government. But since 1792, when Kentucky framed her Constitution, the invariable practice has been for the Convention, elected by the voters, to submit, in accordance with the pre- cedent set by Massachusetts in 1780, the draft Constitution framed by it to the citizens of the State at large, who vote upon
1 In Rhode Island and Connecticut, as already stated, the legislature continued the colonial Constitution as a State Constitution. In South Carolina a body call- ing itself the ‘‘ Provincial Congress” claimed to be the ‘‘ General Assembly,” or legislature of the colony, and as such enacted the Constitution. In the other revolting colonies, except Massachusetts, Conventions or Congresses enacted the Constitution on behalf of the people, not submitting it to the voters for ratifica- tion. In Massachusetts the Convention submitted its draft to the voters in 1780, and the voters adopted it, a previous draft submitted by the legislature in 1778 having been rejected. In no State would the idea of allowing a Convention to enact a constitution as a sovereign body be now entertained.—See Judge Jame- son’s valuable book The Constitutional Convention,
oe Cat ee
are {
Fishes
Cle vit STATE CONSTITUTIONS 419
it Yes or No. They usually vote on it as a whole, and adopt or reject it en bloc, but sometimes provision is made for voting separately on some particular point or points.
The people of a State retain for ever in their hands, alto- gether independent of the National government, the power of altering their Constitution. When a new Constitution is to be prepared, or the existing one amended, the initiative usually comes from the legislature, which (either by a simple majority, or by a two-thirds majority, or by a majority in two successive legislatures, as the Constitution may in each instance provide) submits the matter to the voters in one of two ways. It may either propose to the people certain specific amendments, or it may ask the people to decide by a direct popular vote on the propriety of calling a constitutional Convention to revise the whole existing Constitution. In the former case the amend- ments sugg gested by the legislature are directly voted on by the citizens ; in the latter the legislature, so soon as the citizens have voted for the holding of a convention, provides for the election by the people of this convention. When elected, the Conven- tion meets, sets to work, goes through the old Constitution, and prepares a new one, which is then presented to the people for ratification or rejection at the polls. Only in the little State of Delaware is the function of amending the Constitution still left to the legislature without the subsequent ratification of a popular vote, subject, however, to the provision that changes must be passed by two successive legislatures, and must have been put before the people at the election of members for the second. Some States provide for the submission to the people at fixed intervals, of seven, ten, sixteen, or twenty years, of the propriety of calling a convention to revise the Constitution, so as to secure that the attention of the people shall be drawn to the question whether their scheme of government ought or ought not to be changed. Be it observed, however, that whereas the Federal Constitution can be amended only by a vote of three-fourths of the States, a Constitution can in nearly every State be changed by a bare majority of the citizens voting at the polls.” Hence
1 In Kentucky and New Hampshire the legislature has no power to propose
amendments, In some States it can do so only after stated intervals, e.g. of five
years. 2 Sometimes, however, an absolute majority of all the qualified voters is required. In Rhode Island (where the voting is in town and ward meetings) a
three-fifths majority is needed, and in South Carolina the ratification of the next
420 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il.
we may expect, and shall find, that these instruments are altered — more frequently and materially than the Federal Constitution has been.
A State Constitution is not only independent of the central national government (save in certain points already specified), it is also the fundamental organic law of the State itself. The State exists as a commonwealth by virtue of its Constitution, and all State authorities, legislative, executive, and judicial, are the creatures of, and subject to, the State Constitution! Just as the President and Congress are placed beneath the Federal Con- stitution, so the Governor and Houses of a State are subject to its Constitution, and any act of theirs done either in contraven- tion of its provisions, or in excess of the powers it confers on them, is absolutely void. All that has been said in preceding chapters regarding the functions of the courts of law where an Act of Congress is alleged to be inconsistent with the Federal Constitution, applies equally where a statute passed by a State legislature is alleged to transgress the Constitution of the State, and of course such validity may be contested in any court, whether a State court ora Federal court, because the question is an ordinary question of law, and is to be solved by determining whether or no a law of inferior authority is inconsistent with a law of superior authority. Whenever in any legal proceeding before any tribunal, either party relies on a State statute, and the other party alleges that this statute is ultra vires of the State
elected legislature by a two-thirds majority in each House is necessary. In Ken- tucky and Delaware the proposal to call a convention must be approved by a majority of all the voters. Delaware having during several years failed in the attempt to amend her Constitution (of 1831) by the legislature, fell back, in 1887, on the proposal to hold a constitutional convention, but could not secure a sufficiently large vote.
1 Some details as to the provisions of State Constitutions, and observations on a few of them, may be found in the following works :—Stimson’s American Statute Law, Hitchcock’s American State Constitutions (in Messrs. Putnam’s “Useful Questions of the Day” Series) ; Davis’s “American Constitutions,” in Johns Hopkins University Studies ; and the article ‘‘ States” in the American Cyclopedia of Political Science. Of course the great authority is the collection of the State Constitutions, embracing all that have been duly enacted since 1776, in the two thick quarto volumes entitled Federal and State Constitutions, pub- lished under the authority of Congress by Ben. Perley Poore, 2 vols., Washington, 1878. It is much to be wished than an annual or biennial supplement to Poore’s collection should be officially published, containing all the new constitutions and constitutional amendments. At present it is very difficult, especially for a resi- dent in Europe, to ascertain exactly how the constitution of each State stands ; noe Task indulgence for any errors into which I may, owing to this difficulty, have allen,
- CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 421
legislature, and therefore void, the tribunal must determine the question just as it would determine whether a bye-law made by a municipal council or a railway company was in excess of the law- making power which the municipality or the company had
received from the higher authority which incorporated it and
gave it such legislative power as it possesses. But although Federal courts are fully competent to entertain a question arising on the construction of a State Constitution, their practice is to follow the precedents set by any decision of a court of the State in question, just as they would follow the decision of an English court in determining a point of purely English law. They hold not only that each State must be assumed to know its own law better than a stranger can, but also that the supreme court of a State is the authorized exponent of the mind of the people who enacted its Constitution.
A State Constitution is really nothing but a law made directly by the people voting at the polls upon a draft submitted to them. The people of a State when they so vote act as a primary and constituent assembly, just as if they were all summoned to meet in one place like the folkmoots of our Teutonic forefathers. It is only their numbers that prevent them from so meeting in one place, and oblige the vote to be taken at a variety of polling places. Hence the enactment of a Constitution is an exercise of direct popular sovereignty to which we find few parallels in modern Europe, though it was familiar enough to the republics of antiquity, and has lasted till now in some of the cantons of Switzerland.+
The importance of this character of a State Constitution as a popularly-enacted law, overriding every minor State law, becomes all the greater when the contents of these Constitutions are examined. Europeans conceive of a constitution as an instru- ment, usually a short instrument, which creates a frame of government, defines its departments and powers, and declares the “primordial rights” of the subject or citizen as against the rulers. An American State Constitution does this, but does more ; and in most cases, infinitely more. It deals with a variety of topics which in Europe would be left to the ordinary action
1 See the interesting remarks on the Swiss Landesgemeinde in Mr. Freeman's Comparative Politics. Nowadays, however, the Landesgemeinde (which survive only in Uri, Unterwalden, Glarus, and Appenzell) do not act as constituent or constitution-enacting bodies, though they still directly legislate.
; ie Sere ig P. ONS te oe
f
422 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il |
of the legislature, or of administrative authorities; and it pur- sues these topics into a minute detail hardly to be looked for in a fundamental instrument. Some of these details will be men- tioned presently. Meantime I will sketch in outline the frame and contents of the more recent constitutions, reserving for next chapter remarks on the differences of type between those of the older and those of the newer States.
A normal Constitution consists of five parts :—
I. The definition of the boundaries of the State. (This does not occur in the case of the older States.)
II. The so-called Bill of Rights—an enumeration (whereof
more anon) of the citizens’ primordial rights to liberty of person and security of property. This usually stands at the beginning of the Constitution, but occasionally at the end.
Ill. The frame of government—.c. the names functions and powers of the executive officers, the legislative bodies, and the courts of justice. This occupies several articles.
IV. Miscellaneous provisions relating to administration and law, including articles treating of schools, of the militia, of tax- ation and revenue, of the public debts, of local government, of State prisons and hospitals, of agriculture, of labour, of impeach- ment, and of the method of amending the Constitution, besides other matters, to be mentioned presently, still less political in their character. The order in which these occur differs in different instruments, and there are some in which some of the above topics are not mentioned at all. The more recent Con- stitutions and those of the newer States are much fuller on these points.
V. The Schedule, which contains provisions relating to the method of submitting the Constitution to the vote of the people, and arrangements for the transition from the previous Constitu- tion to the new one which is to be enacted by that vote. Being of a temporary nature, the schedule is not strictly a part of the Constitution.
The Bill of Rights is historically the most interesting part of these Constitutions, for it is the legitimate child and representative of Magna Charta, and of those other declarations and enactments, down to the Bill of Rights of the Act of 1 William and Mary, session 2, by which the liberties of Englishmen have been secured. Most of the thirteen colonies when they asserted their independence and framed their Con-
rey
CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 423
stitutions inserted a declaration of the fundamental rights of the people, and the example then set has been followed by the newer States, and, indeed, by the States generally in their most recent Constitutions. Considering that all danger from the exercise of despotic power upon the people of the States by the executive has long since vanished, their executive authorities being the creatures of popular vote and nowadays rather too weak than too strong, it may excite surprise that these assertions of the rights and immunities of the individual citizen as against the govern- ment should continue to be repeated in the instruments of to- day. A reason may be found in the remarkable constitutional conservatism of the Americans, and in their fondness for the enunciation of the general maxims of political freedom. But it is also argued that these declarations of principle have a practical value, as asserting the rights of individuals and of minorities against arbitrary conduct by a majority in the legislature, which might, in the absence of such provisions, be tempted at moments of excitement to suspend the ordinary law and arm the magis- trates with excessive powers. They are therefore, it is held, still safeguards against tyranny; and they serve the purpose of solemnly reminding a State legislature and its officers of those fundamental principles which they ought never to overstep.! Although such provisions certainly do restrain a State legislature in ways which the British Parliament would find inconvenient, few complaints of practical evils thence arising are heard.
A general notion of these Bills of Rights may be gathered from the Constitution of the State of California (1879), printed in the Appendix to this volume. I may mention, in addition, a few curious provisions which occur in some of them.
All provide for full freedom of religious opinion and worship, and for the equality before the law of all religious denominations and their members; and many forbid the establishment of any particular church ‘or sect, and declare that no public money ought to be applied in aid of any religious body or sectarian in- stitution. But Delaware holds it to be “the duty of all men frequently to assemble for public worship ;” and Vermont adds that “every sect or denomination of Christians ought to observe the Sabbath or Lord’s Day.” And thirteen States declare that the provisions for freedom of conscience are not to be taken to
1 The influence of the Declaration of Independence of 1776 is of course per- ceptible in them all.
by 2 oe ee es OE a pres! as re Re ae oe oy ee +> ; y Onn ; : 1 7
; ’
424 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
excuse acts of licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace and safety of the State.
Louisiana (Constitution of 1879) declares that “all govern- ment of right originates with the people, is founded on their will alone, and is instituted solely for the good of the whole, deriving its just powers from the consent of the governed. Its only legitimate end is to protect the citizen in the enjoyment of life, liberty, and property. When it assumes other functions, it is usurpation and oppression.”
Twenty-six States declare that “all men have a natural, in- herent, and inalienable right to enjoy and defend life and liberty ;” and all of these, except the melancholy Missouri, add, the ‘natural right to pursue happiness.”
Eighteen declare that all men have “a natural right to acquire, possess, and protect property.”
Mississippi (Constitution of 1868) provides that “the right of all citizens to travel upon public conveyances shall not be in- fringed upon nor in any manner abridged.” A similar provision occurs in the Constitution of Louisiana of 1868.7
Kentucky (Constitution of 1850, which is still in force) lays down “that absolute arbitrary power over the lives, liberty, and property of freemen exists nowhere in a republic, not even in the largest majority. The right of property is. before and higher than any constitutional sanction; and the right of the owner of a slave to such slave and its increase is the same and as inviolable as the right of the owner of any property whatever.’ All power is inherent in the people, and all free governments are founded on their authority, and instituted for their peace, safety, happi- ness, and security, and the protection of property.”
All in one form or another secure the freedom of writing and speaking opinions , and some add that the truth of a libel may be given in evidence.
Nearly all secure the freedom of public meeting and petition. © Considering that these are the last rights likely to be infringed
1 In Arkansas, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Texas, a man is declared ineligible for office if he denies the existence of God; in Pennsylvania and Tennessee he is ineligible if he does not believe in God, and in the existence of future rewards and punishments. In Arkansas and Maryland such a person is also incompetent as a witness or juror.
? These provisions were inserted shortly after the Civil War in order to pro- tect the negroes.
3 This proposition has of course been annulled, in effect, by the latest amend ments (xiii. xiv. xv.) to the Federal Constitution.
CHAP, xxxviI — ~—« STATE CONSTITUTIONS 495
by a State government, it is odd to find Florida in her Constitu- tion of 1886 providing that “the people shall have the right to assemble together to consult for the common good, to instruct their representatives, and to petition the legislature for redress of grievances.”
Many provide that no ex post facto law, nor law impairing the obligation of a contract, shall be passed by the State legislature ; and that private property shall not be taken by the State without just compensation.
Many forbid the creation of any title of nobility.
Many declare that the right of citizens to bear arms shall never be denied, a provision which might be expected to prove inconvenient where it was desired to check the habit of carrying revolvers. Tennessee therefore (Constitution of 1870) prudently adds that “the legislature shall have power to regulate the wear- ing of arms, with a view to prevent crime.” Soalso Texas, where such a provision is certainly not superfluous. And five others! allow the legislature to forbid the carrying of concealed weapons.
Some declare that the estates of suicides shall descend in the ordinary course of law.
Most provide that conviction for treason shall not work corrup- tion of blood nor forfeiture of estate.
Seven forbid white and coloured children to be taught in the same public schools.
Many declare the right of trial by jury to be inviolate, even while permitting the parties to waive it.
Some forbid imprisonment for debt, axtept + in case of fraud, and secure the acceptance of reasonable bail, except for the gravest charges.
Several declare that ‘“ perpetuities and monopolies are contrary to the genius of a free State, and ought not to be allowed.”
Some declare that aliens or foreigners shall have the same rights of holding property as citizens.
Many forbid the granting of any hereditary honours, privileges, or emoluments.
North Carolina declares that “as political rights and privileges are not dependent upon or modified by property, therefore no property qualification ought to affect the right to vote or hold
1 North Carolina, Kentucky, Missouri, Louisiana, and Colorado, all States in which daily experience shows that the action of the legislature has not proved
successful,
426 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS | PART Ii
office ;” and also, “secret political societies are dangerous to the liberties of a free people, and should not be tolerated.”
Massachusetts sets forth, as befits a Puritan State, high moral views: “A frequent recurrence to the fundamental principles of the Constitution, and a constant adherence to those of piety, justice, moderation, temperance, industry, and frugality, are absolutely necessary to preserve the advantages of liberty and to maintain a free government. The people ought consequently to have a particular attention to all those principles in the choice of their officers and representatives, and they have a right to require of their law-givers and magistrates an exact and constant observance of them.”
New York (Constitution of 1846) provides: “ All lands within this State are declared to be allodial, so that, subject only to the liability to escheat, the entire and absolute property is vested in the owners, according to the nature of their respective estates.”
Maryland (Constitution of 1867) declares that “a long con- tinuance in the executive departments of power or trust is dangerous to liberty ; a rotation, therefore, in those departments is one of the best securities of permanent freedom.” She also pronounces all gifts for any religious purpose (except of a piece of land not exceeding five acres for a place of worship, parsonage, or burying-ground) to be void unless sanctioned by the legislature.
These instances, a few out of many, may suffice to show how remote from the common idea of a Bill of Rights, are some of the enactments which find a place under that heading. The constitution makers seem to have inserted here such doctrines or legal reforms as seemed to them matters of high import or of wide application, especially when they could find no suitable place for them elsewhere in the instrument.
Of the articles of each State Constitution which contain the frame of State government it will be more convenient to speak in the chapters which describe the mechanism and character of the governments and administrative systems of the several States. I pass on therefore to what have been classed as the Miscellaneous Provisions. ‘These are of great interest as revealing the spirit and tendencies of popular government in America, the economic and social condition of the country, the mischiefs that have arisen, the remedies applied to these mischiefs, the ideas and beliefs of the people in matters of legislation.
Among such provisions we find a great deal of matter which is
t rs j rere? /
OHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 42)
in no distinctive sense constitutional law, but general law, e.g. ad- ministrative law, the law of judicial procedure, the ordinary private law of family, inheritance, contract, and so forth ; matter therefore which seems out of place in a constitution because fit to be dealt with in ordinary statutes. We find minute provisions regarding the management and liabilities of banking companies, of railways, or of corporations generally ; regulations as to the salaries of officials, the quorum of courts sitting in banco, the length of time for appealing, the method of changing the venue, the publication of judicial reports ; detailed arrangements for school boards and school taxation (with rules regarding the separation of white and black children in schools), for a department of agriculture, a _ canal board, or a labour bureau ; we find a prohibition of lotteries, of bribery, of the granting of liquor licences, of usurious interest on money, an abolition of the distinction between sealed and unsealed instruments, a declaration of the extent of a mechanic’s lien for work done. We even find the method prescribed in which stationery and coals for the use of the legislature shall be contracted for, and provisions for fixing the rates which may be charged for the storage of corn in warehouses. The framers of these more recent constitutions have in fact neither wished nor cared to draw a line of distinction between what is proper for a constitution and what ought to be left to be dealt with by the State legislature. And, in the case of three-fourths at least of the States, no such distinction now, in fact, exists.
How is this confusion to be explained? Four reasons may be suggested.
The Americans, like the English, have no love for scientific arrangement. Although the Constitutions have been drafted by lawyers, and sometimes by the best lawyers of each State, logical classification and discrimination have not been sought after.
The people found the enactment of a new Constitution a con- venient opportunity for enunciating doctrines they valued and carrying through reforms they desired. It was a simpler and quicker method than waiting for legislative action, so, when there was a popular demand for the establishment of an institution, or for some legal change, this was shovelled into the new Constitu- tion and enacted accordingly.
The peoples of the States have come to distrust their respective legislatures. Hence they desire not only to do a thing forthwith and in their own way rather than leave it to the chance of legisla-
Pttg ee Ae ee , oe ore oe We cers Wee athena 6 F a
t
“Y
428 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IL
tive action, but to narrow as far as they conveniently can (and sometimes farther) the sphere of the legislature.
There is an unmistakable wish in the minds of the people to act directly rather than through their representatives in legisla- tion. This sentiment is characteristic of democracies everywhere. The same conscious relish for power which leads some democracies to make their representatives mere delegates, finds a further development in passing by the representatives, and setting the people itself to make and repeal laws.
Those who have read the chapters describing the growth and expansion of the Federal Constitution, will naturally ask how far the remarks there made apply to the Constitutions of the several States.
These instruments have less capacity for development, whether by interpretation or by usage, than the Constitution of the United States: firstly, because they are more easily, and therefore more frequently, amended or recast; secondly, because they are far longer, and go into much more minute detail. The Federal Constitution is so brief and general that custom must fill up what it has left untouched, and judicial construction evolve the application of its terms to cases they do not expressly deal with. But the later State Constitutions are so full and precise that they need little in the way of expansive construction, and leave comparatively little room for the action of custom.
The rules of interpretation are in the main the same as those applied to the Federal Constitution. One important difference must, however, be noted, springing from the different character of the two governments. The National Government is an artificial creation, with no powers except those conferred by the instrument which created it. A State Government is a natural growth, which prima facie possesses all the powers incident to any govern- ment whatever. Hence, if the question arises whether a State legislature can pass a law on a given subject, the presumption is that it can doso: and positive grounds must be adduced to prove that it cannot. It may be restrained by some inhibition either in the Federal Constitution, or in the Constitution of its own
State. But such inhibition must be affirmatively shown to have
been imposed, or, to put the same point in other words, a State Constitution is held to be, nota document conferring defined and
specified powers on the legislature, but one regulating and limit-
ing that general authority which the representatives of the
SY eee
CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 499
people enjoy ipso jure by their organization into a legislative
_ body.
“It has never been questioned that the American legislatures have the same unlimited power in regard to legislation which resides in the British Parliament, except where they are restrained by written Constitutions. That must be conceded to be a fundamental principle in the political organization of the American States. We cannot well comprehend how, upon principle, it could be otherwise. The people must, of course, possess all legislative power originally. They have committed this in the most general and unlimited manner to the several State legislatures, saving only such restrictions as are imposed by the Constitution of the United States or of the particular State in question.”?
“The people, in framing the Constitution, committed to the legislature the whole law-making powers of the State which they did not expressly or impliedly withhold. Plenary power in the legislature, for all purposes of civil government, is the rule. A prohibition to exercise a particular power isan ex- ception.”?
It must not, however, be supposed from these dicta that even if the States were independent commonwealths, the Federal Government’ having disappeared, their legislatures would enjoy anything approaching the omnipotence of the British Parliament, “whose power and jurisdiction is,” says Sir Edward Coke, “so transcendent and absolute that it cannot be confined, either for persons or causes, within any bounds.” “All mischiefs and grievances,” adds Blackstone, “operations and remedies that transcend the ordinary course of the laws are within the reach of this extraordinary tribunal.” Parliament being absolutely sovereign, can command, or extinguish and swallow up the executive and the judiciary, appropriating to itself their functions. But in America, a legislature is a legislature and nothing more. The same instrument which creates it creates also the executive governor and the judges. They hold by a title as good as its own. If the legislature should pass a law depriving the governor of an executive function conferred by the Constitution, that law would be void. If the legislature attempted to interfere with the
1 Redfield, C.-J., in 27 Vermont Reports, p. 142, quoted by Cooley, Constit.
Limit., p. 108. . 2 Denio, C.-J., in 15 N. Y. Reports, p. 543, quoted by Cooley, bid. p. 107,
430 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
jurisdiction of the courts, their action would be even more palpably illegal and ineffectual.’
The executive and legislative departments of a State govern- ment have of course the right and duty of acting in the first instance on their view of the meaning of the Constitution. But the ultimate expounder of that meaning is the judiciary ; and when the courts of a State have solemnly declared the true construction of any provision of the Constitution, all persons are bound to regulate their conduct accordingly. As was observed in considering the functions of the Federal judiciary (Chapter XXIIL.), this authority of the American courts is not in the nature of a political or discretionary power vested in them ; it is a legitimate and necessary consequence of the existence of a fundamental law superior to any statute which the legislature may enact,” or to any right which a governor may conceive him- self to possess. To quote the words of an American decision :—
“Tn exercising this high authority the judges claim no judicial supremacy ; they are only the administrators of the public will. If an Act of the legislature is held void, it is not because the judges have any control over the legislative power, but because the Act is forbidden by the Constitution, and because the will of the people, which is therein declared, is paramount to that of their representatives expressed in any law.” ?
It is a well-established rule that the judges will always lean in favour of the validity of a legislative Act; that if there be a reasonable doubt as to the constitutionality of a statute they will solve that doubt in favour of the statute ; that where the legisla- ture has been left to a discretion they will assume the discretion to have been wisely exercised; that where the construction of a statute is doubtful, they will adopt such construction as will harmonize with the Constitution, and enable it to take effect.
1 Tt has, for instance, been held that a State legislature cannot empower election boards to decide whether a person has by duelling forfeited his right to vote or hold office, this inquiry being judicial and proper only for the regular tribunals of the State.—Cooley, Constit. Limit., p. 112. Acts passed by legislatures affect- ing some judicial decision already given, have repeatedly been held void by the Courts. They would be doubly void as also transgressing the Federal Constitution.
2 In Switzerland, however, the cantonal courts have not, except perhaps in Uri, the right to declare invalid a law made by a cantonal legislature, the legisla- ture being apparently deemed the judge of its own powers. A cantonal law may, however, be quashed, in some cases, by the Federal Council, or pronounced invalid by the Federal Court. Sce an interesting discussion of the question in Dubs, Das
oeffentliche Recht der Schweizerischen Hidgenossenschaft, Part I. p. 118, 3 Quoted by Cooley, Constit. Limit., p. 195, from 2 Bay, 61.
CHAP, XXXVIL STATE CONSTITUTIONS 43)
—
So it has been well observed that a man might with perfect con- sistency argue as a member of a legislature against a bill on the ground that it is unconstitutional, and after having been appointed a judge, might in his judicial capacity sustain its constitutionality. Judges must not inquire into the motives of the legislature, nor refuse to apply an Act because they may suspect that it was obtained by fraud or corruption, still less because they hold it to be opposed to justice and sound policy.! “But when a statute is adjudged to be unconstitutional, it is as if it had never been. Rights cannot be built up under it; contracts which depend upon it for their consideration are void; it constitutes a protec- tion to no one who has acted under it; and no one can be punished for having refused obedience to it before the decision was made. And what is true of an Act void %n foto, is true also as to any part of an Act which is found to be unconstitutional, and which consequently is to be regarded as having never at any time been possessed of legal force.” ?
1 “A court cannot declare a statute unconstitutional and void solely on the ground of unjust and oppressive provisions, or because it is supposed to violate the natural, social, or political rights of the citizen, unless it can be shown that such injustice is prohibited, or such rights guaranteed or protected, by the Con- stitution. . . . Ina case decided in the supreme court of New York, one of the judges said, ‘The inhabitants of New York have a vested right in the City Hall, markets, water-works, ferries, and other public property, which cannot be taken from them any more than their individual dwellings. Their rights rest not merely upon the Constitution, but upon the great principles of eternal justice which lie at the foundation of all free governments.” The great principles of eternal justice which affected the particular case had been incorporated in the Constitution, and it therefore became unnecessary to consider what would otherwise have been the rule ; nor do we understand the court as intimating any opinion upon that subject. It was sufficient for the case to find that the principles of right and justice had been recognized and protected by the Constitution.”—Cooley, pp. 200, 202. Mr. Theodore Bacon of Rochester, New York, writes to me: ‘In the case of Gardner v. The Village of Newburg (Johnson’s Chancery Reports, N. Y. 162), the New York legislature had authorized the village to supply itself with water from a stream, but had made no provision for indemnifying the owners of lands through which the stream flowed for the injury they must suffer from the diversion of the water. The Constitution of New York at that time contained no provision pro- hibiting the taking of private property for public use without compensation ; not- withstanding this, Chancellor Kent restrained the village from proceeding upon the broad general principle which he found in Magna Charta, in a statutory Bill of Rights, which of course could not control the legislature, and in Grotius Puffen- dorf and Bynkershoek. He referred also to a like provision in the Constitution of the United States, which, however, although expressive of the sentiment of the nation, was intended to apply only to the Federal Government. I believe, how- ever, that this case is quite exceptional ; and notwithstanding the very great authority of Chancellor Kent, I apprehend that Judge Cooley’s statement would probably now be generally accepted.” 2 Cooley, Constit. Limit., p. 227.
.
432 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS | PART IT
It may be thought, and the impression will be confirmed when we consider as well the minuteness of the State Constitutions as the profusion of State legislation and the inconsiderate haste with which it is passed, that as the risk of a conflict between the Constitution and statutes is great, so the inconveniences of a system under which the citizens cannot tell whether their obedience is or is not due to a statute must be serious. How is a man to know whether he has really acquired a right under a statute? how is he to learn whether to conform his conduct to it or not? How is an investor to judge if he may safely lend money which a statute has empowered a community to borrow, when the statute may be itself subsequently overthrown 4
To meet these difficulties some State Constitutions 1 provide that, the judges of the supreme court of the State may be called upon by the governor or either house of the legislature to deliver their opinions upon questions of law, without waiting for these questions to arise and be determined in an ordinary lawsuit between parties.2 This expedient seems a good one, for it procures a judicial and non-partisan interpretation, and procures it at once before rights or interests have been created. But it is open to the objection that the opinions so pronounced by judges are given before cases have arisen which show how in fact a statute is working, and what points it may raise; and that in
1 Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Florida. In Vermont a similar power is given by statute. In Florida it is only the governor to whom the power has been given, and whereas under the Constitution of 1868 he could obtain the opinion of the justices “ upon any point of law,” he can by the Constitution of 1886 require it only “upon any question affecting his executive powers and duties.” A similar provision was inserted in the Constitution of Missouri of 1865, but omitted in the revised (and now operative) Constitution of 1875, apparently because the judges had so often refused to give their advice when asked for it by a house of the legislature, that there seemed little use in re- taining:the enactment. In the other States the judges have apparently always consented to answer, save on one or two occasions in Massachusetts. See on the whole subject an interesting pamphlet by Mr. J. B. Thayer, of the Harvard University Law School.
2 The judges of the supreme court of Massachusetts suggest in their very learned and instructive opinion, delivered to the legislature, December 31, 1878, that this provision, which appears first in the Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, and was doubtless borrowed thence by the other States, “evidently had in view the usage of the English Constitution, by which the King as well as the House of Lords, whether acting in their judicial or in their legislative capacity, had the right to demand the opinion of the twelve judges of England.” This is still sometimes done by the House of Lords ; but the opinions of the judges so given are not necessarily followed by that House, and though always reported are not deemed to be binding pronouncements of law similar to the decisions of a court.
CHAP. XXxvII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 433
giving them the judges have not, as in contested lawsuits, the assistance of counsel arguing for their respective clients. And this is perhaps the reason why in most of the States where the provision exists, the judges have declared that they act under it in a purely advisory capacity, and that their deliverances are to be deemed merely expressions of opinion, not binding upon them should the point afterwards arise in a lawsuit involving the rights of parties.+
The highest court of a State may depart from a view it has previously laid down, even in a legal proceeding, regarding the construction of the Constitution, that is to say, it has a legal right to do so if convinced that the former view was wrong. - But it is reluctant to do so, because such a course unsettles the law and impairs the respect felt for the bench. And there is less occasion for it to do so than in the parallel case of the supreme Federal court, because as the process of amending a State Constitution is simpler and speedier than, that of altering the Federal Constitution, a remedy can be more easily applied to any mistake which the State judiciary has committed. _ This unwillingness to unsettle the law goes so far that State courts have sometimes refused to disturb a practice long acquiesced in by the legislature, which they have nevertheless declared they would have pronounced unconstitutional had it come before them while still new.
1 Mr. Thayer shows, by an examination of the reported instances, that in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island, as also in Missouri from 1865 to 1875, the courts held that their opinions rendered under these provisions of the State Constitutions were not to be deemed judicial determinations, equal in authority to decisions given in actual litigation, but were rather prima facie im- pressions, which the judges ought not to hold themselves bound by, when subse- quently required to determine the same point in an action or other legal pro- ceeding.
VOL. I 2F
CHAPTER XXXVIII THE DEVELOPMENT OF STATE CONSTITUTIONS
Ir was observed in last chapter that the State Constitutions furnish invaluable materials for history. Their interest is all the greater, because the succession of Constitutions and amendments to Constitutions from 1776 till to-day enables the annals of legislation and political sentiment to be read in these documents more easily and succinctly than in any similar series of laws in any other country. They are a mine of instruction for the natural history of democratic communities. Their fulness and minuteness make them, so to speak, more pictorial than the Federal Constitution. They tell us more about the actual methods and conduct of the government than it does. If we: had similar materials concerning the history of as many Greek republics during the ages of Themistocles and Pericles, we could rewrite the history of Greece. Some things, however, even these elaborately minute documents do not tell us. No one could gather from them what were the modes of doing business in the State legislatures, and how great a part the system of committees plays there. No one could learn what manner of men constitute those bodies and determine their character. No one would know that the whole machinery is worked by a restlessly active party organization. Nevertheless they are so instructive as records of past movements, and as an index to the present tendencies of American democracy, that I heartily regret that the space at my disposal permits me to make only a sparing use of the materials which I gathered during many months spent in studying the one hundred and five Constitutions enacted since the Declaration of Independence.! ;
1 J venture again to commend the study of these constitutions to the philoso- phic inquirer into what may be called the science of comparative politics. Both among the pre-Revolutionary charters and the State constitutions he will find
AY
OHAP, XXXVIII DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 435
Three periods may be distinguished in the development of
State Governments as set forth in the Constitutions, each period
marked by an increase in the length and minuteness of those instruments.
The first period covers about thirty years from 1776 down- wards, and includes the earlier Constitutions of the original thirteen States, as well as of Kentucky, Vermont, Tennessee, and Ohio.
Most of these Constitutions were framed under the impressions of the Revolutionary War. They manifest a dread of executive power and of military power, together with a disposition to leave everything to the legislature, as being the authority directly springing from the people.! The election of a State governor is in most States vested in the legislature. He is nominally assisted, but in reality checked, by a council not of his own choosing. He has not (except in Massachusetts) a veto on the Acts of the legislature. He has not, like the royal governors of colonial days, the right of adjourning or dissolving it. The idea of giving power to the people directly has scarcely appeared, because the legislature is conceived as the natural and necessary organ of
popular government, much as the House of Commons is in Eng-
land. And hence many of these early Constitutions consist of little beyond an elaborate Bill of Rights and a comparatively simple outline of a frame of government, establishing a repre- sentative legislature,? with a few executive officers and courts of justice carefully separated therefrom.
The second period covers the first half of the present century down to the time when the intensity of the party struggles over slavery (1850-60) interrupted to some extent the natural processes
matter full of instruction. Among the former I may refer especially to the Frame of Government of Pennsylvania, 1682 and 1683, and to the Fundamental Con- stitutions of Carolina of 1669. These last were framed by John Locke, and re- vised by the first Lord Shaftesbury. They were found unsuitable, were only partially put in force, and were abrogated by the proprietors in 1698, but they are none the less interesting to the student of history on that account.
1 See the remarkable passage in the Federalist, Nos. xlvi. and xlvii., which by examining the structure of the State Governments, shows the predominance of the legislature.
2 The wide powers of these early legislatures are witnessed to by the fear which prudent statesmen entertained of their action. Madison said, in the Philadelphia Convention of 1787, ‘ Experience proves a tendency in our govern- ments to throw all power into the legislative vortex. ‘The executives of the States are little more than ciphers ; the legislatures are omnipotent.” How they might abuse this power the case of Rhode Island showed.
,
436 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS parr is
of State development. It is a period of the democratization of all institutions, a democratization due not only to causes native to American soil, but to the influence upon the generation which had then come to manhood of French republican ideas, an infiu- ence which declined after 1815 and ended with 1851, since which time French examples and ideas have counted for very little. Such provisions for the maintenance of religious institutions by the State as had continued to exist are now swept away. ‘The principle becomes established that constitutions must be directly enacted by popular vote. The choice of a governor is taken from the legislature to be given to the people. Property qualifications are abolished, and a suffrage practically universal, except that it often excludes free persons of colour, is introduced. Even the judges are not spared. Many Constitutions shorten their term of office, and direct them to be chosen by popular vote. The State has emerged from the English conception of a community acting through a-ruling legislature, for the legislature begins to be regarded as being only a body of agents exercising delegated and restricted powers, and obliged to recur to the sovereign people (by asking for a constitutional amendment) when it seeks to extend these powers in any particular direction. The increas- ing length of the constitutions during this half century shows how the range of the popular vote has extended, for these docu- ments now contain a mass of ordinary law on matters which in the early days would have been left to the legislatures.
In the third period, which begins from about the time of the Civil War, a slight reaction may be discerned, not against popular sovereignty, which is stronger than ever, but in the tendency to strengthen the executive and judicial departments. The governor had begun to receive in the second period, and has now in every — State but four, a veto on the acts of the legislature. His tenure of office has been generally lengthened ; the restrictions on his re-eligibility generally removed. In many States the judges have been granted larger salaries, and their terms of office lengthened. Some constitutions have even transferred judicial appointments from the vote of the people to the executive. But the most not- able change of all has been the narrowing of the competence of the legislature, and the tying up of its action by a variety of complicated restrictions. It may seem that to take powers away from the legislature is to give them to the people, and is therefore another step towards pure democracy. But in America this is
Faget the
CHAP, XXXVIII DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 437
not so, because a legislature always yields to any popular clamour,
however transient, while direct legislation by the people involves
some delay. Such provisions are therefore conservative in their
results, and are really checks imposed by the citizens upon
themselves. This process of development, which has first exalted and then
: depressed the legislature, which has extended the direct interfer-
ence of the people, which has changed the Constitution itself from a short into a long, a simple into a highly complex document, has
of course not yet ended. Forces are already at work which will
make the constitutions of forty years hence different from those of to-day. To conjecture the nature of these forces we must examine a little further the existing constitutions of the States,
and especially the later among them; and must distinguish
between different types of constitution, corresponding to the different parts of the Union in which the States that have framed them are situate.
Three types were formerly distinguishable, the old colonial type, best seen in New England and the older middle States, the Southern or Slave State type (in which the influence of the first
Constitution of Virginia was noticeable), and the new or Western
type. At present these distinctions are less marked. All the Southern States except Kentucky (which never passed an ordin- ance of secession) have given themselves new constitutions since the war; and the differences between these and the new consti- tutions of the North-Western and Pacific States are not salient. This is because the economic and social changes produced _by the War of Secession and abolition of slavery broke to pieces the old social conditions, and made these Southern States virtually new communities like those of the West. There is still, however, a strong contrast between the New England States, to which for
_ this purpose we may add New Jersey and Delaware, whose pre-
sent constitutions all date from the period between 1780 and 1844, and the Southern and Western States, nearly all of whose constitutions are subsequent to that year. In these older States the power of the executive is generally greater. The judges are frequently named by the governor, and not elected by the people. The electoral districts are not always equal. ‘The constitutions are not so minute, and therefore the need of recurring to the people to change them arises less frequently.
Taking the newer, and especially the Western and Southern
438 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I1
Constitutions, and remembering that each is the work of an absolutely independent body, which (subject to the Federal Con- stitution) can organize its government and shape its law in any way it pleases, so as to suit its peculiar conditions and reflect the character of its population, one is surprised to find how similar these newer instruments are. There is endless variety in details, but a singular agreement in essentials. The influences at work, the tendencies which the constitutions of the last forty years re- veal, are evidently’ the same over the whole Union. What are the chief of those tendencies? One is for the constitutions to grow longer. This is an absolutely universal rule. Virginia, for instance, put her first constitution, that of 1776, into four closely printed quarto pages, that is, into about three thousand two hundred words.! In 1830, she needed seven pages; in 1850, eighteen pages ; in 1870, twenty-two pages, or seventeen thousand words. Texas has doubled the length of her constitution from sixteen quarto pages in 1845 to thirty-four in 1876. Pennsyl- vania was content in 1776 with a document of eight pages, which for those times was a long one; she now requires twenty- three. The constitution of Illinois filled ten pages in 1818 ; in 1870 it had swollen to twenty-five. These are fair examples, but the extremes are marked by the constitution of New Hamp- shire of 1776, which was of about six hundred words (not reckoning the preamble), and the constitution of Missouri of 1875, which has more than twenty-six thousand words. The new constitutions are longer, not only because new topics are taken up and dealt with, but because the old topics are handled in far greater detail. Such matters ‘as education, ordinary private law, railroads, State and municipal indebtedness, were - either untouched or lightly touched in the earlier instruments. The provisions regarding the judiciary and the legislature, parti- cularly those restricting the power of the latter, have grown far more minute of late years, as abuses of power became more frequent, and the respect for legislative authority less. As the powers of a State legislature are prima facie unlimited, these bodies can be restrained only by enumerating the matters with- drawn from their competence, and the list grows always ampler.. The time might almost seem to have come for prescribing that, like Congress, they should be entitled to legislate on certain
1 The full quarto page in Poore’s edition of The Federal and State Constitutions contains about eight hundred words.
Oe oe a Cee i ~ a
OHAP, xxxvi1 DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 439
enumerated subjects only, and be always required to establish affirmatively their competence to deal with any given topic.
I have already referred to the progress which the newer con- stitutions show towards more democratic arrangements. The suffrage is now in almost every State enjoyed by all adult males. Citizenship is quickly and easily accorded to immigrants. And, most significant of all, the superior judges, who were formerly
named by the governor, or chosen by the legislature, and who
held office during good behaviour, are now in most States elected by the people for fixed terms of years. I do not ignore the strongly-marked democratic character of even the first set of con- stitutions, formed at and just after the Revolution; but that character manifested itself chiefly in negative provisions, i.¢. in forbidding exercises of power by the executive, in securing full civil equality and the primordial rights of the citizen. The new democratic spirit is positive as well as negative. It refers every- thing to the direct arbitrament of the people. It calls their will into constant activity, sometimes by the enactment of laws on various subjects in the Constitution, sometimes by prescribing to the legislature the purposes which legislation is to aim at. Even the tendency to support the executive against the legislature is evidence not so much of respect for authority as of the confidence of the people that the executive will be the servant of popular opinion, prepared at its bidding to restrain that other servant— the legislature—who is less trusted, becatise harder to fix with responsibility for misdoing. On the whole, therefore, there can be no doubt that the democratic spirit is now more energetic and pervasive than it was in the first generation. It is a different kind of spirit. It is more practical, more disposed to extend the sphere of governmental interference, less content to rely on general principles. One discovers in the wording of the most recent constitutions a decline of that touching faith in the efficacy of broad declarations of abstract human rights which marked the disciples of Jefferson. But if we compare the present with the second or Jacksonian age, it may be said that there has been in progress for some years past a certain anti-democratic reaction, fainter than the levelling movement of sixty years ago, and not
likely to restore the state of things that existed before that
movement, yet noticeable as showing that the people do learn by experience, and are not indisposed to reverse their action and eet clear of the results of past mistakes. The common saying
440 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
that on the road to democracy there are vestigia nulla retrorsum is not universally true in America.
That there are strong conservative tendencies in the United States is a doctrine whose truth will be illustrated later on. Meantime it is worth while to ask how far the history of State constitutions confirms the current notion that democracies are fond of change. The answer is instructive, because it shows how flimsy are the generalizations which men often indulge in when discussing forms of government, as if all communities with similar forms of government behaved in the same way. All the States of the Union are democracies, and democracies of nearly the same type. Yet while some change their constitutions fre- quently, others scarcely change theirs at all. Let me recall the reader’s mind to the distinction already drawn between the older or New England type and the newer type, which we find in the Southern as well as the Western States. It is among the latter that changes are frequent. Louisiana, for instance, whose State life began in 1812, has had six complete new constitutions, with- out counting the so-called Secession Constitution of 1861. So has Georgia. Arkansas, which dates from 1836, has had five, besides many amendments passed in the intervals. Virginia and South Carolina (both original States) have had five each. Among the Northern States, Pennsylvania (an original State) has had four ; Illinois, dating from 1818, three; New York, three; Dela- ware, three; whereas Connecticut and Rhode Island! (both original States), and Maine (dating from 1820), have had only one each, Vermont and New Hampshire two each. Massachusetts still lives under her Constitution of 1780, which has indeed been amended at various dates, yet not to such an extent as to efface its original features. Of the causes of these differences I will now touch on two only. One is the attachment which in an old and historic, a civilized and well-educated community, binds the people to their accustomed usages and forms of government. It is the newer States, without.a past to revere, with a population undis- ciplined or fluctuating, that are prone to change. In well-settled commonwealths the longer a constitution has stood untouched, the longer it is likely to stand, because the force of habit is on its side, because an intelligent people learns to value the stability of its
institutions, and to love that which it is proud of having created. —
1 Connecticut gave herself a new constitution in 1818, Rhode Island in 1842, both having previously lived under their old colonial constitutions.
CHAP. Xxxvi1_ DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 441
The other cause is the difference between the swiftness with which economic and social changes move in different parts of the country. They are the most constant sources of political change, and find their natural expression in alterations of the Constitu- . tion. Such changes have been least swift and least sudden in the New England and Middle States, though in some of the latter the growth of great cities, such as New York and Phila- delphia, has induced them, and induced therewith a tendency to amend the constitutions so as to meet new conditions and check new evils. They have been most marked in regions where popu- lation and wealth have grown with unexampled speed, and in those where the extinction of slavery has changed the industrial basis of society. Here lies the explanation of the otherwise singular fact that several of the original States, such as Virginia and Georgia, have run through many constitutions. These whilom Slave States have not only changed greatly but changed suddenly : society was dislocated by the Civil War, and has had to make more than one effort to set itself right.
The total number of distinct constitutions adopted in 1776 or enacted in the several States since that year—the States being then 13 and now 38.in number—is 105; and to these constitu- tions 214 partial amendments have been at different times adopted.1 The period since 1860 shows a somewhat greater frequency of change than the eighty-four years preceding ; but that may be accounted for by the effects of the war on the Southern States. The average duration of a constitution has been estimated at thirty years, and ten have lasted more than sixty years. In this connection it must be remarked that both whole constitutions and particular amendments are frequently rejected by the people when submitted to them at the polls. This has befallen six draft constitutions and more than dca eight amendments within the last ten years.”
Putting all these facts together, and bearing in mind to how large an extent the constitutions now, whether wisely or foolishly, embody ordinary private and administrative law and therefore invite amendment, the American democracy seems less inclined
1 JT take these figures from Dr. Hitchcock’s Study of American State Con- stitutions, published in 1887, adding the last Constitution of Florida. Several
Constitutions have been amended since 1886, but I am unable to give the exact
number of amendments. 2 Macpherson’s Handbook mentions 34 constitutional amendments as adopted in the two years from July 1884 to July 1886, and 4 as rejected.
442 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il
to changefulness and inconstancy than either abstract consider- ations or the descriptions of previous writers, such as De Tocque- ville, would have led us to expect. The respect for these . fundamental instruments would no doubt be greater if the changes in them were even fewer, and the changes would be fewer if the respect were greater; but I see little reason to think that the’ evil is increasing.
A few more observations on what the Constitutions disclose are needed before I conclude this necessarily brief sketch of the most instructive sources for the history of popular government which our century has produced—documents whose clauses, while they attempt to solve the latest problems of democratic commonwealths, often recall the earliest efforts of our English forefathers to restrain the excesses of medieval tyranny.
The Constitutions witness to a singular distrust by the people of its own agents and officers, not only of the legislatures but also of local authorities, as well rural as urban, whose powers of borrowing or undertaking public works are strictly limited. Even the judges are in some States restrained in their authority to commit for contempt-of court, and, while permitted to state the law, are generally forbidden to charge a jury upon the facts of a case.
They witness also to a jealousy of the Federal government. By most constitutions a Federal official is made incapable, not only of State office, but of being a member of a State legislature. These prohibitions are almost the only references to the National government to be found in the State constitutions, which so far as their terms go might belong to independent communities. They usually talk of corporations belonging to other States as “foreign,” and sometimes try to impose special burdens on them.
They show a wholesome anxiety to protect and safeguard private property in every way. The people’s consciousness of sovereignty has not used the opportunity which the enactment of a constitution gives to override private rights: there is rather a desire to secure such rights from any encroachment by the legislature: witness the frequent provisions against the taking of property without due compensation, and against the passing of private or personal statutes which could unfairly affect indi- viduals. The only exceptions to this rule are to be found in the case of anything approaching a monopoly, and in the case of wealthy corporations. But the “monopolist” is regarded as. the
vee
oHAP. xxxviI DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 443
enemy of the ordinary citizen, whom he oppresses; and the corporation—it is usually corporations that are monopolists—is deemed not a private person at all, but a sort of irresponsible tyrant whose resources enable him to overreach the law. Cor- porations are singled out for special taxation. Labour laws are enacted to apply to them only. A remarkable instance of this hostility to monopolies is to be found in the Constitution of Illinois of 1870, with its provisions anent grain elevators, ware-
‘houses, and railroads.1_ Nor are the newer constitutions of other
Western States, such as Wisconsin and Texas, less instructive in this respect.
The extension of the sphere of State interference, with the corresponding departure from the doctrine of laissez faire, is a question so large and so interesting as to require a chapter to itself. Here it may suffice to remark, that some departments of governmental action, which on the continent of Europe have long been handled by the State, are in America still left to private enterprise. or instance, the States neither own nor manage railways, or telegraphs, or mines, or forests, and they sell their public lands instead of working them. ‘There is, never- theless, visible in recent constitutions a tendency to extend the scope of public administrative activity. Some of the newer in- struments establish ministries of agriculture, labour offices, mining commissioners, land registration offices, dairy commissioners, and agricultural or mining colleges. And a reference to the statutes passed within the last few years in the Western States will show that more is being done in this direction by the legislatures, as exponents of popular sentiment, than could be gathered from the constitutions, most of which are more than ten years old.
A spirit of humanity and tenderness for suffering, very characteristic of the American people, appears in the directions which many constitutions contain for the establishment of charit- able and reformatory institutions. Sometimes the legislature is enjoined to provide that the prisons are made comfortable. On the other hand, this tenderness is qualified by the judicious severity which in most States debars persons convicted of crime from the electoral franchise.
In the older Northern constitutions, and in nearly all the more recent constitutions of all the States, ample provision is
1 See the remarkable group of cases beginning with Munn v. Iilinots (com- monly called the Granger Cases) in 94 U.S. Reports, p. 118.
444 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
made for the creation and maintenance of schools. Even uni- versities are the object of popular zeal, though a zeal not always according to knowledge. Several Western constitutions direct their establishment and support from public funds or land grants.
Although a Constitution is the fundamental and supreme law of the State, one must not conclude that its provisions are any better observed and enforced than those of an ordinary statute. There is sometimes reason to suspect that when an offence is thought worthy of being specially mentioned in a constitution, this happens because it is specially frequent, and because it is feared that the legislature may shrink from applying due severity to repress it. Certain it is that in many instances the penalties threatened by constitutions fail to attain their object. For instance, the constitutions of most of the Southern States have for many years past declared duellists, and even persons who abet a duel by carrying a challenge, incapable of office, or of sitting in the legislature. Yet the practice of private warfare does not seem to have declined in Mississippi, Texas, or Arkansas, where these provisions exist. Virginia had such a provision in her constitution of 1830.. She repeated it in her constitution of 1850, but with the addendum, that the disqualification should not attach to those who had offended previously—e. in viola- tion of the constitution of 1830.1 So far as the enactment has had any effect, that effect would seem to have been to encourage the practice of shooting at sight, which is neither morally nor socially an improvement on duelling, though apparently exempt from these constitutional penalties.
New York has been so much exercised on the subject of
bribery and corruption, as to declare (amendments of 1874), not
1 “The General Assembly may provide that no person shall be capable of holding or being elected to any post of profit, trust, or emolument, civil or military, legislative, executive, or judicial, under the government of this common- wealth who shall hereafter fight a duel, or send or accept a challenge to fight a duel, the probable issue of which may be the death of the challenger or challenged, or who shall be second to either party, or shall in any manner aid or assist in such duel, or shall be knowingly the bearer of such challenge or acceptance ; but no person shall be so disqualified by reason of his having heretofore fought such duel or sent or accepted such challenge, or been second in such duel, or bearer of such challenge or acceptance” (Constitution of 1830, Art. iii. § 12, repeated in Constitution of 1850, Art. iv. § 17). In her Constitution of 1870 Virginia is not content with suggesting to the legislature to disqualify duellists, but does this directly by Art. iii. § 38. Seventeen Constitutions now declare duellists dis- qualified for office, and nine others add a disqualification for the franchise, Nearly all are Southern and Western States.
See OL el ee eee a iv
= , 2 Za =
= a ' - ee hg on: : = ; alg ro CHAP, xxxviI DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 445
—
only that every member of the legislature and every officer shall
take an oath that he has given nothing as a consideration for any vote received for him (amendment to Art. xii. § 1), and that the legislature shall pass laws excluding from the suffrage all persons convicted of bribery or of any infamous crime (amend- ment to Art. ii. § 2), but also (amendment to Art. xv. §§ 1 and 2) that the giving or offering to or receiving by an officer of any bribe shall be a felony. And lobbying, which is openly practised
in every building where a legislature meets, is declared by Cali-
fornia to be a felony, and by Georgia to be a crime.
CHAPTER XXXIX DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE
THE difficulties and defects inherent in the method of legislating by a Constitution are obvious enough. Inasmuch as the people cannot be expected to distinguish carefully between what is and what is not proper for a fundamental instrument, there arises an inconvenient as well as unscientific mixture and confusion of private law and administrative regulation with the frame of government and the general doctrines of public law. This mixture, and the practice of placing in the Constitution direc- tions to the legislature to legislate in a certain sense, or for certain purposes, embarrass a legislature in its working by raising at every turn questions of its competence to legislate, and of the agreement between its acts and the directions contained in the Constitution. And as the legislature is seldom either careful or well-advised, there follows in due course an abundant crop of questions as to the constitutionality of statutes, alleged by those whom they affect prejudicially in any particular instance to be either in substance inconsistent with the Constitution, or such as the legislature was expressly forbidden by it to pass. These in- conveniences are no doubt slighter in America than they would be in Europe, because the lawyers and the judges have had so much experience in dealing with questions of constitutional con- flict and ultra wires legislation that they now handle them with amazing dexterity. Still, they are serious, and such as a well- ordered government ought to avoid. The habit of putting into the Constitution matters proper for an ordinary statute has the further disadvantage that it heightens the difficulty of correcting a mistake or supplying an omission. The process of amending a constitution even in one specific point is a slow one, to which neither the legislature, as the proposing authority, nor the people, as the sanctioning authority, willingly resort. Hence blemishes
E J
.
7
a
Fg eh
CHAP. XxxIx DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE . 447
remain and are tolerated, which a country possessing, like Eng- land, a sovereign legislature would correct in the next session of Parliament without trouble or delay.
It is sometimes difficult to induce the people to take a proper interest in the amendment of the Constitution. In those States where a majority of all the qualified voters, and not merely of those voting, is required to affirm an amendment, it often happens that the requisite majority cannot be obtained owing to the small number who vote.t This has its good side, for it is a check on hasty or frequent change. But it adds greatly to the difficulty of working a rigid or supreme Constitution, that you may find an admitted, even if not very grave evil, to be practically irremov- able, because the mass of the people cannot be induced to care enough about the matter to come to the polls, and there deliver their judgment upon it.
These defects are so obvious that we are entitled to expect to find correspondingly strong grounds for the maintenance, and indeed the steady extension of the plan of legislating by and through a Constitution. What are these grounds? Why do the Americans tend more and more to remove legislation from the legislature and entrust it to the people ?
We could quite well imagine the several State governments working without fundamental instruments to control them. In a Federal government which rests on, or at least which began from, a compact between a number of originally separate com- munities, the advantages of having the relations of these com- raunities to one another and to the central authority defined by an instrument placed beyond the reach of the ordinary legislature, and not susceptible of easy change, are clear and strong. Such an instrument is the guarantee for the rights of each member placed above the impulses of a chance majority. The case is quite different when we come to a single homogeneous community. Each American State might now, if it so pleased, conduct its own business, and govern its citizens as a commonwealth “at common law,” with a sovereign legislature, whose statutes formed the highest expression of popular will. Nor need it do so upon the cabinet system of England. It might retain the separation from the legislature of the executive governor, elected by tho people, and exercising his veto on their behalf, and yet dispense altogether with a rigid fundamental constitution, being content
1 This has happened more than once oi tate years in Kentucky and Delaware,
448 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
to vest in its representatives and governor the plenitude of its own powers. This, however, no American State does, or has ever done, or is likely to do. And the question why it does not suggests a point of interest for Europeans as well as for Americans.
In the republics of the ancient world, where representative assemblies were unknown, legislative power rested with the citizens meeting in what we should now ¢all primary assemblies, such as the Ecclesia of Syracuse or the Comitia of Rome. ‘The same plan prevailed in the early Teutonic tribes, where the assembly of the freemen exercised all such powers as did not belong to the king. The laws of the kings of the Angles and Saxons, the capitularies of Charlemagne, were promulgated in assemblies of the nation, and may be said, though emanating from the prince, to have been enacted by the people. During the middle ages, these assemblies died out, and the right of making laws passed either to the sovereign or to a representative assembly surrounding the sovereign such as the English Parlia- ment, the older method surviving only in such primitive com- munities as some of the Swiss cantons, and the tiny republics of Andorra and San Marino. The first reappearance in modern Europe of the scheme of direct legislation by the people is, so far as I know, the provision of the French Constitution framed by the National Convention in 1793, which directs that any law proposed by the legislative body shall be published and sent to all the communes of the Republic, whose primary assemblies shall be convoked to vote upon it, in case objections to it have been raised by one-tenth of these primary assemblies in a majority of the departments. In recent times the plan has become familiar by its introduction, not only into most of the cantons of Switzerland, but into the Swiss Federal Republic, which constantly applies it, under the name of Referendum, by submitting to the vote of the people laws passed by the Federal legislature.
1 The Swiss Federal Constitution provides that any Federal law and Federal © resolution of general application and not of an urgent character, must on the demand of eight cantons or of 30,000 voters be submitted to popular vote for acceptance or rejection (Constit. Art. 89). This vote is frequently in the negative. See Swiss Federal Constitution, Art. 89; and the remarks of M. Numa Droz in his Instruction cwigue, § 172. In some cantons the submission of laws to popular vote is compulsory. In Geneva it is facultatif. See Geneve et ses Insti- tutions, by A. Gavard.
tyr
cHar. xxx1x DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 449
In England the influence of the same idea may be discovered in two phenomena of recent years. One is the proposal fre- quently made to refer to the direct vote of the inhabitants of a town or other local area the enactment of some ordinance affect- ing that district: as, for instance, one determining whether or no licences shall be granted within it for the sale of intoxicating liquors. This method of deciding an issue, commonly known as Local Option, is a species of referendum. It differs from the Swiss form, not merely in being locally restricted, but rather in the fact that it is put to the people, not for the sake of con- firming an Act of the legislature, but of deciding whether a particular Act shall be operative in a given area. But the principle is the same ; it is a transference of legislative authority from a representative body, whether the parliament of the nation or the municipal council of the town, to the voters at the polls.
The other English illustration may seem far fetched, but on examination will be seen to involve the same idea. It is now be- ginning to be maintained as a constitutional doctrine, that when any large measure of change is carried through the House of Commons, the House of Lords has a right to reject it for the purpose of compelling a dissolution of Parliament, that is, an appeal to the voters. And there are some signs that the view is making way, that even putting the House of Lords out of sight, the House of Commons is not morally, though of course it is legally, entitled to pass a bill seriously changing the Constitu- tion, which was not submitted to the electors at the preceding general election. A general election, although in form a choice of particular persons as members,’ has now practically become an expression of popular opinion on the two or three leading measures then propounded and discussed by the party leaders, as well as a vote of confidence or no confidence in the Ministry of the day. It is in substance a vote upon those measures ; although, of course, a vote only on their general principles, and not, like the Swiss Referendum, upon the statute which the legislature has passed. Even therefore in a country which clings to and founds itself upon the absolute supremacy of its repre- sentative chamber, the notion of a direct appeal to the people
2 has made progress.
1 The reference to the vote of the ratepayers of a parish of the question whether
a rate shall be levied for a free library is another instance. : 2 Much importance has come to be attached in England to casual parliamentary
VOL. I 2G
450 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
In the United States, which I need hardly say has in this matter been nowise affected by France or Switzerland or Eng- land, but has developed on its own lines, the conception that the people (i.e. the citizens at large) are and ought of right to be the supreme legislators, has taken the form of legislation by enacting or amending a Constitution. Instead of, like the Swiss, submit- ting ordinary laws to the voters after they have passed the legislature, the Americans take subjects which belong to ordinary legislation out of the category of statutes, place them in the Constitution, and then handle them as parts of this fundamental instrument. They are not called laws; but laws they are to all intents and purposes, differing from statutes only in being enacted by an authority which is not a constant but an occasional body, called into action only when a Convention or a legislature lays propositions before it.
I have already explained the historical origin of this system, how it sprang from the fact that the Constitutions of the colonies having been given to them by an external authority superior to the colonial legislature, the people of each State, seeing that they could no longer obtain changes in their Constitution from Britain, assumed to themselves the right and duty of remodelling it; putting the collective citizendom of the State into the place of the British Crown as sovereign. The business of creating or remodelling an independent commonwealth was to their thinking too great a matter to be left to the ordinary organs of State life. This feeling, which had begun to grow from 1776 onwards, was much strengthened by the manner in which the Federal Constitu- tion was enacted in 1788 by State conventions. It seemed to have thus received a specially solemn ratification ; and even the - Federal legislature, which henceforth was the centre of national politics, was placed far beneath the document which expressed the will of the people as a whole.
As the republic went on working out both in theory and in practice those conceptions of democracy and popular sovereignty which had been only vaguely apprehended when enunciated at the Revolution, the faith of the average man in himself became elections occurring when any important measure is before Parliament, because such an election is taken to indicate the attitude of the people generally towards the measure, and by consequence the judgment they would pronounce were a general election held. There have been instances in which a measure or part of a
measure pending in Parliament has been dropped, because the result of the “by-election ” was taken to indicate that it displeased the people.
apes
; CHAP, xxxIx DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 451
stronger, his love of equality greater, his desire, not only to rule, but to rule directly in his own proper person, more constant. These sentiments would have told still further upon State govern- ments had they not found large scope in local government. However, even in State affairs they made it an article of faith that no Constitution could be enacted save by the direct vote of the citizens ; and they inclined the citizens to seize such chances as occurred of making laws for themselves in their own way. - Concurrently with the growth of these tendencies there had been a decline in the quality of the State legislatures, and of the legis- lation which they turned out. They were regarded with less respect ; they inspired less confidence. Hence the people had the further excuse for superseding the legislature, that they might reasonably fear it would neglect or spoil the work they desired to
gee done.
Instead of being stimulated by this distrust to mend their ways and recover their former powers, the State legislatures fell in with the tendency, and promoted their own supersession. ‘The chief interest of their members, as will be explained later, is in the passing of special or local Acts, not of general public legisla- tion. They are extremely timid, easily swayed by any active section of opinion, and afraid to stir when placed between the opposite fires of two such sections, as for instance, between the Prohibitionists and the liquor-sellers. Hence they welcomed the direct intervention of the people as relieving them of embarrassing problems. They began to refer to the decision of a popular vote matters clearly within their own proper competence, such as the question of liquor traffic, or the creation of a system of gratuitous schools. This happened as far back as thirty years ago. And in New York, the legislature having been long distracted and perplexed by the question whether articles made by convicts in the State prisons should be allowed to be sold, and so to compete with articles made by private manufacturers, recently resolved to invite the opinion of the multitude, and accordingly passed an Act under which the question was voted on over the whole State. They could not (except of course by proposing a constitutional amendment) enable the people to legislate on the point ; for it has been often held by American courts that the legislature, having received a delegated power of law-making, cannot delegate that power to any other person or body.1_ But they could ask
1 According to the maxim Delegata potestas non delegatur, 2 maxim which
452 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT
the people to advise them how they should legislate ; and having obtained its view in this manner, could pass a statute in con- formity with its wishes.
It is, however, chiefly in the form of an amendment to the Constitution that we find the American voters exercising direct legislative power. And this method comes very near to the Swiss referendum, because the amendment is first discussed and approved by the legislature, a majority greater than a simple majority being required in some States, and then goes before the citizens voting at the polls. Sometimes the State Constitution provides that a particular question shall be submitted by the legislature to the voters; thus creating a referendum for that particular case. Thus Wisconsin refers it to the voters to decide whether or no banks shall be chartered.1 Minnesota declares that a certain class of railway laws shall not take effect unless submitted to and ratified by a majority of the electors. And she
would not apply in England, because there Parliament has an original and not a delegated authority.
Judge Cooley says: ‘One of the settled maxims of constitutional law is that the power conferred upon the legislature to make laws cannot be delegated by that department to any other body or authority.. Where the sovereign power of the State has located the authority, there it must remain ; and by the constitu- tional authority alone the laws must be made until the Constitution itself is changed. The power to whose judgment, wisdom, and patriotism this high pre- rogative has been entrusted cannot relieve itself of the responsibility by choosing other agencies upon which the power shall be devolved” (Constit. Limit., p. 141). He quotes from Locke (Civil Government, § 142) the remark that “The legislature neither must nor can transfer the power of making laws to anybody else, or place it anywhere but where the people have.” This is one of Locke’s “bounds set to the legislative power of every commonwealth in every form of government ;” but it has not precluded the British Parliament from delegating large, and in many cases truly legislative, powers to particular persons or author- ities, such as the Crown in Council.
There has been much difference of opinion among American courts as to the extent to which a legislature may refer the operation of a general law to popular vote in a locality, but “the clear weight of authority is in support of legislation of the nature commonly known as local option laws.’’—Cooley, wt supra, p. 152 ; and see the cases collected in his notes.
1 Constitution of 18438, Art. xi. § 5.—“The legislature may submit to the voters at any general election the question of ‘Bank or no bank 2’ and if at any such election a number of votes equal to a majority of all the votes cast at such election on that subject shall be in favour of banks, then the legislature shall have power to grant bank charters, or to pass a general banking law, with such restric- tions and under such regulations as they may deem expedient for the protection of the bill-holders : Provided, that no such grant or law shall have any force or effect until the same shall have been submitted to a vote of the electors of the State at some general election, and been approved by a majority of the votes cast on that subject at such election.”
Pgh es
CHAP. xxxIx DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 453
provides, by a later amendment to her Constitution, that “the moneys belonging to the internal improvement land fund shall never be appropriated for any purpose till the enactment for that purpose shall have been approved by a majority of the electors of the State, voting at the annual general election following the passage of the Act.”! In this last instance the referendum goes the length of constituting the voters the financial authority for the State, withdrawing from the legislature what might seem the oldest and most essential of its functions.
It is not uncommon for proposals submitted by the legislature in the form of constitutional amendments to be rejected by the people. Thus in Indiana, Nebraska, Ohio, and Oregon, the legis- lature submitted amendments extending the suffrage to women, and the people in all four States refused the extension. In
Colorado, where the Constitution of 1876 had provided a special referendum on the point, the legislature passed its woman fran- chise law, and submitted it to popular vote in October 1877, when it was rejected by 14,000 votes to 7400.
What are the practical advantages of this plan of direct legis- lation by the people? Its demerits are obvious. Besides those I have already stated, it tends to lower the authority and sense of responsibility in the legislature ; and it refers matters needing much elucidation by debate to the determination of those who cannot, on account of their numbers, meet together for discus- sion, and many of whom may have never thought about the matter.2 These considerations will to most Europeans appear decisive against it. The proper course, they will say, is to im- prove the legislatures. ‘The less you trust them, the worse they will be. They may be ignorant; yet not so ignorant as the masses.
But the improvement of the legislatures is just what the
1 Amendments of 1871 and 1874 to the Constitution of 1857.
2 A Scotch local option bill proposing to refer to the vote of the ratepayers the decision of the question whether licences for the sale of intoxicating liquors in any town shall be granted has called forth much discussion as to the merits of popular voting. It is urged by some that this provision, by taking away from the repre- sentatize local authority the determination of an important question, will lower the position of that authority, and make leading residents less eager to be elected members of it. It is replied that the local authorities cannot always be trusted in such a question, that the ratepayers will be satisfied with no decision but their own, and that to make the opinion of a candidate on this one question the test of
his fitness to be elected a member of the local authority will really injure the election, by excluding men who might possibly be the best in point of personal
capacity.
454 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IL
Americans despair of, or, as they would prefer to say, have not time to attend to. Hence they fall back on the referendum as the best course available under the circumstances of the case, and in such a world as the present. They do not claim that it has any great educative effect on the people. But they remark with truth that the mass of the people are equal in intelligence and character to the average State legislator, and are exposed to fewer temptations. The legislator can be “got at,” the people cannot. The personal interest of the individual legislator in passing a measure for chartering banks or spending the internal improvement fund may be greater than his interest as one of the community in preventing bad laws. It will be otherwise with the bulk of the citizens. The legislator may be subjected by the advocates of women’s suffrage or liquor prohibition to a pressure irresistible by ordinary mortals ; but the citizens are too numerous to be all wheedled or threatened. Hence they can and do reject proposals which the legislature has assented to. Nor should it be forgotten that in a country where law depends for its force on the consent of the governed, it is eminently desirable that law should not outrun popular sentiment, but have the whole weight of the people’s deliverance behind it. ;
A brilliant, though severe, critic of Canadian institutions deplores the want of some similar arrangement in the several Provinces of the Dominion. Having remarked that the veto of the lieutenant-governor on the Acts of a Provincial legislature is in practice a nullity, and that the central government never vetoes such Acts except where they are held to exceed the con- stitutional competence of the legislature, he urges that what is needed to cure the faults of Provincial legislation is to borrow the American plan of submitting constitutional amendments — (and, he might add, laws) to popular vote. “The people can- not be lobbied, wheedled, or bull-dozed; the people is not in fear of its re-election if it throws out something supported by the Irish, the Prohibitionist, the Catholic, or the Methodist vote.” 4
If the practice of recasting or amending State Constitutions were to grow common, one of the advantages of direct legislation by the people would disappear, for the sense of permanence _ would be gone, and the same mutability which is now possible in ordinary statutes would become possible in the provisions of
1 Mr. Goldwin Smith in the Contemporary Review.
Pans
cuar, xxxix DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 455
the fundamental law. But this fault of small democracies,! especially when ruled by primary assemblies, is unlikely to recur in large democracies, such as most States have now become, nor does it seem to be on the increase among them. Reference to the people, therefore, acts as a conservative force; that is to say, it is a conservative method as compared with action by the legislature. .
In England, and indeed in most European countries, repre- sentative government has been hitherto an institution with markedly conservative elements, because the legislating repre- sentatives have generally belonged to the wealthy or well-born and educated classes, who having something to lose by change, are disinclined to it, who have been looked up to by the masses, and who have been imperfectly responsive to popular impulses. American legislatures have none of these features. The men are not superior to the multitude, partly because the multitude is tolerably educated and tolerably well off. The multitude does not defer to them. They are horribly afraid of it, and indeed of any noisy section in it. They live in the breath of its favour ; they hasten to fulfil its behests almost before they are uttered. Accordingly an impulse or passion dominant among the citizens tells at once on the legislature, and finds expression in a law, the only check being, not the caution of that body and its willingness to debate at length, but the incapacity it often shows to embody in a practical form the wishes manifested by the people. Hence in the American States representative government has by no means that conservative quality which Europeans ascribe to it, whereas the direct vote of the people is the vote of men who are generally better instructed than the European masses, more experienced in politics, more sensible of their interest in the stability of the country. If, therefore, we regard the refer- endum in its effect upon the State legislature, we shall regard it as being rather a bit and bridle than a spur.
This method of legislation by means of a Constitution or amendments thereto, arising from sentiments and under con- ditions in many respects similar to those which have produced the referendum in Switzerland, is an interesting illustration of
1 So frequent a charge against the Greek republics and the Italian republics of the middle ages, as Dante says of Florence—
‘Ch’ a mezzo Novembre, Non giunge quel che tu d’Ottobre fili.”
456 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART JL
the tendency of institutions, like streams, to wear their channels deeper. A historical accident, so to speak, suggested to the Americans the subjection of their legislatures to a fundamental law, and the invention has been used for other purposes far more extensively {than its creators foresaw. It is now, moreover, serviceable in a way which those who first used it did not con- template, though they are well pleased with the result. It acts as a restraint not only on the vices and follies of legislators, but on the people themselves. Having solemnly bound themselves by their Constitution to certain rules and principles, the people come to respect those principles. They have parted with powers which they might be tempted in a moment of excitement, or under the pressure of suffering, to abuse through their too pliant representatives ; and although they can resume these powers by enacting a new Constitution or amending the old one, the process of resumption requires time, and involves steps which secure care and deliberation, while allowing passion to cool, and the prospect of a natural relief from economic evils to appear. It has been well observed by Dr. von Holst+ that the completeness and consistency with which the principle of the direct sovereignty of the whole people is carried out in America has checked ‘revolutionary tendencies, by pointing out a peaceful and legal method for the effecting of political or economical changes, and has fostered that disposition to respect the decision of the majority which is essential to the success of popular govern- ments.
State Constitutions, considered as laws drafted by a Con- vention and enacted by the people at large, are better both in form and substance than laws made by the legislature, because they are the work of abler men, acting under a special com- mission which imposes special responsibilities‘on them. The appointment of a Constitutional Convention is an important event, which excites general interest in a State. Its functions are weighty and difficult, far transcending those of the regular legislature. Hence the best men in the State desire a seat in it, and, in particular, eminent lawyers become candidates, knowing how much it will affect the law they practise. It is therefore a body superior in composition to either the Senate or the House of a State. Its proceedings excite more interest ; its debates are more instructive; its conclusions are more carefully weighed,
1 Constitutional Law of the United States, § 90.
tse
cHAP, xxxIx DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 457
because they cannot be readily reversed. Or if the work of altering the constitution is carried out by a series of amendments, these are likely to be more fully considered by the legislature than ordinary statutes would be, and to be framed with more regard to clearness and precision.
In the interval between the settlement by the convention of its draft constitution, or by the legislature of its draft amend- ments, and the putting of the matter to the vote of the people, there is copious discussion in the press and at public meetings, so that the citizens often go well prepared to the polls. An all-pervading press does the work which speeches did in the ancient republics, and the fact that constitutions and amendments so submitted are frequently rejected, shows that the people, — whether they act wisely or not, do not at any rate surrender themselves blindly to the judgment of a convention, or obediently adopt the proposals of a legislature.
These merits are indeed not always claimable for conventions and their remodelled constitutions, much less for individual amendments. The Constitution of California of 1879 (whereof more in a later chapter) is a striking instance to the contrary. But a general survey of this branch of our inquiry leads to the conclusion that the peoples of the several States, in the exercise of this their highest function, show little of that haste, that reck- lessness, that love of change for the sake of change, with which European theorists, both ancient and modern, have been wont to credit democracy ; and that the method of direct legislation by the citizens, liable as it doubtless is to abuse, causes, in the present condition of the States, fewer evils than it prevents.
1 Occasionally some particular clause of a draft constitution is separately submitted to the people; if they approve it, it is inserted in the constitution, which is voted on as a whole; if they refuse it, it is omitted.
2 There is much controversy in America as to whether the better method of reforming a constitution be to recast it by a convention or remove particular blemishes by a series of amendments. Probably the one plan or the other is to be preferred, according to the condition of public sentiment and the likelihood of securing a strong convention.
CHAPTER XL STATE GOVERNMENTS: THE LEGISLATURE
THE similarity of the frame of government in the thirty-eight republics which make up the United States, a similarity which appears the more remarkable when we remember that each of the republics is independent and self-determined as respects its frame of government, is due to the common source whence the governments flow. They are all copies, some immediate, some mediate, of ancient English institutions, viz. chartered self-govern- ing corporations, which, under the influence of English habits, and with the precedent of the English parliamentary system before their eyes, developed into governments resembling that of England in the eighteenth century. Each of the thirteen colonies had up to 1776 been regulated by a charter from the British Crown, which, according to the best and oldest of all English traditions, allowed it the practical management of its own affairs. The charter contained a sort of skeleton constitution, which usage had clothed with nerves, muscles, and sinews, till it became a complete and symmetrical working system of free government. There was in each a governor, in two colonies chosen by the people,! in the rest nominated by the Crown; there was a legis- lature ; there were executive officers acting under the governor’s commission and judges nominated by him ; there were local self- governing communities. In none, however, did there exist what we call cabinet government, i.¢. the rule of the legislature through a committee of its own members, coupled with the irresponsibility of the permanent nominal head of the executive. This separation of the executive from the legislature, which naturally arose from the fact that the governor was an officer directly responsible to
1 However, in Connecticut and Rhode Island, the governor was chosen, not as now by the people at large, but by the Company assembled in general court, a
body which passed into the legislature of the colony. See Charter of Connecticut of 1662, Charter of Rhode Island, 1663.
OHAP. XL STATE LEGISLATURES 459
another power than the colonial legislature, viz. the British Crown, his own master to whom he stood or fell,! distinguishes the old colonial governments of North America from those of the British colonies of the present day, in all of which cabinet govern- ment prevails. The latter are copies of the present Constitution of England; the former resembled it as it existed in the seven- teenth and beginning of the eighteenth century before cabinet government had grown up.
When the thirteen colonies became sovereign States at the Revolution, they preserved this frame of government, substituting a governor chosen by the State for one appointed by the Crown. As the new States admitted to the Union after 1789 successively formed their constitutions prior to their admission to the Union, each adopted the same scheme, its people imitating, as was natural, the older commonwealths whence they came, and whose working they understood and admired? They were the more inclined to do so because they found in the older constitutions that sharp separation of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers which the political philosophy of those days taught them to regard as essential to a free government, and they all take
this separation as their point of departure.
I have observed in an earlier chapter that the influence on the framers of the Federal Constitution of the examples of free government which they found in their several States, had been profound. We may sketch out a sort of genealogy of Govern- ments as follows :—
First. The English incorporated Company, a self-governing body, with its governor, deputy-governor, and assistants chosen by the freemen of the company, and meeting in what is called the General Court or Assembly.
Next. The Colonial Government, which out of this Company evolves a governor or executive head and a legislature, consisting of representatives chosen by the citizens and meeting in one or two chambers.
1 Even in Connecticut and Rhode Island the governor, though chosen by the colony, was in a sense responsible to the Crown.
2 Of course in the British self-governing colonies the governor is still responsible to the Crown, but this responsibility is confined within narrow limits by the responsibility of his ministers to the colonial legislature and by the wide powers
of that legislature.
3 Massachusetts worked for several years with a small council as the executive power representing the former Crown governor, but in 1780 she came back to the plan of a single governor, while retaining, as she still retains, a council surrounding him,
460 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
Thirdly. The State Government, which is nothing but the colonial government developed and somewhat democratized, with a governor chosen originally by the legislature, now always by the people at large, and now in all cases with a legislature of two chambers. From the original thirteen States this form has spread over the Union and prevails in every State. J
Lastly. The Federal Government, modelled after the State Governments, with its President chosen, through electors, by the people, its two-chambered legislature, its judges named by the President.}
Out of such small beginnings have great things grown.
It would be endless to describe the minor differences in the systems of the thirty-eight States. I will sketch the outlines only, which, as already observed, are in the main the same everywhere.
Every State has—
An executive elective head, the governor.
A number of other administrative officers.
A legislature of two houses.
A system of courts of justice.
Various subordinate local self-governing communities, counties, cities, townships, villages, school districts.
The governor and the other chief officials are not now chosen by the legislature, as was the case under most of the older State Constitutions, but by the people. They are as far as possible dis- joined from the legislature. Neither the governor nor any other State official can sit in a State legislature. He cannot lead it. It cannot, except of course by passing statutes, restrain him. There can therefore be no question of any government by ministers who link the executive to the legislature according to the system of the free countries of modern Europe and of the British colonies.
Of these several powers it is best to begin by describing the legislature, because it is by far the strongest and most prominent.
An American State legislature always consists of two houses, the smaller called the Senate, the larger usually called the House
1 One might add another generation at the beginning of this genealogy by deriving the English corporate company from the Roman collegia, and a generation at the end by observing how much the constitution of modern Switzerland owes to that of the United States.
=
CHAP. XL STATE LEGISLATURES 461
of Representatives, though in six States it is entitled “The Assembly,” and in three “The House of Delegates.” The origin of this very interesting feature is to be sought rather in history than in theory. It is due partly to the fact that in some colonies there had existed a small governor’s council in addition to the popular representative body, partly to a natural disposition to imitate the mother country with its Lords and Commons, a dis- position which manifested itself both in colonial days and when the revolting States were giving themselves new Constitutions, for up to 1776 some of the colonies had gone on with a legisla- ture of one house only. Now, however, the need for two chambers has become an axiom of political science, being based on the belief that the innate tendency of an assembly to become hasty, tyrannical, and corrupt, needs to be checked by the co- existence of another house of equal authority. The Americans restrain their legislatures by dividing them, just as the Romans restrained their executive by substituting two consuls for one king. The only States that ever tried to do with a single house were Pennsylvania, Georgia, and Vermont, all of whom gave it up: the first after four years’ experience, the second after twelve years, the last after fifty years.1 It is with these trifling excep- tions the quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus of American constitutional doctrine.”
1 Upon this subject of the division of the legislature, see Kent’s Commentaries, i. 208-210 ; and Story’s Commentaries on the American Constitution, §§ 548-570. It deserves to be remarked that the Pennsylvanian Constitution_of 1786, the Georgian Constitution of 1777, and the Vermont Constitutions of 1786 and 1798, all of which constituted one house of legislature only, provided for a second body called the Executive Council, which in Georgia had the duty of examining bills sent to it by the House of Assembly, and of remonstrating against any provisions they disapproved, and in Vermont was empowered to submit to the Assembly amendments to bills sent up to them by the latter, and in case the Assembly did not accept such amendments, to suspend the passing of the bill till the next session of the legislature. In 1789, Georgia abolished her Council, and divided her legislature into two houses ; Pennsylvania did the same in 1790; Vermont in 1836. Both Pennsylvania and Vermont had also a body called the Council of Censors, who may be compared with the Nomothet of Athens, elected every geven years, and charged with the duty of examining the laws of the State and their execution, and of suggesting amendments. This body was abolished in Pennsylvania in 1790, but lasted on in Vermont till 1870. All these experiments well deserve the study of constitutional historians.
2 Tt ought to be noted as an illustration of the divergences between countries both highly democratic that in the Swiss cantons the legislatures consist of one chamber only. In most of these cantons there is, to be sure, a referendum and a small executive council. Another remarkable divergence is that whereas in America, and especially in the West, the tendency is towards “rotation” in
462 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS Ne
Both houses are chosen by popular vote, generally? in equal electoral districts, and by the same voters, although in a few States there are minor variations as to modes of choice.”
The following differences between the rules governing the two Houses are general :—
1. The senatorial electoral districts are always larger, usually twice or thrice as large as the House districts, and the number of senators is, of course, in the same proportion smaller than that of representatives.
2. A senator is usually chosen for a longer term than a representative. In twenty-four States he sits for four years, in one (New Jersey) for three, in eleven for two, in two (Massa- chusetts and Rhode Island) for one year only.
3. In most cases the Senate, instead of being elected all at once like the House, is only partially renewed, half its members going out when their two or four years have been completed, and a new half coming in. This gives it a sense of continuity which the House wants.
4. In some States the age at which a man is eligible for the Senate is fixed higher than that for the House of Repre- sentatives ; and in one (Delaware) he must own freehold land of 200 acres or real or personal estate of the value of £1000. Other restrictions on eligibility, such as the exclusion of clergy- men (which still exists in six States, and is of old standing), that of salaried public officials (which exists everywhere), that of United States officials and members of Congress, and that of persons not resident in the electoral district (frequent by law and practically universal by custom), apply to both Houses. In some States this last restriction goes so far that a member who ceases to reside in the district for which he was elected loses his seat ipso facto. office, in Switzerland an official and a member of a legislature is usually continued in his post from one term to another, in fact is seldom displaced except for some positive fault. At one time officials were steadily re-elected in Con- necticut.
1 In Connecticut, every town which had members in 1874 still returns two members, whatever its size, and new towns obtain two members when they reach 5000. Thus a great many very small places have two members each, and the State is governed by the representatives of ‘‘rotten boroughs.” As they form the majority, they have hitherto refused to submit to the people a constitutional amendment for a redistribution of seats on the basis of equal population.
2 For instance, in Rhode Island every town or city, be it great or small,
returns one senator. In Illinois, every district returns one senator and three representatives, but the latter are elected by minority voting.
CHAP. XL STATE LEGISLATURES 463
I have dwelt in an earlier chapter (Chap. XIV.) on the strength of this local feeling as regards congressional elections, and on the results, to a European eye mostly unfortunate, which it produces. It is certainly no weaker in State elections. Nobody dreams of offering himself as a candidate for a place in which he does not reside, even in new States, where it might be thought that there had not been time for local feeling to spring up. Hence the educated and leisured residents of the greater cities have no chance of entering the State legislature except for the city district wherein they dwell; and as these city districts are those most likely to be in the hands of some noxious and selfish ring of professional politicians, the prospect for such an aspirant is a dark one. - We shall see presently that some of these State legislatures sadly need reform in their methods and_ their tone. Nothing more contributes to make reform difficult than the inveterate habit of choosing residents only as members. Suppose an able and public-spirited man desiring to enter the Assembly or the Senate of his State and shame the offenders who are degrading or plundering it. He may be wholly unable to find a seat, because in his place of residence the party opposed to his own may hold a permanent majority, and he will not be even considered elsewhere. Suppose a group of earnest men who, knowing how little one man can effect, desire to enter the legis- lature at the same time and work together. Such a group can hardly arise except in or near a great city. It cannot effect an entrance, because the city has at best very few seats to be seized, and the city men cannot offer themselves in any other part of the State. That the restriction often rests on custom, not on law, makes the case more serious. <A law can be repealed, but custom has to be unlearned ; the one may be done in a moment of happy impulse, the other needs the teaching of long experience applied to receptive minds.
The fact is, that the Americans have ignored in all their legislative as in many of their administrative arrangements, the differences of capacity between man and man. ‘They underrate the difficulties of government and overrate the capacities of the man of common sense. Great are the blessings of equality ; but what follies are committed in its name!
The unfortunate results of this local sentiment have been ageravated by the tendency to narrow the election areas, allot- ting one senator or representative to each district. Under the
464 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I _
older Constitution of Connecticut, for instance, the twelve sena- tors were elected out of the whole State by a popular vote. Now (Amdts. of A.D. 1828) the twenty-four senators are chosen by districts, and the Senate is to-day an inferior body, because then the best men of the whole State might be chosen, now it is possible only to get the leading men of the districts. In Massachusetts, under the Constitution of 1780, the senators were chosen by districts, but a district might return as many as six senators: the Assembly men were chosen by towns,! each corporate town having at least one representative, and more in proportion to its population, the proportion being at the rate of one ad- ditional member for every 275 ratable polls. In 1836 the scale of population to representatives was raised, and a plan prescribed (too complicated to be here set forth) under which towns below the population entitling them to one representative, should have a representative during a certain number of years out of every ten years, the census being taken decennially. Thus a small town might send a member to the Assembly for five years out of every ten, choosing alternate years, or the first five, or the last five, as it pleased. Now, however (Amdts. of A.D. 1857), the State has been divided into forty Senatorial districts, each of which returns one senator only, and into 175 Assembly districts, returning, one, two, or, in a few cases, three representatives each: The composition of the legislature has declined ever since this change was made. ‘The area of choice being smaller, inferior men are chosen ; and in the case of the Assembly districts which return one member, but are composed of several small towns, the practice has grown up of giving each town its turn, so that not even the leading man of the district, but the leading man of the particular small community whose turn has come round, is chosen to sit in the Assembly.
Universal manhood suffrage, subject to certain disqualifications in respect of crime (including bribery) and of the receipt of poor law relief, which prevail in many States—in eight States no pauper can vote—is the rule in nearly all the States. A  pro- perty qualification was formerly required in many, but now exists only in Rhode Island, where the possession of real estate valued
1 A town or township means in New England, and indeed generally in the United States, a small rural district, as opposed to a city. It is a community which has not received representative municipal government, —See Chapter XLVIII. post.
CHAP, XL STATE LEGISLATURES 465
at $134, or the payment of a tax of at least $1 is required from all citizens not natives of the United States. Four other States (Delaware, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee) require the voter to have paid some State or county tax (Massachusetts and Tennessee call it a poll tax); but if he does not pay it, his party usually pay it for him, so the restriction is of little practical importance. Massachusetts also requires that he shall be able to read the State Constitution in English, and to write his name (Amdt. of 1857), Connecticut, that he shall be able to read any section of the Constitution or of the statutes, and shall sustain a good moral character (Amdts. of 1855 and 1845).2 So far as I have been able to ascertain, this educational test is of little practical consequence. In Massachusetts it does not seem to be generally enforced, perhaps because the party managers on both sides agree not to trouble voters about it. Of course cer- tain terms of residence within the United States, in the particular State, and in the voting districts, are also prescribed: these vary greatly from State to State, but are usually short.
The suffrage is generally the same for other purposes as for that of elections to the legislature, and is in every State confined to male inhabitants. In a few States, however, women are per- mitted to vote at school district and in one at municipal elections,’ and in these no distinction is made between married and unmarried women ; nor has it been attempted, in the various constitutional amendments framed to give political suffrage to women, but hitherto always rejected by the people, to draw such a distinction, which would indeed be abhorrent to the genius of American law.*
It is important to remember that, by the Constitution of the
1 Rhode Island has, since the above was in print, abolished this requirement by a constitutional amendment. There were about 25,000 persons whom it had excluded. Hight constitutions forbid the imposition of any property qualification.
2 The Constitution of Colorado, 1876, allows its legislature to prescribe an educational qualification for electors, but no such law is to take effect prior to A.D. 1890. Florida by its Constitution of 1868 directed its legislature to pre- scribe such qualifications, which, however, were not to apply till after 1880, nor to any person who might then be already a voter. In the Constitution of 1886 I find no such provision.
® On the other hand, the Constitutions of Alabama and Mississippi forbid any educational qualification to be imposed. It is curious, yet easily explicable, that two of the most ignorant States should prohibit what two of the best educated States (Massachusetts and Connecticut) expressly prescribe. The safeguard is applied where it is least, and forbidden where it is most, needed. In Alabama and Mississippi it would have excluded most of the negroes and many of the poor whites.
4 Minnesota and Colorado give the school vote to women by their Constitutions ;
VOL I 2H
466 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IL
United States, the right of suffrage in Federal or national elections (i.e. for presidential electors and members of Congress) is in each State that which the State confers on those who vote at the election of its more numerous House. Thus there might exist great differences between one State and another in the free be- stowal of the Federal franchise. That such differences are at present insignificant is due, partly to the prevalence of demo- cratic theories of equality over the whole Union, partly to the provision of the fourteenth amendment to the Federal Constitu- tion, which reduces the representation of a State in the Federal House of Representatives, and therewith also its weight in a presidential election, in proportion to the number of adult male citizens disqualified in that State. As a State desires to have its full weight in national politics, it has a strong motive for the widest possible enlargement of its Federal franchise, and this implies a corresponding width in its domestic franchise.
The number of members of the legislature varies greatly from State to State. Delaware, with nine senators, has the smallest Senate, Illinois, with fifty-one, the largest. Delaware has also the smallest House of Representatives, consisting of twenty-one members; while New Hampshire, a very small State, has the largest with 321. The New York houses number 32 and 128 respectively, those of Pennsylvania 50 and 201, those of Massa- chusetts 40 and 240. In the Western and Southern States the number of representatives rarely exceeds 120.
As there is a reason for everything in the world, if one could but find it out, so for this difference between the old New England States and those newer States which in many other points have followed their precedents. In the New England States local feeling was and is intensely strong, and every little town wanted to have its member. In the West and South, local divisions have had less natural life; in fact, they are artificial divisions rather than genuine communities that arose spontane- ously. Hence the same reason did not exist in the West and South for having a large Assembly ; while the distrust of representa- tives, the desire to have as few of them as possible and pay them as little as possible, have been specially strong motives in the West and South, as also in New York and Pennsylvania, and have caused a restriction of numbers.
Massachusetts has done it by statute. Kansas has very recently (1888) conferred the municipal franchise.
Ve oN Ne wba PAY
Vey
CHAP. XL STATE LEGISLATURES 467
In all States the members of both Houses receive salaries, which in some cases are fixed at an annual sum of from $150 (Maine) to $1500 (New York), the average being $500 (£100). More frequently, however, they are calculated at so much for every day during which the session lasts, varying from $1 (in
~ Rhode Island) to $8 (in California and Nevada) per day (4s. 2d.
to £1:13:4), besides a small allowance, called mileage, for travelling expenses. These sums, although unremunerative to a man who leaves a prosperous profession or business to attend in the State capital, are an object of such desire to many of the representatives of the people, that the latter have thought it prudent to restrict the length of the legislative sessions, which now stand generally limited to a fixed number of days, varying from forty days in Georgia, Nebraska, and Oregon, to 150 days in Pennsylvania. The States which pay by the day are also those which limit the session. Some States secure themselves against prolonged sessions by providing that the daily pay shall diminish, or shall absolutely cease and determine, at the expiry of a certain number of days, hoping thereby to expedite business and check inordinate zeal for legislation.+
It was formerly usual for the legislature to meet annually, but the experience of bad legislation and over legislation has led to fewer as well as shorter sittings ; and sessions are now biennial in all States but six: viz. Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey, South Carolina, all of them old States. In these the sessions are annual, save in that odd little nook Rhode Island, which still convokes her legislature every May at Newport, and afterwards holds an adjourned session at Providence, the other chief city of the commonwealth. There is, however, in nearly all States a power reserved to the governor to summon the Houses in extraordinary session should a pressing occasion arise, but the provisions for daily pay do not usually apply to these extra sessions.”
Bills may originate in either House, save that in nineteen States money bills must originate in the House of Representatives, a rule for which, in the present condition of things, when both Houses are equally directly representative of the people and
1 These limitations on payment are sometimes, where statutory, repealed for the occasion. In the Swiss Federal Assembly a member receives pay (16s. per diem) only for those days on which he answers to his name on the roll call.
2 Some of the biennially-meeting legislatures are apt to hold adjourned sessions
in the off years.
468 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
chosen by the same electors, no sufficient ground appears. It is a curious instance of the wish which animated the framers of the first Constitutions of the original thirteen States to reproduce the details of the English Constitution that had been deemed bul- warks of liberty. The newer States borrowed it from their elder sisters, and the existence of a similar provision in the Federal Constitution has no doubt helped to perpetuate it in all the States. But there is a reason for it in Congress, the Federal Senate not being directly representative of equal numbers of citizens, which is not found in the State legislatures: it is in these last a mere survival of no present functional value. Money bills may, however, be amended or rejected by the State Senates like any other bills, just as the Federal Senate amends money bills brought up from the House. ©
In one point a State Senate enjoys a special power, obviously modelled on that of the English House of Lords and the Federal Senate. It sits as a court under oath for the trial of State officials impeached by the House! Like the Federal Senate, it has in many States the power of confirming or rejecting appoint- ments to office made by the governor. When it considers these it is said to “go into executive Session.” The power is an important one in those States which allow the governor to nominate the higher judges. In other respects the powers and - procedure of the two Houses of a State legislature are identical ;? except that, whereas the lieutenant-governor of a State is gener- ally ex officio president of the Senate, with a casting vote therein, the House always chooses its own Speaker. The legal quorum is usually fixed, by the Constitution, at a majority of the whole number of members elected,? though a smaller number may adjourn and compel the attendance of absent members. Both Houses do most of their work by committees, much after the fashion of Congress,* and the committees are in both usually
1 In New York impeachments are tried by the Senate and the judges of the Court of Appeal sitting together: in Nebraska by the judges of the Supreme court.
2 Here and there one finds slight differences, as, for instance, in Vermont the power decennially to propose amendments to the Constitution belongs to the Senate, though the concurrence of the House is needed. However, I do not attempt in this summary to give every detail of every Constitution, but only a fair general account of what commonly prevails, and is of most interest to the student of comparative politics. ;
3 So thirty-two constitutions. Four fix the quorum at two-thirds, and two specify a number.
4 See, as to the committees of Congress, Chapter XV. ante. Some constitutions
CHAP. XL STATE LEGISLATURES ; 469
chosen by the Speaker (in the Senate by the President, though it is often provided that the House (or Senate) may on motion vary their composition.! Both Houses sit with open doors, but in most States the Constitution empowers them to exclude strangers when the business requires secrecy.
The State governor has of course no right to dissolve the legislature, nor even to adjourn it unless the Houses, while agreeing to adjourn, disagree as to the date. Such control as the legislature can exercise over the State officers by way of inquiry into their conduct is generally exercised by committees, and it is in committees that the form of bills is usually settled and their fate decided, just as in the Federal Congress. The proceedings are rarely reported. Sometimes when a committee takes evidence on an important question reporters are present, and the proceed- ings more resemble a public meeting than a legislative session. It need scarcely be added that neither House separately, nor both Houses acting together, can control an executive officer otherwise than either by passing a statute prescribing a certain course of action for him, which if it be in excess of their powers will be held unconstitutional and void, or by withholding the appropria- tions necessary to enable him to carry out the course of action he proposes to adopt. The latter method, where applicable, is the more effective, because it can be used by a bare majority of either House, whereas a bill passed by both Houses may be vetoed by the governor, a point so important as to need a few words.
Four States, three of them original States, vest legislative authority in the legislature alone. These are Rhode Island, Delaware, North Carolina, and Ohio. All the rest require a bill to be submitted to the governor, and permit him to return it to the legislature with his objections. If he so returns it, it can only be again passed “over the veto” by something more than a bare majority. To so pass a bill over the veto there is required—
In two States a majority of three-fifths in each House.
provide that no bill shall pass unless it has been previously referred to and con- sidered by a committee.
1 In Massachusetts there were in 1881 six standing committees of the Senate, ten of the House, twenty-five joint standing committees, and six joint special committees of both Houses. In Pennsylvania there were in 1887 twenty- nine standing committees of the Senate, thirty-four of the House. In Indiana there were in 1887 thirty-seven standing committees of the House, and four joint standing committees of House and Senate. In Minnesota in 1886 there were thirty-two standing committees of the Senate, thirty-four of the House, and two joint standing committees,
470 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS = PART II
In twenty-three States a majority of two-thirds in each House.
In nine States a majority in each House of all the members elected to that. House.
Here, therefore, as in the Federal Constitution, we find a use- ful safeguard against the unwisdom or misconduct of a legislature, and a method provided for escaping, in extreme cases, from those deadlocks which the system of checks and balances tends to occasion.
I have adverted in a preceding chapter to the restrictions im- posed on the legislatures of the States by their respective Con- stitutions. These restrictions, which are numerous, elaborate, and instructive, take two forms—
I. Exclusions of a subject from legislative competence, 2.2. prohibitions to the legislature to pass any law on certain enumerated subjects. The most important classes of prohibited statutes are—
Statutes inconsistent with democratic principles, as, for example, granting titles of nobility, favouring one religious denomination, creating a property qualification for suffrage or office.
Statutes against public policy, e.g. tolerating lotteries, impair- ing the obligation of contracts, incorporating or permitting the incorporation of banks, or the holding by a State of bank stock.}
Statutes special or local in their application, a very large and increasing category, the fulness and minuteness of which in many Constitutions show that the mischiefs arising from improvident or corrupt special legislation must have become alarming. The list of prohibited subjects in the Constitu- tion of Missouri of 1875 is the most complete I have found.?
Statutes increasing the State debt beyond a certain limited amount, or permitting a local authority to increase its debt beyond a prescribed amount, the amount being usually fixed in proportion to the valuation of taxable property within the area administered by the local authority.?
1 See, for instance, Constitution of Texas of 1876. ? Similar lists occur in the constitutions of all the Western and Southern States as well as of some Eastern States (¢.g. Constitution of Pennsylvania of
1878, Art: iii. § 7; Constitution of New York, amendments of 1874 to Constitu- tion of 1846).
* Further information on this head will be found in Chapter XLIII, on State
ala ie a i
CHAP, XL . STATE LEGISLATURES 471
II. Restrictions on the procedure of the legislature, i.c. direc- tions as to the particular forms to be observed and times to be allowed in passing bills, sometimes all bills, sometimes bills of a certain specified nature. Among these restrictions will be found provisions—
As to the majorities necessary to pass certain bills. Sometimes
a majority of the whole number of members elected to each House is required, or a majority exceeding a bare majority.
As to the method of taking the votes, e.g. by calling over the roll and recording the vote of each member.
As to allowing certain intervals to elapse between each reading of a measure, and for preventing the hurried passage of bills at the end of the session.
As to including in a bill only one subject, and expressing that subject in the title of the bill.
Against re-enacting, or amending, or incorporating, any former Act by reference to its title merely, without setting out its contents.1
The two latter classes of provisions might be found wholesome in England, where much of the difficulty complained of by the judges in construing the law arises from the modern habit of incorporating parts of former statutes, and dealing with them by reference.
Where statutes have been passed by a legislature upon a pro- hibited subject, or where the prescribed forms have been trans- egressed or omitted, the statute will be held void so far as inconsistent with the Constitution.
Even these multiform restrictions on the State legislatures have not been found sufficient. Bitted and bridled as they are by the Constitutions, they contrive, as will appear in a later chapter, to do plenty of mischief in the direction of private or special legislation.
Although State legislatures have of course no concern what- ever with foreign affairs, this is not deemed a reason for abstain- Finance. The local authorities had been usually forbidden by statute to borrow or tax beyond a certain amount, but as they had formed the habit of obtaining
dispensations from the State legislatures, the check mentioned in the text has been imposed on the latter.
1 Indiana and Oregon direct every Act to be plainly worded, avoiding as far as possible technical terms, and Louisiana (Constitution of 1879, § 31) says: “The General Assembly shall never adopt any system or code of laws by general refer- ence to such system or code of laws, but in all cases shall recite at length the several provisions of the laws it may enact,”
472 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS ° PART II
ing from passing resolutions on that subject. The passion for resolutions is strong everywhere in America, and an expression of sympathy with an oppressed foreign nationality, or of displeasure at any unfriendly behaviour of a foreign power, is not only an obvious way of relieving the feelings of the legislators, but often an electioneering device, which appeals to some section of the State voters. Accordingly such resolutions are common, and, though of course quite irregular, quite innocuous.
Debates in these bodies are seldom well reported, and some- times not reported at all. One result is that the conduct of members escapes the scrutiny of their constituents ; a better one that speeches are generally short and practical, the motive for rhetorical displays being absent. If a man does not make a reputation for oratory, he may for quick good sense and business habits. However, so much of the real work is done in committees that talent for intrigue or “management” usually counts for more than debating power.
CHAPTER XLI THE STATE EXECUTIVE
THE executive department in a State consists of a governor (in all the States), a lieutenant-governor (in twenty-seven), and of various minor officials. The governor, who, under the earlier Constitutions of most of the original thirteen States, was chosen by the legislature, is now always elected by the people, and by the same suffrage, practically universal, as the legislature. He is elected directly, not, as under the Federal Constitution, by a college of electors. His term of office is, in sixteen States, four years ; in two States, three years; in eighteen States, two years ; and in two States (Massachusetts and Rhode Island), one year. His salary varies from $10,000 (£2000) in New York and Pennsylvania to $1000 (£200) in Michigan. Some States limit his re-eligibility ; but in those which do not there seems to exist no tradition forbidding a third term of office similar to that which has prevailed in the Federal Government since the days of Washington.
The earlier Constitutions of the original States oe South Carolina) associated with the governor an executive council! (called in Delaware the Privy Council), but these councils have long since disappeared, except in Massachusetts, Maine, and North Carolina, and the governor remains in solitary glory the
1 This is another interesting illustration of the disposition to reproduce Eng- land. Vermont was still under the influence of English precedents when it framed its Constitutions of 1786 and 1793. Maine was influenced by Massachu- setts. None of the newer Western States has ever tried the experiment of such a council.
New York had originally two Councils, a “ Council of Appointment,” consist- ing of the Governor and a Senator from each of the (originally four) districts, and
“te Council of Revision,” consisting of the Governor, the Chancellor and the ees of the Supreme court, and possessing a veto on statutes. The Governor has now, since the extinction of these two councils, obtained some of the patronage which belonged to the former as well as the veto which belonged to the latter.
474 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I
official head and representative of the majesty of the State. His powers are, however, in ordinary times more specious than solid, and only one of them is of great practical value. He is charged with the duty of seeing that the laws of the State are faithfully administered by all officials and the judgments of the courts carried out. He has, in nearly all States, the power of repriev- ing and pardoning offenders, but in some this does not extend to treason or to conviction on impeachment (in Vermont he cannot pardon for murder), and in some, other authorities are associated with him in the exercise of this prerogative. He is commander-in-chief of the armed forces of the State, can embody the militia, repel invasion, suppress insurrection.
He appoints some few officials, but seldom to high posts, and in many States his nominations require the approval of the State Senate. Patronage, in which the President of the United States finds one of his most desired and most disagreeable functions, is in the case of a State governor of slight value, because the State offices are not numerous, and the more important and lucrative ones are filled by the direct election of the people. However, in a few States the governor still retains the nomination of the judges. He has in many the power of suspending or removing certain officials, usually local officials, from office, upon proof of their misconduct (see Constitution of New York of 1846, Arts. vy. and x.) He has the right of requiring information from the executive officials, and is usually bound to communicate to the legislature his views regarding the condition of the common- wealth. He may also recommend measures to them, but does not frame and present bills. In a few States he is directed to present estimates. He has in all the States but four a veto upon bills passed by the legislature! This veto may be overriden by the legislatures in manner already indicated (see pp. 469-470), but generally kills the measure, because if the bill is a bad one, it calls the attention of the people to the fact and frightens the legislature, whereas if the bill be an unobjectionable one, the governor’s motive for vetoing it is probably a party motive, and the requisite overriding majority can seldom be secured in favour
1 Tt deserves to be remarked that neither the Constitution of the Swiss Con- federation nor any cantonal constitution vests a veto in any officer. Switzerland seems in this respect more democratic than the American States, while in the amount of authority which the Swiss allow to the executive government over the
citizen (as witness the case of the Salvation Army troubles in Canton Bern) they are less democratic.
CHAP, XLI THE STATE EXECUTIVE 475
of a bill which either party dislikes. The use of his veto is, in ordinary times, a governor’s most serious duty, and chiefly by his discharge of it is he judged.
Although much less sought after and prized than in “ the days of the Fathers,” when a State governor sometimes refused to yield precedence to the President of the United States, the governorship is still, particularly in New England, and such great States as New York or Ohio, a post of some dignity, and affords an opportunity for the display of character and talents. It was in his governorship of New York that Mr. Cleveland, for instance, commended himself to his party, and rose to be Presi- dent of the United States. Similarly Mr. Hayes was put forward for the Presidency in 1876 because he had been a good governor of Ohio. During the Civil War, when each governor was respon- sible for enrolling, equipping, officering, and sending forward troops from his State, and when it rested with him to repress any attempts at disorder, much depended on his energy, popu- larity, and loyalty. In some States men still talk of the “war governors” of those days as heroes to whom the North owed deep gratitude. And since the Pennsylvanian riots of 1877 and those which have subsequently occurred in Cincinnati and Chicago have shown that tumults may suddenly grow to serious propor- tions, it has in many States become important to have a man of prompt decision and fearlessness in the office which issues orders to the State militia. In most States there is an elective lieu- tenant-governor who steps into the governor’s place if it becomes vacant, and who is usually also ex officio President of the Senate, as the Vice-President of the United States is of the Federal Senate. Otherwise he is an insignificant personage, though some- times a member of some of the executive boards.”
The names and duties of the other officers vary from State to State. The most frequent are a secretary of state (in all States), a treasurer (in all), an attorney-general, a comptroller, an auditor, a superintendent of public instruction. Now and then we find a State engineer, a surveyor, a superintendent of prisons. Some States have also various boards of commissioners, e.g. for rail-
1 Commissions to officers up to the rank of colonel inclusive were usually
issued by the governor of the State: the regiment, in fact, was a State product, though the regular Federal BoE is of course raised and managed by the Federal
Government directly. 2 In States which have no lieutenant-governor, the President of the State
Senate usually succeeds if the governor dies or becomes incapable,
476 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
roads, for canals, for prisons, for the land office, for agriculture, for immigration. Most of these officials are in nearly all States elected by the people at the general State election. Sometimes, however, they, or some of them, are either chosen by the legis- lature, or, more rarely, appointed by the governor, whose nomi- nation usually requires the confirmation of the Senate. Their salaries, which of course vary with the importance of the office and the parsimony of the State, seldom exceed $5000 (£1000) per annum and are usually smaller. So, too, the length of the term of office varies. It is often the same as that of the governor, and never exceeds four years, except that in New Jersey, a con- servative State, the secretary and attorney-general hold for five years ; and in Tennessee the attorney-general who, oddly enough, is appointed by the supreme court of the State, holds for eight. It has already been observed that the State officials are in no sense a ministry or cabinet to the governor. Holding independ- ently of him, and responsible neither to him nor to the legislature, but to the people, they do not take generally his orders, and need not regard his advice! Each has his own department to administer, and as there is little or nothing political in the work, a general agreement in policy, such as must exist between the Federal President and his ministers, is not required. Policy rests with the legislature, whose statutes, prescribing minutely the action to be taken by the officials, leave little room for execu- tive discretion. Europeans may best realize the nature of the system by imagining a municipal government in which the mayor, town clerk, health officer, and city architect are all chosen directly by the people, instead of by the common council, and in which every one of these latter officials is for most purposes, and except so far as he needs appropriations of money, independent not only of the mayor, but also of the common council, except in so 1 Florida, by her Constitution of 1868, Art. vi. 17, and Art. viii., created a “cabinet of administrative officers,” consisting of eight officials, appointed by the governor, with the consent of the Senate, who are to hold office for the same time as the governor, and “assist the governor in the performance of his duties.” However, in her Constitution of 1886 she simply provides that “the governor shall be assisted by administrative officers,” viz. secretary of state, attorney- general, comptroller, treasurer, superintendent of public instruction, and com- missioner of agriculture, all elected by the people at the same time with the governor and for the same term. The council of North Carolina (Constitution of 1868) consists of five officials, who are to “advise the governor in the execution of his duty,” but they are elected directly by the people. Their position may be
compared with that of the Council of India under recent English statutes towards the English Secretary of State for India.
I OHAP. XLI THE STATE EXECUTIVE 477
4 far as the latter acts by general ordinances—that is to say, acts as a purely legislative and not as an administrative body.
To give a clearer idea of the staff of a State government I will take the great State of Ohio, and give the functions of the officials by whom it is administered.”
The executive officials of Ohio are :—
A Governor, elected by the people for two years. His chief duties are to execute the laws, convene the legislature on extraordinary occasions, command the State forces, ap- point staff officers and aides-de-camp, grant pardons and reprieves, issue commissions to State and county officers, make a variety of appointments, serve on certain boards, and remove, with the assent of the Senate, any official appointed by him and it. He is paid $4000 (£800) a year.
A Tneutenant-Governor, elected by the people for two years, salary $800 (£160) a year, with the duty of succeeding to the governor (in case of death or disability), and of presiding in the Senate.
A Secretary of State, elected by the people for two years (along with the governor), salary $2000 (£400) a year, besides
! sundry fees for copies of documents. His duties are to take charge of laws and documents of the State, gather and report statistics, distribute instructions to certain officers, and act as secretary to certain boards, to serve on the State printing and State library boards, to make an abstract of the votes for candidates at presidential and State elections.
A State Auditor, elected by the people for four years, salary $3000 (£600). Duties—to keep accounts of all moneys in the State treasury, and of all appropriations and war- rants, to give warrants for all payments from or into the treasury, to conduct financial communications with county authorities, and direct the attorney-general to prosecute revenue claims, to serve on various financial boards, and manage various kinds of financial business.
1 In the Swiss Confederation the Federal Council of Seven consists of persons belonging to different parties, who sometimes speak against one another in the chambers (where they have the right of speech), but this is not found to interfere with their harmonious working as an administrative body.
2 T abridge this from a useful little book, called the Ohio Voters’ Manual, by Mr. W. 8. Collins, stating the mode of election, duties, and powers of every ofticer elected at the polls in the State of Ohio.
478 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It
A State Treasurer, elected by the people for two years, salary $3000 (£600). Duties—to keep account of all drafts, paying the money into the treasury, and of auditor’s war- rants for drafts from it, and generally to assist and check the auditor in the supervision and disbursement of State revenues, publishing monthly statements of balances.
A State Attorney-General, elected by the people for two years, salary $1500 dollars (£300) a year, and 3 per cent on all collections made for the State, but total not to exceed $2000 a year in all. Duties—to appear for the State in civil and criminal cases, advise legally the governor and other State officers, and the Assembly, proceed against offenders, enforce performance of charitable trusts, submit statistics of crime, sit upon various boards.
A State Commissioner of Common Schools, elected by the people for three years, salary $2000 (£400) a year. Duties— to visit and advise teachers’ institutes, boards of educa- tion, and teachers, deliver lectures on educational topics, see that educational funds are legally distributed, prepare and submit annual reports on condition of schools, appoint State board of examiners of teachers.
Three Members of Board of Public Works, elected by the people for three years, one in each year, salary $800 (£160) a year, and travelling expenses, not exceeding $50 a month. Duties—to manage and repair the public works (includ- ing canals) of the State, appoint and supervise minor officials, let contracts, present annual detailed report to the governor.
Besides these, the people of the State elect the judges and the clerk of the supreme court. Other officials are either elected by the people .in districts, counties, or cities, or appointed by the governor or legislature.
Of the subordinate civil service of a State there is little to be said. It is not large, for the sphere of administrative action which remains to the State between the Federal government on the one side, and the county, city, and township governments on the other, is not wide. It is ill-paid, for the State legislatures, especially in the West, are parsimonious. It is seldom well- manned, for able men have no inducement to enter it; and the so-called “Spoils System,” which has been hitherto applied to State no less than to Federal offices, makes places the reward for
CHAP, XLI THE STATE EXECUTIVE 479
¢
political work, 2.¢. electioneering and wirepulling. Efforts are now being made in some States to introduce reforms similar to those begun in the Federal administration, whereby certain walks of the civil service shall be kept out of politics, at least so far as to secure competent men against dismissal on party grounds. Such reforms would in no case apply to the higher officials chosen by the people, for they are always elected for short terms and on party lines.
Every State, except Oregon, which is content to rely on the ordinary law, provides for the impeachment of executive officers, and usually of all such officers, for grave offences. In all, save two, the State House of Representatives is the impeaching body ; and in all but New York the State Senate sits as the tribunal, a two-thirds majority being generally required for a conviction. Impeachments are rare in practice.
There is also in many States a power of removing officials, sometimes by the vote of the legislature, sometimes by the governor on the address of both houses, or by the governor alone, or with the concurrence of the Senate. Such removals must of course be made in respect of some offence, or for some other sufficient cause, not from caprice or party motives; and when the case does not seem to justify immediate removal, the governor is sometimes empowered to suspend the officer, pending an investigation of his conduct.
CHAPTER XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY
Tue Judiciary in every State includes three sets of courts :—A supreme court or court of appeal; superior courts of record ; local courts; but the particular names and relations of these several tribunals and the arrangements for criminal business vary ereatly from State to State. We hear of courts of common pleas, probate courts,’ surrogate courts, prerogative courts, courts of oyer and terminer, orphans’ courts, court of general sessions of the peace and gaol delivery, quarter sessions, hustings’ courts, county courts, ete. etc. All sorts of old English institutions have been transferred bodily, and sometimes look as odd in the midst of their new surroundings as the quaint gables of a seventeenth- century house among the terraces of a growing London suburb. As respects the distinction which Englishmen used to deem fun- damental, that of courts of common law and courts of equity, there has been great diversity of practice. Most of the original thirteen colonies once possessed separate courts of chancery, and these were maintained for many years after the separation from England, and were imitated in a few of the earlier among the . new States, such as Michigan, Arkansas, Missouri. In some of the old States, however, the hostility to equity jurisdiction, which marked the popular party in England in the seventeenth cen- tury, had transmitted itself to America. Chancery courts were regarded with suspicion, because thought to be less bound by fixed rules, and therefore more liable to be abused by an am- bitious or capricious judiciary. Massachusetts, for instance, would permit no such court, though she was eventually obliged
1 Admiralty business is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal courts.
* Note that the grossest abuses of judicial power by American judges, such as the Erie Railroad injunctions of Judge Barnard of New York in 1869, were per-
petrated in the exercise of equitable jurisdiction. Equity in granting discretion opens a door to indiscretion, or to something worse.
OHAY, xxII THE STATE JUDICIARY 48st
to invest her ordinary judges with equitable powers, and to engraft a system of equity on her commen law, while still keep- ing the two systems: distinct. Pennsylvania held out still longer, but she also now administers equity, as indeed every civilized State must do in substance, dispensing it, however, through the same judges as those who apply the common law, and having more or less worked it into the texture of the older system. Special chancery courts were abolished in New York, where they had flourished and enriched American jurisprudence by many admirable judgments, by the democratizing constitution of 1846 ; and they now exist only in a few of the States, chiefly older Eastern or Southern States, which, in judicial matters, have shown themselves more conservative than their sisters in the West. In three States only (New York, North Carolina, and California) has there been a complete fusion of law and equity, although there are several others which have provided that the - legislature shall abolish the distinction between the two kinds of procedure. Five States provide for the establishment of tribunals of arbitration and conciliation.
The jurisdiction of the State courts, both civil and criminal, is absolutely unlimited, i.e. there is no appeal from them to the Federal courts, except in certain cases specified by the Federal Constitution (see above, Chapter XXII.), being cases in which some point of Federal law arises. Certain classes of cases are, of course, reserved for the Federal courts and in some the State courts enjoy a concurrent jurisdiction.” All crimes, except such as are punishable under some Federal statute, are justiciable by a State court; and it is worth remembering that in most States there exist much wider facilities for setting aside the ver- dict of a jury finding a prisoner guilty, by raising all sorts of points of law, than are permitted by the law and practice of England. Such facilities have been and are abused, to the great detriment of the community.
One or two other points relating to law and justice in the States require notice. Each State recognizes the judgments of the courts of a sister State, gives credit to its public acts and records, and delivers up to its justice any fugitive from its juris- diction charged with a crime. Of course the courts of one State are not bound either by law or usage to follow the reported
1 Distinct chancery courts remain in Delaware, New Jersey, Vermont, Ten- nessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Michigan. 2 See Chapter XXII. ante.
VOL. I 21
482 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It
decisions of those of another State. They use such decisions merely for their own enlightenment, and as some evidence of the common law, just as they use the English law reports. Most of the States have within the last half century made sweeping changes, not only in their judicial system, but in the form of their law. They have revised and codified their statutes, a care- fully corrected edition whereof is issued every few years. They have in many instances adopted codes of procedure, and in some cases have even enacted codes embodying the substance of the common law, and fusing it with the statutes. Such codes, how- ever, have been condemned by the judgment of the abler and more learned part of the profession, as tending to confuse the law and make it more uncertain and less scientific! A warm controversy has lately been raging in New York on the subject. But with the masses of the people'the proposal is popular, for it holds out a prospect, unfortunately belied by thé result in States which, like California, have tried the experiment, of a system whose simplicity will enable the layman to understand the law, and render justice cheaper and more speedy. A really good code might have these happy effects. But it may be doubted whether the codifying States have taken the steps requisite to secure the goodness of the codes they enact. And there is a grave objec- tion to the codification of State law which does not exist in a country like England or France. So long as the law of a State remains common law, i.e. rests upon custom and decisions given by the judges, the law of each State tends to keep in tolerable harmony with that of other States, because each set of judges is enlightened by and disposed to be influenced by the decisions of the Federal courts and of judges in other States. But when the whole law of a State has been enacted in the form of a code all existing divergences between one State and another are sharpened and perpetuated, and new divergences probably created. Hence codification increases the variations of the law between different States, and these variations may impede business and disturb the ordinary relations of life.
Important as are the functions of the American judiciary, the powers of a judge are limited by the State Constitutions in a
1 This is perhaps less true of Louisiana, where the civil law of Rome, which may be said to have been the common law of the State, offered a better basis for a code than the English common law does. The Louisiana code is based on the Code Napoleon,
Eh |
CHAP, XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY 483
manner surprising to Europeans. He is not allowed to charge the jury on questions of fact,! but only to state the law. He is sometimes required to put his charge in writing. His power of committing for contempt of court is often restricted. Express rules forbid him to sit in causes wherein he can have any family or pecuniary interest. In one Constitution his punctual attend- ance is enforced by the provision that if he does not arrive in court within half an hour of the time fixed for the sitting, the attorneys of the parties may agree on some person to act as judge, and proceed forthwith to the trial of the cause. And in
California he is not allowed to draw his salary till he has made
an affidavit that no cause that has been submitted for decision for ninety days remains undecided in his court.?
I come now to three points, which are not only important in themselves, but instructive as illustrating the currents of opinion which have influenced the peoples of the States. These are—
The method of appointing the judges.
Their tenure of office.
Their salaries.
The remarkable changes that have been made in the two former matters, and the strange practice which now prevails in the latter, are full of significance for the student of modern democracy, full of warning for Europe and the British colonies.
In colonial days the superior judges were appointed by the Governors, except in Rhode Island and Connecticut, where the legislature elected them. When, in and after 1776, the States formed their first Constitutions, four States,? besides the two just named, vested the appointment in the legislature, five* gave it to the Governor with the consent of the council; Delaware gave it to the legislature and President (=Governor) in joint ballot, while Georgia alone entrusted the election to the people.
In the period between 1812 and 1860, when the tide of democracy was running strong, the function was in several of the older States taken from the Governor or the legislature to be given to the people voting at the polls; and the same became
1 A frequent form is that in the Constitution of Tennessee of 1870 (Art. vi. § 9) —“ Judges shall not charge juries with respect to matters of fact, but may state the testimony and declare the law.”
2 The Californian judges are said to have contrived to evade this.
3 Virginia, New Jersey, North Carolina, and South Carolina.
4 Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, Maryland, New York.
484 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
the practice among the new States as they were successively admitted to the Union. Mississippi, in 1832, made all her judges elected by the people. The decisive nature of the change was marked by the great State of New York, which, in her highly democratic Constitution of 1846, transferred all judicial appointments to the citizens at the polls.
At present we find that in twenty-five States, the judges are elected by the people. These include nearly all the Western and Southern States, besides New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio.
In five States! they are elected by the legislature.
In eight States? they are appointed by the Governor, subject however to confirmation either by the council, or by the legisla- ture, or by one House thereof.
I may observe that all the thirteen States which do not appoint the judge by popular election either belong to the original thirteen colonies or are States which have been specially influenced by one of those thirteen (as, for instance, Maine was influenced by Massachusetts). It is these older commonwealths that have clung to the less democratic methods of choosing judicial officers; while the new democracies of the West, together with the most populous States of the East, New York and Pennsylvania, States thoroughly democratized by their great cities, have thrown this grave and delicate function into the rude hands of the masses, that is to say, of the wire- pullers.
Originally, the superior judges were, in most States, like those of England since the Revolution of 1688, appointed for life, and held office during good behaviour, 7.¢. were removable only when condemned on an impeachment, or when an address requesting their removal had been presented by both houses of the legislature. A judge may now be removed upon such an address in thirty States, a majority of two-thirds in each house being usually required. The salutary provision of the British Constitution against capricious removals has been faithfully adhered to. But the wave of democracy has in nearly all States swept away the old system of life-tenure. Only four now retain
1 Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia, South Carolina, Georgia.
2 Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Hampshire, Delaware, Maine, Mississippi, New Jersey, Louisiana ; in the last of which, however, district judges, and in
Maine and Connecticut probate judges, are popularly elected. 3 The power of impeachment remains but is not often used.
4 3
CHAP, XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY 485
it.1 In the rest a judge is elected or appointed for a term, varying from two years in Vermont to twenty-one years in Pennsylvania. Eight to ten years is the average term pre- scribed ; but a judge is always re-eligible, and likely to be re-elected if he be not too old, if he has given satisfaction to the bar, and if he has not offended the party which placed him on the bench.
The salaries paid to State judges of the higher courts range from $8500 (£1700), (chief-justice), in Pennsylvania, and $7 000 (£1400) + $2000 (£400) for expenses in New York, to $2000 in Oregon. $4000 to $5000 (£800 to £1000) is the average, a sum which, especially in the greater States, fails to attract the best legal talent. Judges of the inferior courts of course receive salaries proportionately lower. In general the new Western States are the worst paymasters,” their population of farmers not perceiving the importance of securing high ability on the bench, and deeming $4000 a larger sum than a quiet-living man can need. The lowness of the scale on which the salaries of Federal judges are fixed confirms this tendency.
Any one of the three phenomena I have described—popular elections, short terms, and small salaries—would be sufficient to lower the character of the judiciary. Popular elections throw the choice into the hands of political parties, that is to say, of knots of wirepullers inclined to use every office as a means of rewarding political services, and garrisoning with grateful parti- sans posts which may conceivably become of political importance. Short terms oblige the judge to remember and keep on good terms with those who have made him what he is, and in whose hands his fortunes lie. They induce timidity, they discourage independence. ‘And small salaries prevent able men from offer- ing themselves for places whose income is perhaps only one-tenth of what a leading barrister can make by private practice. Putting the three sources of mischief together, no one will be surprised to hear that in many of the American States the State judges are men of moderate abilities and scanty learning, inferior,
1 Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, Delaware, all of them among the original thirteen. In New Hampshire and Delaware the judge must retire at seventy years of age. In Florida, though the three justicesjof the supreme court are now (Constitution of 1886) elected py the people, the seven circuit Judges are appointed by the governor.
2 Vermont and New Hampshire also pay their supreme court judges only $2500 (£500) and $2700 respectively.
486 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I]
and sometimes vastly inferior, to the best of the advocates who — practise before them. It is more hard to express a general opinion as to their character, and particularly as to what is called, even in America where robes are not worn, the “ purity of the judicial ermine.” Pecuniary corruption seems, so far as a stranger can ascertain, to be rare, perhaps very rare, but there are other ways in which sinister influences can play on a judge’s mind, and impair that confidence in his impartiality which is almost as necessary as impartiality itself. And apart from all questions of dishonesty or unfairness, it is an evil that the bench should not be intellectually and socially at least on a level with the bar.
The mischief is serious. But I must own that it is smaller than a European observer is prepared to expect. In most of the twenty-four States where this system prevails the bench is respectable ; and in some it is occasionally adorned by men of the highest eminence. Not even in California or Arkansas are the results so lamentable as might have been predicted. New York City, under the dominion of the Tweed Ring, has afforded the only instance of flagrant judicial scandals ; and even in those loathsome days, the Court of Appeals at Albany, the highest tribunal of the State, retained the respect of good citizens. Justice in civil causes between man and man is fairly admin- istered over the whole Union, and the frequent failures to con- vict criminals, or punish them when convicted, are attributable not so much either to weakness or to partiality on a judge’s part as to the tenderness of juries and the inordinate delays and complexity of criminal procedure.
Why then have sources of evil so grave failed to produce correspondingly grave results? Three reasons may be sug- gested :—
One is the co-existence in every State of the Federal tribunals, presided over by judges who are usually capable and always upright. Their presence helps to keep the State judges, how- ever personally inferior, from losing the sense of responsibility and dignity which befits the judicial office, and makes even party wirepullers ashamed of nominating as candidates notoriously incapable or tainted men.
Another is the influence of a public opinion which not only recognizes the interest the community has in an honest admin- istration of the law, but recoils from turpitude in a highly placed
a i bi aN i
LEE
‘CHAP. XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY | 487
official. The people act as a check upon the party conventions that choose candidates, by making them feel that they damage themselves and their cause if they run a man of doubtful character, and the judge himself is made to dread public opinion in the criticisms of a very unreticent press. Democratic theory, which has done a mischief in introducing the elective system, partly cures it by subjecting the bench to a light of publicity which makes honesty the safest policy. Whatever passes in court is, or may be, reported. The judge must give his reasons for every judgment he delivers.
Lastly, there is the influence of the bar, a potent influence even in the present day, when its réle is less brilliant than in former generations. The local party leaders who select the candidates and “run” the conventions are in some States mostly lawyers themselves, or at least in close relations with some lead- ing lawyers of the State or district. Now lawyers have not only a professional dislike to the entrusting of law to incapable hands, the kind of dislike which a skilled bricklayer has to seeing walls badly laid, but they have a personal interest in getting fairly competent men before whom to plead. It is no pleasure to them to have a judge so ignorant or so weak that a good argument is thrown away upon him, or that you can feel no confidence that the opinion given to a client, or a point of law which you think clear, will be verified by the decision of the court. Hence the bar often contrives to make a party nomination for judicial office fall, not indeed on a leading barrister, because a leading barrister will not accept a place with $4000 a year, when he can make $14,000 by private practice, but on as competent a member of the
‘ party as can be got to take the post. Having constantly inquired,
in every State I visited wherein the system of popular elections to judgeships prevails, how it happened that the judges were not worse, I was usually told that the bar had interposed to prevent such and such a bad nomination, or had agreed to recommend such and such a person as a candidate, and that the party had yielded to the wishes of the bar. Occasionally, when the wire- pullers are on their good behaviour, or the bar is exceptionally public-spirited, a person will be brought forward who has no claims except those of character and learning. But it is perhaps more common for the lawyers to put pressure on one. or other party in nominating its party candidates to select capable ones. Thus when a few years ago the Republicans of New York State
\ 488 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
were running bad candidates, some leading Republican lawyers persuaded the Democrats to nominate better men, and thereupon issued an appeal in favour of these latter, who were accordingly carried at the ensuing election.
These causes, and especially the last, go far to nullify the malign effects of popular election and short terms. But they cannot equally nullify the effect of small salaries. | Accordingly, while corruption and partiality are uncommon among State judges, inferiority to the practising counsel is a conspicuous and frequent fault.
One is obliged to speak generally, because there are differences between the various States too numerous to be particularized. In some, especially in the North-West, the tone of the party managers and of the bar is respectable, and the sense of common interest makes everybody wish to have as good men as the salaries will secure. In others there are traditions which even unscrupulous wirepullers fear to violate. Pennsylvania, for instance, though her legislature and her city governments have been impure, and little under the influence of the bar, still generally elects capable judges.1 The scandals of Barnard and Cardozo? were due to the fact that the vast and ignorant popu- lation of New York was dominated by a gang of professional politicians who neither fear the good citizens nor regarded the bar.
As there are institutions which do not work as well as they theoretically ought, so there are happily others which work better. The sale of offices under the old monarchy of France, the sale of commissions in the English army till 1871, the sale of advowsons and next presentations to livings which still exists ° in the Anglican Church Establishment, the bribery of electors which has only the other day been extinguished in England, were or are all of them indefensible in theory, all mischievous in practice. But none of them did so much harm as a philosophical observer would have predicted, because other causes were at work to mitigate and minimize their evils.
During the last few years there has been a distinct change for the better. Some States which had vested the appointment of judges in the legislature, like Connecticut, or in the people, like
a Pennsylvania, it is fair to say, pays better than most States, and gives long terms, so she can obtain better men than most.
2 The notorious Tweed Ring judges of twenty years ago.
THE STATE JUDICIARY
- Mississippi, have by recent constitutional amendments or new Constitutions, given it to the governor with the consent of the
legislature or of one house thereof! Others have raised the salaries, or lengthened the terms of the judges, or, like New York, have introduced both these reforms. Within the decade ending December 1886, though twenty-eight States altered their Constitutions, no one, except Florida, took appointments from legislature or governor to entrust them to popular vote. In this point at least, the tide of democracy which went on rising for so many years, seems to have begun to recede from the high-water
a? mark of 1840-1860. The American people, if sometimes bold in
their experiments, have a fund of good sense which makes them watchful of results, and not unwilling to reconsider their former
_ decisions.
‘1 Tn Connecticut the change was made at the instance of the Bar Association of the State, which had seen with regret that the dominant party in the State legislature was placing inferior men on the bench.
1G eae 7 MA
i" +r
CHAPTER XLIII STATE FINANCE
THE financial systems in force in the several States furnish one of the widest and most instructive fields of study that the whole range of American institutions presents to a practical statesman, as well as to a student of comparative politics. It is much to be wished that some person equipped with the necessary special knowledge could survey them with a philosophic eye, and present the results of his survey in a concise form. From such an attempt I am interdicted not only by the want of that special knowledge, but by the compass of the subject, and the difficulty of obtaining in Europe adequate materials. These materials must
be sought not only in the Constitutions of the States, but even ,
more in their statutes, and in the reports presented by the various financial officials, and by the special commissions occasionally appointed to investigate the subject or some branch of it. All I can here attempt is to touch on a few of the more salient features of the topic, and to cull from the Constitutions some illustrations of the dangers feared and the remedies desired by the people of the States. What I have to say falls under the heads of —
Purposes for which State revenue is required.
Forms of taxation.
Exemptions from taxation.
Methods of collecting taxes.
Limitations imposed on the power of taxing.
State indebtedness.
Restrictions imposed on the borrowing power.
I. The budget of a State is seldom large, in proportion to the wealth of its inhabitants, because the chief burden of adminis- tration is borne not by the State, but by its subdivisions, the counties, and still more the cities and townships. The chief
a
CHAP. XLIII STATE FINANCE 491
expenses which a State undertakes in its corporate capacity are— (1) The salaries of its officials, executive and judicial, and the incidental expenses of judicial proceedings, such as payments to jurors and witnesses; (2) the State volunteer militia; (3) charitable and other public institutions, such as State lunatic asylums, State universities, agricultural colleges, etc. ;1 (4) grants to schools ;? (5) State prisons, comparatively few, since the prison is usually supported by the county; (6) State buildings _ and public works, including, in a few cases, canals ; (7) payment of interest on State debts. Of the whole revenue collected in each State under State taxing laws, a comparatively small part is taken by the State itself and applied to State purposes.’ In 1882 only seven States raised for State purposes a revenue exceeding $2,000,000. In that year the revenue of New York was $7,690,416 (pop. in 1882 about 5,200,000). In 1886-87 the revenue of Pennsylvania was $7,646,147 (pop. about 4,700,000). These are small sums when compared either with the population and wealth of these States, or with the revenue raised in them by local authorities for local purposes. They are also small in comparison with what is raised by indirect taxation for Federal purposes.
Il. The Federal government raises its revenue by indirect taxation, and by duties of customs and excise,* though it has the power of imposing direct taxes, and used that power freely during the War of Secession. State revenue, on the other hand, arises almost wholly from direct taxation, since the Federal Constitution forbids the levying of import or export duties by a
1 The Constitutions of Louisiana and Georgia allow State revenue to be applied to the supplying of wooden legs and arms to ex-Confederate soldiers.
2 All or nearly all States have set apart for the support of schools and of other educational or benevolent institutions, sometimes including universities, a con- siderable fund derived from the sale of Western lands granted for the purpose by the Federal government about twenty-five years ago, and derived in some cases also from lands appropriated originally by the State itself to these objects.
3 Tn the State of Connecticut (population in 1883 about 650,000) the total revenue raised by taxation in 1883-84 was $8,524,776 (£1,800,000), which was collected by and for the following authorities and purposes :—
The State : ‘ ; 5 . $1,462,328 Counties . A é ‘ 4 : 1,131,766 Towns . ps ; é ; ; 2,808,682 Cities and boroughs 5 ; : ; 1,636,957 School districts . ‘ ; ; ; 1,485,048
4 Stamp duties were also resorted to during the Civil War, but at present none are levied by the National government.
492 . THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il
State, except with the consent of Congress, and directs the produce of any such duties as Congress may permit to be paid into the Federal treasury. The chief tax is in every State a property tax, based on a valuation of property, and generally of all property, real and personal, within the taxing juris- diction.
The valuation is made by officials called appraisers or assessors, appointed by the local communities, though under general State laws.: It is their duty to put a value on all taxable property ; that is, speaking generally, on all property, real and personal, which they can discover or trace within the area of their authority. As the contribution, to the revenues of the State or county, leviable within that area is proportioned to the amount and value of taxable property situate within it, the local assessors have, equally with the property owners, an obvious motive for valuing on a low scale, for by doing so they relieve their com- munity of part of its burden. The State is accordingly obliged to check and correct them by creating what is called a Board of Equalization, which compares and revises the valuations made by the various local officers, so as to secure that taxable property in each locality is equally and fairly valued, and made thereby to bear its due share of public burdens. Similarly a county has often an equalization board to supervise and adjust the valuations of the towns and cities within its limits.2, However, the existence of such boards by no means overcomes the difficulty of securing a really equal valuation, and the honest town which puts its property at a fair value suffers by paying more than its share. Valuations are generally made at a figure much below the true worth of property. In Connecticut, for instance, the law directs the market price to be the basis, but real estate is valued only at from one-third to two-thirds thereof. Indeed one hears
1 The account in the text does not, of course, claim to be true in all particulars for every State, but only to represent the general usage.
2 See, for a specimen of the provisions for equalization boards, the Constitution of California, Art. xiii. § 9, in the Appendix to this volume.
3 The special commission on taxation in Connecticut in their recent singularly clear and interesting report (1887) observe :—‘‘ One great defect in the practical execution of our tax laws consists in inequalities of assessment and valuation. This shows itself especially as between the different towns. . . . It is notorious that in few, if any, towns do the assessors value real estate at what they think it is fairly worth. On the contrary, they generally first make this appraisal of its actual value, and then put it in the list at a certain proportion of such appraisal, varying from 83§ to 75 per cent. Similar reductions are made in valuing personal property, though with less uniformity, and so perhaps with more injustice”
CHAP, XLIII STATE FINANCE 493
everywhere in America complaints of inequalities arising from the varying scales on which valuers proceed.
A still more serious evil is the fact that so large a part of tax- able property escapes taxation. Lands and houses cannot be concealed ; cattle and furniture can be discovered by a zealous tax officer. But a great part, often far the largest part of a rich man’s wealth, consists in what the Americans call “intangible property,” notes, bonds, book debts, and Western mortgages. At this it is practically impossible to get, except through the declaration of the owner; and though the owner is required to present his declaration of taxable property upon oath, he is apt to omit this kind of property. The Connecticut commissioners report that “the proportion of these intangible securities to other taxable property has steadily declined from year to year. In 1855 it was nearly 10 per cent of the whole, in 1865 about 74 per cent, in 1875 a little over 5 per cent, and in 1885 about 33: per cent. Yet during the generation covered by these statistics the amount of State railroad and municipal bonds, and of Western mortgage loans has very greatly increased, and our citizens have,
_in every town in the State, invested large sums in them. Why
then do so few get into the tax list? The terms of the law are plain, and the penalties for its infringement are probably as stringent as the people will bear. ... The truth is that no system of tax laws can ever reach directly the great mass of intangible property. It is not to be seen, and its possession, if not voluntarily disclosed, can in most cases be only the subject of conjecture. ‘The people also in a free government are accus- tomed to reason for themselves as to the justice and validity of the laws, and too apt to give themselves the benefit of the doubt when they have in any way the power to construe it for them- selves. Such a power is practically given in the form of oath used in connection with our tax lists, since it refers only to such property of the parties giving them in as is taxable ‘according to (p. 8). ‘Household furniture above $500 in value constitutes an item of only
$9500 in one of our cities, while a neighbouring town of not more than half the population returns $12,900” (p. 16).
1 The difficulty does not arise with stock or shares even when held in a com- pany outside a State, because all States now tax corporations or companies within their jurisdiction, and the principle is generally (though not universally) adopted, that where stocks in a corporation outside the State have been so taxed, they shall not be again taxed in the hand of the holder of the stock, who may reside within the State. State laws and tax assessors can in each State succeed in reaching the property of the corporation itself.
rl
494 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
their best knowledge, remembrance, or belief. The man who does not believe that a western farm loan or foreign railroad bond (ie bond of a company outside the State) ought to be taxed, is too often ready to swear that to the best of his’belief it is not liable to taxation. ... As the law stands, it may be a burden on the conscience of many, but it is a burden on the pro- perty of few, not because there are few who ought to pay, but because there are few who can be made to pay. Bonds and notes held by an individual are for the most part concealed from the assessors, nor do they in most towns make much effort to ascertain their existence.! The result is that a few towns, a few estates, and a few persons of a high sense of honesty, bear the entire weight of the tax. Such has been the universal result of similar laws elsewhere.”
A comparison of the tax lists with the probate records con- vinced the commissioners that, whereas in 1884 more than a third of the whole personal property assessed in the State of Connecticut escaped taxes, the proportion not reached by taxa- tion was in 1886 much greater ; and induced them to recommend that “‘all the items of intangible property ought to be struck out of the tax list.” The probate inventories of the estates of de- ceased persons, and the last returns made to the tax assessors by those persons, “show, to speak of it mildly, few points of con- tact.” Connecticut is a commonwealth in most respects above the average. In every part of the country one hears exactly the same.” The tax returns sent in are rarely truthful; and not only does a very large percentage of property escape its lawful
1 “ A person, formerly assessor in one of our leading cities, reported that he had made efforts when in office to get this kind of property into the ‘grand list,’ and succeeded during his last two years in finding out and adding over $200,000 of it; but he adds, ‘That may have had something to do with my defeat when election came around.’ ”
2 The West Virginian tax commission, in 1884, says, ‘‘ At present all taxes from invisible property come from a few conspicuously conscientious citizens, from widows, executors, and from guardians of the insane and infants ; in fact, it is a comparatively rare thing to find a shrewd trader who gives in any considerable amount of notes, stocks, or money. The truth is, things have come to such a condition in West Virginia that, as regards paying taxes on this kind of property. it is almost as voluntary and is considered pretty much in the same light as dona- tions to the neighbourhood church or Sunday school.” —Quoted by the Connecticut commissioners, who add that the New Hampshire commission of 1878 report that in that State three-fourths of all personal property is not reached by the assessors. Reference may also be made to the Report of the Tax Commission of Baltimore 1886 ; and to the supplementary Report of one member of the Maryland Tax
CHAP, XLIII STATE FINANCE 495
burdens, but “the demoralization of the public conscience by the frequent administration of oaths, so often taken only to be dis- regarded, is an evil of the greatest magnitude. Almost any change would seem to be an improvement.” !
There is probably not a State in the Union of which the same thing might not be said. In Ohio, for instance, the Governor remarks in a special message of April 1887: “The great majority of the personal property of this State is not returned, but entirely and fraudulently withheld from taxation. The idea seems largely to prevail that there is injustice and inequality in taxation, and that there is no harm in cheating the State, although to do so a false return must be made and perjury committed. This offence against the State and good morals is too frequently committed by men of wealth and reputed high character, and of corresponding position in society.” In New York the Governor said (Annual Message of 1886): ‘For years the State assessors have directed _ public attention to the fact that the personalty of the tax-payers was escaping assessment, yet there has been a shrinkage from 1871 to 1884 of $107,184,371 (£21,436,874).” That is to say, notwithstanding the immense increase of personal property in New York during these thirteen years, personal property stood assessed at £21,000,000 less in 1884 than in 1871.
I have dwelt upon these facts, not only because they illustrate the difficulties inherent in a property tax, but also because they help to explain the occasional bitterness of feeling among the _ American farmers as well as the masses against capitalists, much of whose accumulated wealth escapes taxation, while the farmer who owns his land, as well as the working man who puts his savings into the house he lives in, is assessed and taxed upon this visible property. We may, in fact, say of most States, that under the present system. of taxation the larger is the city the smaller is the proportion of personalty reached by taxation
Commission, Mr. Richard T. Ely, in which a great deal of instructive evidence as to the failure in various States of the efforts made to tax intangible property has been diligently collected and set forth (Baltimore, 1888).
1 Judge Foster, in the case of Kirtland v. Hotchkiss, 42 Conn. Rep., p. 449. So Mr. David A. Wells, in his report as Special Tax Commissioner to the New York Legislature, says: ‘‘ Oaths as a matter of restraint or as a guarantee of truth in respect to official statements have in great measure ceased to be effectual ; or in other words, perjury, direct or constructive, has become so common as to almost cease to occasion notice. This is the all but unanimous testimony of officials who have of late had extensive experience in the administration of both the national
and State revenue laws.”
496 _ THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It
(since concealment is easier in large communities), and the richer a man is the smaller in proportion to his property is the contri- bution he pays to the State. Add to this that the rich man bears less, in proportion to his income, of the burden of indirect taxation, since the protective tariff raises the price not merely of luxuries but of all commodities, except some kinds of food.1 Besides the property tax, which is the main source of revenue, the States often levy taxes on particular trades or occupations,” sometimes in the form of a licence tax, taxes on franchises en- joyed by a corporation, taxes on railroad stock, or (in a few
1 An experienced Massachusetts publicist writes to me apropos of the passage in the text: ‘‘If one State compels a man to make a full declaration of his per- sonal property for taxation and another does not there will be a tendency for capital to flow from the former to the latter. In Vermont, for instance, a law has been passed requiring every person under penalty to make sworn returns of his moveable property, and the result is that capital seems to be leaving that State.
“‘In New York the law taxes personal property, but if a person makes no return the assessors are instructed to ‘doom’ him according to the best of their knowledge and belief ; and the amount becomes a matter of ‘trade.’ Returns are practically made only by trustees and corporations, not by capitalists. It isa case of bad law tempered by violation.
“In Massachusetts the practice in each town depends mainly upon the assessors. In Boston the chief office having resolved to let no one escape, has for twenty years gone on increasing the assessment each year till the victim makes a return. At first, men had some scruple about leaving the city before Ist May (the date of residence when taxes are assessed), but these were soon overcome, and now nearly all the capitalists have country places where they retire at a still inclement season, and are received with open arms by the local assessors, who accept just what they choose to pay, while their political influence, their taxes, and their public donations are lost to the city. Occasionally the assessors in a country town take it into their heads to apply the screw after the fashion of the city authority, and then there is a fine turmoil. As the rich men generally live in one quarter of the (country) town, the next step is to apply to the legislature to get the town divided, and the vicinity of Boston is thus being gradually cut up into small pieces.”
2 North Carolina empowers its legislature to tax all trades, professions, and franchises. Arkansas in 1868 (Article x. § 17) directed its general assembly to ‘‘tax all privileges, pursuits, and occupations that are of no real use to society,” adding that all others shall be exempt. But having apparently found it hard to determine which occupations are useless, she dropped the direction in her Consti- tution of 1874, and now merely empowers the taxation of “hawkers, pedlers, ferries, exhibitions, and privileges.’
The persons or things on whom licence taxes or occupation taxes may be im- posed are the following, some being mentioned in one State Constitution, some in another—Pedlers, hawkers, auctioneers, brokers, pawnbrokers, merchants, commis- sion merchants, “persons selling by sample,” showmen, jugglers, innkeepers, toll bridges, ferries, telegraphs, express agents (7.e. parcels’ delivery), grocery keepers, liquor dealers, insurance, vendors of patents, persons or corporations using fran- chises or privileges, banks, railroads, destructive domestic animals, dealers in “ options” or “ futures.”
CHAP, XLII1 STATE FINANCE 497
States) taxes on collateral inheritances. Comparatively little resort is had to the so-called “death-duties,” i.e. probate, legacy, and succession duties, nor is much use made of an income tax. Five States, however, authorize it. As regards poll taxes there is much variety of practice. Some State Constitutions (¢.g. Ohio) forbid such an impost, as “grievous and oppressive”; others direct it to be imposed, and about one half do not mention it. Where it exists, there is sometimes a direction that it shall be applied to schools or some other specified useful purpose, such as poor relief, so as to give the poor, who perhaps pay no other direct tax, a sense of their duty to contribute to public objects, and especially to those in whose benefits they directly share. The amount of a poll tax is always small, $1 or $2: sometimes the payment of it is made a pre-requisite to the exercise of the electoral franchise. It is, I think, never imposed on women or minors.
In some States “foreign” corporations, 7.¢. those chartered by or domiciled in another State, are taxed more heavily than domestic corporations. New Hampshire has recently, by taxing “foreign” insurance companies, succeeded in driving them out of its limits.
I have found no instance of a progressive inheritance duty, or of a progressive income tax such as some of the Swiss cantons
‘have imposed. California, however, in her Constitution of 1879
(see Appendix to this volume) has attempted to tax the same property twice over.
There is always a desire to hit companies, especially banks! and railroads. The newer Constitutions often direct the legisla- ture to see that such undertakings are duly taxed, sometimes for- bidding it ever to deprive itself of the power of taxing any cor- poration, doubtless from the fear that these powerful bodies may purchase from a pliant legislature exemption from civic burdens.
II. In most States, certain descriptions of property are exempted from taxation, as for instance, the buildings or other property of the State, or of any local community, burying grounds, schools and universities, educational, charitable, scientific, literary, or agricultural institutions or societies, public libraries, churches and other buildings or property used for religious purposes, cemeteries, household furniture, farming im-
1 Ag to banks, see Ohio Constitution of 1851, Article xii. § 8. Banks were an object of as much popular dislike then as railroads are now. VOL. I 2K
498 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
plements, deposits in savings banks. Often too it is provided that the owner of personal property below a certain figure shall not pay taxes on it, and occasionally ministers of religion are allowed a certain sum (as for instance in New York, $1500) free from taxation.
No State can tax any bonds, debt certificates, or other securities issued by, or under the authority of, the Federal government, including the circulating notes commonly called “ greenbacks.” This has been held to be the law on the construction of the Federal Constitution, and has been so declared in a statute of Congress. It introduces an element of great difficulty into State taxation, because persons desiring to escape taxation are apt to turn their property into these exempted forms just before they make their tax returns.
IV. Some of the State taxes, such, for instance, as licence taxes, or a tax on corporations, are directly levied by and. paid to the State officials. But others, and particularly the property tax, which forms so large a source of revenue, are collected by the local authorities. The State having determined what income it needs, apportions this sum among the counties, or in New England, sometimes directly among the towns, in proportion to their paying capacity, that is, to the value of the property situate within them.! So similarly the counties apportion not only what they have to pay to the State, but also the sum they © have to raise for county purposes, among the cities and town- ships within their area, in proportion to the value of their taxable property. Thus, when the township or city authorities assess and collect taxes from the individual citizen, they collect at one and the same time three distinct sets of taxes, the State tax, the county tax, and the city or township tax. Retaining the latter for local purposes,” they hand on the two former to the county authorities, who in turn retain the county tax, handing on to the State what it requires. Thus trouble and expense are saved in the process of collecting, and the citizen sees in one tax-paper all he has to pay.
V. Some States, taught by their sad experience of reckless legislatures, limit by their Constitutions the amount of taxation
1 As ascertained by the assessors and board of equalization. 2 Sometimes, however, the town or township in its corporate capacity pays the
State its share of the State tax, instead of collecting it specifically from individual citizens,
a be
CHAP, XLIII STATE FINANCE 499
which may be raised for State purposes in any one year. Thus Texas in 1876 forbade the State property tax to exceed one half per cent on the valuation (exclusive of the sum needed to pay interest on the State debt), and has since reduced the percentage to °35.1 A similar provision exists in Missouri, and in four other Southern or Western States. We shall see presently that this method of restriction has been more extensively applied to cities and other subordinate communities. Sometimes we find directions that no greater revenue shall be raised than the current needs of the State require, a rule which Congress would have done well to observe, seeing that a surplus revenue invites extravagant and reckless expenditure and gives opportunity for legislative jobbery.?
It may be thought that the self-interest of the people is sufii- cient to secure economy and limit taxation. But, apart from the danger of a corrupt legislature, it is often remarked that as in many States a large proportion of the voters do not pay State taxes,’ the power of imposing burdens lies largely in the hands of persons who have no direct interest, and suppose themselves to have no interest at all, in keeping down taxes which they do not pay. So far, however, as State finance is concerned, this has been no serious source of mischief, and more must be attributed to the absence of efficient control over expenditure, and to the fact that (as in Congress) the committee which reports on appro- priations of the revenue is distinct from that which deals with the raising of revenue by taxation.
Another illustration of the tendency to restrict the improvi- dence of representatives is furnished by the prohibitions in many Constitutions to pass bills appropriating moneys to any private individual or corporation, or to authorize the payment of claims against the State arising under any contract not strictly and legally binding, or to release the claims which the State may have against railroads or other corporations. One feels, in read- ing these multiform provisions, as if the legislature was a rabbit
1 Jn spite of this Texas had in March 1888 a surplus of $2,000,000 in her State treasury, so that the Governor was obliged to summon the legislature in extra session to dispose of this surplus and prevent the growth of another.
2 Sir T. More in his Utopia mentions with approval a law of the Macarians forbidding the king to have ever more than £1000 in the public treasury.
3 Mr. Ford says (Citizens’ Manual) that it is estimated that only eight per cent of the whole population of the United States pay State taxes. Of course, a much larger percentage of the voters pay, they being nearly one-fourth of the
whole,
500 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART 1
seeking to issue from its burrow to ravage the crops wherever it could, and the people of the State were obliged to close every exit, because they could not otherwise restrain its inveterate propensity to mischief.
VI. Nothing in the financial system of the States better deserves attention than the history of the State debts, their portentous growth, and the efforts made, when the people had taken fright, to reduce their amount, and to set limits to them in the future.
Sixty years ago, when those rich and ample Western lands which now form the States of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Missouri were being opened up and settled, and again forty years ago, when railway construction was in the first freshness of its marvellous extension, and was filling up the lands along the Mississippi at an increasingly rapid rate, every one was full of hope; and States, counties, and cities, not less than individual men, threw themselves eagerly into the work of developing the resources which lay around them. The States, as well as these minor communities, set to work to make roads and canals and railways; they promoted or took stock in trading companies, they started or subsidized banks, they embarked in, or pledged their credit for, a hundred enterprises which they were ill-fitted to conduct or supervise. Some undertakings failed lamentably, while in others the profits were grasped by private speculators, and the burden left with the public body. State indebtedness, which in 1825 (when there were twenty-four States) stood at an aggregate over the whole Union of $12,790,728 (£2,500,000), had in 1842 reached $203,777,9161 (£40,000,000), in 1870 $35 2,866,898 (£70,000,000).
A part of the increase between the latter years was due to loans contracted for the raising and equipping of troops by many Northern States to serve in the Civil War, the intention being to obtain ultimate reimbursement from the national treasury. There was also a good deal in the way of executed works to show for the money borrowed and expended, and the States (in 1870 thirty-seven in number) had grown vastly in taxable pro- perty. Nevertheless the huge and increasing total startled the péople, and, as everybody knows, some States repudiated their
1 In 1838 it was estimated that of the total debt of the States, then calcu-
lated at $170,800,000 (say £35,000,000), $60,200,000 had been incurred for canals, $42,800,000 for railroads, and $52,600,000 for banking.
CHAP, XLIII STATE FINANCE 501
debts. The diminution in the total indebtedness of 1880, which stood at $250,722,081 (£50,144,000), and is the indebtedness of thirty-eight States, is partly due to this repudiation. Even after the growth of State debts had been checked (in the way to be presently mentioned), minor communities, towns, counties, but above all, cities trod in the same path, the old temptations recurring, and the risks seeming smaller because a municipality had a more direct and close interest than a State in seeing that its money or credit was well applied. Municipal indebtedness has advanced, especially in the larger cities, at a dangerously swift rate. Of the State and county debt much the largest part had been incurred for, or in connection with, so-called “internal improvements”; but of the city debt, though a part was due to the bounties given to volunteers in the Civil War, much must be set down to extremely lax and wasteful administration; and much more to mere stealing, practised by methods to be hereafter explained, but facilitated by the habit of subsidizing, or taking shares in, corporate enterprises which had excited the hopes of the citizens.
VII. The disease spread till it terrified the patient, and a remedy was found in the insertion in the Constitutions of the States of provisions limiting the borrowing powers of State legislatures. Fortunately the evil had been perceived in time to enable the newest States (Minnesota, Wisconsin, Oregon, Kansas, Nevada, Nebraska, West Virginia, Colorado) to profit by the experience of their predecessors. For the last thirty years, whenever a State has enacted a Constitution, it has~ inserted sections restricting the borrowing powers of States and local bodies, and often also providing for the discharge of existing liabilities. Not only is the passing of bills for raising a State loan surrounded with special safeguards, such as the requirement of a two-thirds majority in each house of the legislature ; not only is there a prohibition ever to borrow money for, or even to undertake, internal improvements (a fertile source of jobbery and waste, as the experience of Congress shows); not only is there almost invariably a provision that whenever a debt is contracted the same Act shall create a sinking fund for paying it off within a few years, but in most Constitutions the total amount of the debt is limited, and limited to a sum beautifully small in pro- portion to the population and resources of the State. Thus
1 Debts incurred for the purpose of suppressing insurrection or repelling invasion are excepted from these limitations,
502 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
Wisconsin fixes its maximum at $200,000 (£40,000) ; Minnesota and Iowa at $250,000, Ohio at $750;000 ; Nebraska at $100,000; prudent Oregon at $50,000; and the great and wealthy State of Pennsylvania, with a population now exceeding 5,000,000 (Con- stitution of 1873, Art. ix. § 4), at $1,000,000.1
In thirty-one States, including all those with recent Con- stitutions, the legislature is forbidden to “give or lend the credit of the State in aid of any person, association, or corporation, whether municipal or other, or to pledge the credit of the State in any manner whatsoever for the payment of the liabilities present or prospective of any individual association, municipal, or other corporation,” as also to take stock in a corporation, or otherwise embark in any gainful enterprise. Many Constitutions also forbid the assumption by the State of the debts of any individual or municipal corporation.
The care of the people for their financial freedom and safety extends even to local bodies. Many of the recent Constitutions limit, or direct the legislature to limit, the borrowing powers of counties, cities, or towns, sometimes even of incorporated school districts, to a sum not exceeding a certain percentage on the assessed value of the taxable property within the area in question. This percentage is usually five per cent (¢.g. Illinois, Constit. of 1870, Art. ix. § 12), sometimes (eg. Pennsylvania, Constit. of 1873, Art. ix. § 8) seven per cent; New York (Amend. of 1884), ten per cent. Sometimes also the amount of the tax leviable by a local authority in any year is restricted to a definite sum—for instance, to one half per cent on the valuation.? And in all the States but seven, cities, tounties, or other local incorporated authorities are forbidden to pledge their credit for, or undertake the liabilities of, or take stock in, or otherwise give aid to, any undertaking or company. Sometimes this prohibition is absolute ; sometimes it is made subject to certain conditions, and may be
1 New York (Constitution of 1846, Art. vii. §§ 10-12) also names a million of dollars as the maximum, but permits laws to be passed raising loans for “some single work or object,” provided that a tax is at the same time enacted sufficient to pay off this debt in eighteen years; and that any such law has been directly submitted to the people and approved by them at an election.
? Constitution of Missouri of 1875 (Art. iv. § 45), a Constitution whose pro- visions on financial matters and restrictions on the legislature are copious and instructive. Similar words occur in nearly all Western and Southern, as well as in some of the more recent Eastern Constitutions.
3 He for elaborate provisions under this head, the Constitution of Missouri of 1875.
mass atenss\ a> a
PN ee
CHAP, XLIIT STATE FINANCE 503
avoided by their observance. For instance, there are States in which the people of a city can, by special vote, carried by a two- thirds majority, or a three-fifths majority, or (in Colorado) by a bare majority of the tax-payers, authorize the contracting of a debt which the municipality could not incur by its ordinary organs of government. Sometimes there is a direction that any municipality creating a debt must at the same time provide for its extinction by a sinking fund. Sometimes the restrictions imposed apply only to a particular class of undertakings—e.g. banks or railroads. The differences between State and State are endless ; but everywhere the tendency is to make the protection against local indebtedness and municipal extravagance more and more strict ; nor will any one who knows these local authorities, and the temptations, both good and bad, to which they are exposed, complain of the strictness.
Cases, of course, occur in which a restriction on the taxing power or borrowing power of a municipality is found incon- venient, because a costly public improvement is rendered more costly if it has to be done piecemeal. The corporation of Brooklyn was thus recently prevented from making all at once a great street which would have been a boon to the city, and will have to spend more money in buying up the land for it bit by bit. But the evils which have followed in America from the immixture both of States and of cities in enterprises of a public nature, and the abuses incident to an unlimited power of undertaking improve- ments, have been so great as to make people willing to bear with the occasional inconveniences which are inseparable from restriction.
Says Judge Cooley: “A catalogue of these evils would in- clude the squandering of the public domain; the enrichment of schemers whose policy it has been first to obtain all they can by fair promises, and then avoid, as far and as long as possible, the fulfilment of the promises ; the corruption of legislation ; the loss of State credit; great public debts recklessly contracted for ; moneys often recklessly expended; public discontent, because the enterprises fostered from the public treasury, and on the pre- tence of public benefit, are not believed to be managed in the public interest ; and finally, great financial panic, collapse, and disaster.”?
1 In a Note to Chapter LI. post, placed at the end of this volume, I have given some specimens of the constitutional provisions which restrict the borrowing
powers of local authorities. 2 Cooley, Constit. Limit. p. 266. The notes to pp. 262 and 272 contain a very instructive sketch of the history of these financial evils.
504 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
The provisions above described have had the effect of steadily reducing the amount of State and county debts, although the wealth of the country makes rapid strides. A careful writer estimates this reduction between 1870 and 1880 at 25 per cent in the case of State debts, and in that of county, town, and school district debts at 8 per cent.1 In cities, however, there has been, within the same decade, not only no reduction, but an increase of over 100 per cent, possibly as much as 130 per cent. The total debt of cities with a population exceeding 7500 was, in 1880 (in round numbers), $710,000,000 (£142,000,000) ; that of smaller municipalities, $56,000,000.
This striking difference between the cities and the States may be explained in several ways. One is that cities cannot re- pudiate, while sovereign States can and do.” Another may be found in the later introduction into State Constitutions of re- strictions on the borrowing powers of municipalities. But the chief cause is to be found in the conditions of the government of creat cities, where the wealth of the community is largest, and is also most at the disposal of a multitude of ignorant voters. Several of the greatest cities lie in States which did not till recently, or have not even now, imposed adequate restrictions on the borrowing power of city councils. Now city councils are not only incapable administrators, but are prone to such public improvements as present opportunities for speculation, for jobbery, and even for wholesale embezzlement.
1 Mr. Robert L. Porter, in the American Cyclopedia of Political Science, article “Debts” ; an article in which much valuable information on this large subject will be found.
2 In some parts of New England the city, town, or other municipal debt is also the personal debt of every inhabitant, and is therefore an excellent security.
CHAPTER XLIV THE WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS
THE difficulty I have already remarked of explaining to Europeans the nature of an American State, viz. that there is in Europe nothing similar to it, recurs when we come to inquire how the organs of government which have been described play into one another in practice. To say that a State is something lower than the nation but greater than a municipality, is to say what is obvious, but not instructive; for the peculiarity of the State is that it combines some of the features which are to Europeans characteristic of a nation and a nation only, with others that belong to'a municipality.
The State seems great or small according to the point of view from which one regards it. It is vast if one regards the sphere of its action and the completeness of its control in that sphere, which includes the maintenance of law and order, nearly the whole field of civil and criminal jurisprudence, the supervision of all local governments, an unlimited power of taxation. But if we ask, Who are the persons that manage this great machine of government ; how much interest do the citizens take in it; how much reverence do they feel for it? the ample proportions we had admired begin to dwindle, for the persons turn out to be insig- nificant, and the interest of the people to have steadily declined. The powers of State authorities are powers like those of a Euro- pean parliament; but they are wielded by men most of whom are less distinguished and less respected by their fellows than are those who fill the city councils of Manchester or Cologne. Several States exceed in area and population some ancient Euro- pean monarchies. But their annals may not have been illumined by a single striking event or brilliant personality.
A further difficulty in describing how a State government works arises from the endless differences of detail between the
506 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
several States. The organic frame of government is similar in all; but its functional activities vary according to the temper and habits, the ideas, education, and traditions of the inhabitants of the State. A European naturally says, “Select a typical State, and describe that to us.” But there is no such thing as a typical State. Massachusetts or Connecticut is a fair sample of New England, Minnesota or Iowa of the North-West; Georgia or Alabama shows the evils, accompanied no doubt by great recuperative power, that still vex the South; New York and Illinois the contrast between the tendencies of an ignorant city mob and the steady-going farmers of the rural counties. But to take any one of these States as a type, asking the reader to assume what is said of it to apply equally to the other thirty- seven commonwealths, would land us in inextricable confusions. I must therefore be content to speak quite generally, emphasizing those points in which the colour and tendencies of State govern- ments are much the same over the whole Union, and begging the European reader to remember that illustrations drawn, as they must be drawn, from some particular State, will not necessarily be true of some other State government, because its life may go on under different conditions.
The State governments, as has been observed already, bear a family likeness to the National or Federal government, a like- ness due not only to the fact that the latter was largely modelled after the systems of the old thirteen States, but also to the influence which the Federal Constitution has exerted ever since 1789 on those who have been drafting or amending State Consti- tutions. Thus the Federal Constitution has been both child and parent. Where the State Constitutions differ from the Federal, they invariably differ in being more democratic. It still expresses the doctrines of 1787. They express the views of later days, when democratic ideas have been more rampant, and men less cautious than the sages of the Philadelphia Convention have given legal form to popular beliefs. This difference, which appears not only in the mode of appointing judges, but in the shorter terms which the States allow to their officials and senators, comes out most clearly in the relations established between the legislative and the executive powers. The national executive, as we have seen, is disjoined from the national legislature in a way strange to Europeans. Still, the national executive is all of a piece. The President is supreme; his ministers are his subordinates,
ay tee eck mh i eA
CHAP, XLIV WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 507
chosen by him from among his political associates. They act under his orders; he is responsible for their conduct. But in the States there is nothing even distantly resembling a cabinet. The chief executive officials are directly elected by the people. They hold by a title independent of the State governor. They are not, except so far as some special statute may provide, subject to his directions, and he is not responsible for their conduct, since he cannot control it. As the governor need not belong to the party for the time being dominant in the legislature, so the other State officials need not be of the same party as the governor. They may even have been elected at a different time, or for a longer period.
A European, who studies the mechanism of State government —very few Europeans so far having studied. it—is at first puzzled by a system which contradicts his preconceived notions. ‘ How,” he asks, “can such machinery work? One can understand the scheme under which a legislature rules through officers-whom it has, whether legally or practically, chosen and keeps in power. One can even understand a scheme in which the executive, while independent of the legislature, consists of persons acting in unison, under a head directly responsible to the people. But will not a scheme, in which the executive officers are all indepen- dent of one another, yet not subject to the legislature, want every condition needed for harmonious and efficient action? They obey nobody. ‘They are responsible to nobody, except a people which only exists in concrete activity for one election day every two or three years, when it is dropping papers into the ballot-box. Such a system seems the negation of a system, and more akin to chaos.”
In his attempts to penetrate this mystery, our European receives little help from his usually helpful American friends, simply because they do not understand his difficulty. Light dawns on him when he perceives that the executive business of a State is such as not to need any policy, in the European sense, and therefore no harmony of view or purpose among those who manage it. Everything in the nature of State policy belongs to the legislature, and to the legislature alone.
Compare the Federal President with the State Governor. The former has foreign policy to deal with, the latter has none. The former has a vast patronage, the latter has scarcely any. The former has the command of the army and navy, the latter has only the militia, insignificant in ordinary times. The former has
508 ' THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
a post-office, but there is no State postal-service. Little remains to the Governor except his veto, which is not so much an executive as a legislative function; the duty of maintaining order, which becomes important only when insurrection or riot breaks out ; and the almost mechanical duty of representing the State for various matters of routine, such as demanding from other States the extradition of offenders, issuing writs for the election of congressmen or of the State legislature, receiving the reports of the various State officials. These officials, even the highest of them who correspond to the cabinet ministers in the National government, are either mere clerks, performing work, such as that of receiving and paying out State moneys, strictly defined by statute, and usually checked by other officials, or else are in the nature of commissioners of inquiry, who may inspect and report, but can take no independent action of importance. Policy does not lie within their province; even in executive details their discretion is confined within narrow limits. They have, no doubt, from the governor downwards, opportunities for jobbing and malversation; but even the less scrupulous are restrained from using these opportunities by the fear of some investigating committee of the legislature, with possible impeachment or criminal prosecution as a consequence of its report. Holding for terms which seldom exceed two or three years, they feel the insecurity of their position ; but the desire to earn re-election by the able and conscientious discharge of their functions, is a less effective motive than it would be if the practice of re-electing competent men were more frequent. Unfortunately here, as in Congress, the tradition of many States is, that when a man has enjoyed an office, however well he may have served the public, some one else ought to have the next turn.
The reason, therefore, why the system I have sketched rubs along in the several States is, that the executive has little to do, and comparatively small sums to handle. The further reason why it has so little to do is two-fold. Local government is so fully developed that many functions, which in Europe would devolve on a central authority, are in all American States left to the county, or the city, or the township, or the school district. These minor divisions narrow the province of the State, just as the State narrows the province of the central government. And the other reason is, that legislation has in the several States pushed itself to the farthest limits, and so encroached on subjects
b. Bs, é ;
CHAP. XLIV WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 509
which European legislatures would leave to the executive, that executive discretion is extinct, and the officers are the mere hands of the legislative brain, which directs them by statutes drawn with extreme minuteness, carefully specifies the purposes to which each money grant is to be applied, and supervises them by inquisitorial committees.
It is a natural consequence of these arrangements that State office carries little either of dignity or of power. A place is valued chiefly for its salary, or for such opportunities of obliging friends or securing commissions on contracts as it may present, though in the greatest States the post of attorney-general or comptroller is often sought by able men. A State Governor, however, is not yet a nonentity. In more than one State a sort of perfume from the old days lingers round the office, as in Massachusetts, where the traditions of last century were re- newed by the eminent man who occupied the chair of the common- wealth during the War of Secession and did much to stimulate and direct the patriotism of its citizens. Though no one would nowadays, like Mr. Jay in 1795, exchange the chief justiceship of the United States for the governorship of his State, a Cabinet minister will sometimes, as Mr. Folger did a few years ago, resign his post in order to offer himself for the governorship of a great State like New York. In all States, the Governor, as the highest official and the depositary of State authority, may at any moment become the pivot on whose action public order turns. In the Pennsylvania riots of 1877 it was the accidental absence of the Governor on a tour in the West which enabled the forces of sedition to gather strength. During the more recent dis- turbances which large strikes, especially among railway employés, have caused in the West, the prompt action of a Governor has preserved or restored tranquillity in more than one State; while
the indecision of the Governor of an adjoining one has em-
boldened strikers to stop traffic, or to molest workmen who had been hired to replace them. So in a commercial crisis, like that which swept over the Union in 1837, when the citizens are panic- stricken and the legislature hesitates, much may depend on the initiative of the Governor, to whom the eyes of the people naturally turn. His right of suggesting legislative remedies, usually neglected, then becomes significant, and may abridge or increase the difficulties of the community.
It is not, however, as an executive magistrate that a State
Me ST Ee ee ee
510 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IL
Governor usually makes or mars a reputation, but in his quasi- legislative capacity of agreeing to or vetoing bills passed by the legislature. The merit of a Governor is usually tested by the number and the boldness of his vetoes ; and a European enjoys, as I did in the State of New York in 1870, the odd spectacle of a Governor appealing to the people for re-election on the ground that he had defeated in many and important instances the will of their representatives solemnly expressed in the votes of both Houses. That such appeals should be made, and often made successfully, is due not only to the distrust which the people entertain of their legislatures, but also, to their honour be it said, to the respect of the people for courage. They like above all things a strong man ; just as English constituencies prefer a candi- date who refuses to swallow pledges or be dictated to by cliques.
This view of the Governor as a check on the legislature explains why the Americans think it rather a gain than an injury to the State that he should belong to the party which is for the time being in a minority in the legislature. How the phenomenon occurs may be seen by noting the different methods of choice employed. The Governor is chosen by a mass vote of all citizens over the State. The representatives are chosen by the same voters, but in districts. Thus one party may have a majority on aeross poll of the whole State, but may find itself in a minority in the larger number of electoral districts. This happens in New York State, on an average, in two years out of every three. The mass vote shows a Democratic majority, because the Democrats are overwhelmingly strong in New York City, and some other great centres of population. But in the rural districts and most of the smaller towns the Republican party commands a majority sufficient to enable them to carry most districts. Hence, while the Governor is usually a Democrat, the legislature is usually Republican. Little trouble need be feared from the opposition of the two powers, because such issues as divide the parties have scarce any bearing on State politics. Some good may be hoped, because a Governor of the other party is more likely to check or show up the misdeeds of a hostile Senate or Assembly than one who, belonging to the group of men which guides the legislature, has a motive for working with them, and may expect to share any gains they can amass.!
1 Sometimes, however, inconvenience arises from the hostility of the State Senate and the Governor. Quite recently the Senate of New York persistently
r
=m
CHAP, XLIV WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 511
Thus we are led back to the legislature, which is so much the strongest force in the several States that we may almost call it the Government and ignore all other authorities. Let us see how it gets on without that guidance which an executive ministry supplies to the Chambers of every free European country.
As the frame of a State government generally resembles the National government, so a State legislature resembles Congress. But, in most States, it exaggerates the characteristic defects of Congress. It has fewer able and high-minded men among its members. It has less of recognized leadership. It is surrounded by temptations relatively greater. It is guarded by a less watchful and less interested public opinion. But before we inquire what sort of men fill the legislative halls, let us ask what kinds of business draw them there.
The matter of State legislation may be classified under three heads :
J. Ordinary private law, i.e. contracts, torts, inheritance, family relations, offences, civil and criminal procedure.
II. Administrative law, including the regulation of municipal and rural local government, public works, education, the liquor traffic, vaccination, adulteration, charitable and penal establish- ments, the inspection of mines or manufactories, together with the general law of corporations, of railroads, and of labour, | together also with taxation, both State and local, and the manage- ment of the public debt.
III. Measures of a local and special nature, such as are called in England “private bills,” 2. bills for chartering and incorporating gas, water, canal, tramway, or railway companies, or for conferring franchises in the nature of monopolies or privileges upon such bodies, or for altering their constitutions, for incorporating cities and minor communities and regulating their affairs.
Comparing these three classes of business, between the first and second of which it is no doubt hard to draw a sharp line, we shall find that bills of the second class are more numerous than those of the first, bills of the third more numerous than those of refused to confirm the nominations made to certain offices by the Governor, with the effect of securing the retention in office long beyond their legal term of several officials, these old officials holding on and drawing their salaries because no new
men had been duly appointed to fill their places. The Senate was thought to have behaved ill; but the Governor was not trusted and exerted no moral
authority.
512 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il
the other two put together. Ordinary private law, the law which guides or secures us in the everyday relations of life, and upon which nine-tenths of the suits between man and man are founded, is not greatly changed from year to year in the American States. Some Western, and a few Eastern States have made bold experi- ments in the field of divorce, others have added new crimes to the statute-book and amended their legal procedure. But com- mercial law, as well as the law of property and civil rights in general, remains tolerably stable. People are satisfied with things as they are, and the influence of the legal profession is exerted against tinkering. In matters of the second class, which I have called administrative, because they generally involve the action of the State or of some of the communities which exist within it, there is more legislative activity. Hvery session sees experiments tried in this field, generally with the result of enlarging the province of government, both by interfering with the individual citizen and by attempting to do things for him which apparently he either does not do or does not do well for himself.1_ But the general or “public” legislation, as Englishmen would call it, is dwarfed by the “ private bill” legislation which forms the third of our classes. The bills that are merely local or special out- number general bills everywhere, and outnumber them enor- mously in those States which, like Virginia and Mississippi, do not require corporations to be formed under general laws. Such special bills are condemned by thoughtful Americans, not only as confusing the general law, but because they furnish, unless closely watched, opportunities for perpetrating jobs, and for inflicting injustice on individuals or localities in the interest of some knot of speculators. They are one of the scandals of the country. But there is a further objection to their abund- ance in the State legislatures. They are a perennial fountain of corruption. Promoted for pecuniary ends by some incor- porated company or group of men proposing to form a company, their passage is secured by intrigue, and by the free expenditure of money which finds its way in large sums to the few influential
1 See the chapter on ‘‘ Laissez Faire,” Vol. II. p, 299.
Many of these measures have been prepared by associations outside the legisla- ture, who embody their wishes in a bill, give it to a member or members, and get it passed, perhaps with scarcely any debate. Thus not only the Labour organiza- tions, such as the Knights of Labour, and the Grangers (farmers’ clubs), but the Women’s Christian Temperance Union, the medical profession, the dentists, the dairymen, get their favourite schemes enacted.
CHAP. XLIV WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS ~ 513
men who control a State Senate or Assembly, and in smaller sums to those among the rank and file of members who are accessible to these solid arguments, and careless of any others. It is the possibility of making profit in this way out of a seat in the legislature which draws to it not a few men in those States which, like New York, Pennsylvania, or Illinois, offer a promising field for large pecuniary enterprises. Where the carcase is there will the vultures be gathered together. The money power, which is most formidable in the shape of large corporations, chiefly attacks the legislatures of these great States. It is, however, felt in nearly all States. And even where, as is the case in most States, only a small minority of members are open to bribes, the opportunity which these numerous local and special bills offer to a man of making himself important, of obliging his friends, of securing something for his locality, and thereby confirming his local influence, is sufficient to make a seat in the legislature desired chiefly in respect of such bills, and to obscure, in the eyes of most members, the higher func-. tions of general legislation which these assemblies possess. One may apply to these commonwealths, though in a new sense, the famous dictum, corrwptissima republica plurimae leges.
One form of this special legislation is peculiarly attractive and pernicious. It is the power of dealing by statute with the municipal constitution and actual management of cities. Cities grow so fast that all undertakings connected with them are particularly tempting to speculators. City revenues are so large as to offer rich plunder to those who can seize the control of them. The vote which a city casts is so heavy as to throw great power into the hands of those who control it, and enable them to drive a good bargain with the wirepullers of a legislative chamber. Hence the control exercised by the State legislature over city government is a most important branch of legislative business, a means of power to scheming politicians, of enrich- ment to greedy ones, and if not of praise to evil-doers, yet cer- tainly of terror to them that do well.’
1 Although this tinkering with city government is most harmful where the cities are large, it is abundant even where the cities are small. For instance, in Wisconsin, a Western State with no large cities, there were passed in the session of 1885 about 500 acts granting or dealing with city charters, filling 1342 pages of print. All the other acts of the year filled only about 600 pages. I owe this fact, as well as that stated in note 1, p. 512, to an interesting discourse by Dr, Albert Shaw of Minneapolis, delivered in 1888 before Cornell University.
VOL. I 20
514 ‘ THE STATE GOVERNMENTS ; PART Il
We are now in a position, having seen what the main business of a State legislature is, to inquire what is likely to be the quality of the persons who compose it. The conditions that determine their quality may be said to be the following :—
I. The system of selection by party conventions. As this will be described in later chapters, I will here say no more than that it prevents the entrance of good men and favours that of bad ones.
II. The habit of choosing none but a resident in any electoral district to represent that district, a habit which narrows the field of choice, and not only excludes competent men from other parts of the State, but deters able men generally from entering State politics, since he who loses his seat for his own district cannot find his way back to the legislature as member for any other.
III. The fact that the capital of a State—i.e. the meeting- place of the legislature and residence of the chief officials, is usually a small town, at a distance from the most populous city or cities of the State, and therefore a place neither attrac- tive socially nor convenient for business men or lawyers, and which, it may be remarked in passing, is more shielded from a vigilant public opinion than is a great city, with its keen and curious press. Pennsylvanians who might be willing to serve in a legislature meeting at Philadelphia are less inclined to attend one at Harrisburg. An eminent citizen of Connecticut observed to me that, whereas everybody in that little State could reach Hartford in a few hours from its farthest corner, a member attending the legislature of Illinois or Wisconsin might often have to quit his home and live during the session at Springfield or Madison, because these capitals are remote from the outer parts of those large commonwealths. He thought this an impor- tant factor in the comparative excellence of the Connecticut legislature.
IV. The nature of the business that comes before a State legislature. As already explained, by far the largest part. of this business excites little popular interest and involves no large political issues. Unimportant it is not. Nothing could well be more important than to repress special legislation, and deliver cities from the fangs of the spoiler. But its importance is not readily apprehended by ordinary people, the mischiefs that have to be checked being spread out over a multitude of bills, most of them
=
CHAP, XLIV WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 515
individually insignificant, however ruinous in their cumulated potency. Hence a leading politician seldom troubles himself to enter a State legislature, while the men who combine high character with talent and energy are too much occupied in prac- tising their profession or pushing their business to undertake the dreary task of wrangling over gas and railroad bills in com- mittees, or exerting themselves to win some advantage for the locality that returns them.
I have not mentioned among these depressing conditions the payment of salaries to members, because it does not seem to make any substantial difference. It is no doubt an attraction to some of the poorer men, to penurious farmers, or half-starved lawyers. But in attracting them it does not serve to keep out any better men. Probably the sense of public duty would be keener if legislative work was not paid at all. This is matter for specula- tion. But, looking at the question practically, I doubt whether the discontinuance of salaries would improve the quality of American legislators. The drawbacks to the position which repel the best men, the advantages which attract inferior men, would remain the same as now; and there is nothing absurd in the view that the places of those who might cease to come if they did not get their five dollars a day would be taken by men who would manage to make as large an income in a less respectable way.
After this, it need scarcely be said that the State legislatures are not high-toned bodies. The best seem to be those of some of the New England States, particularly Massachusetts, where the venerable traditions surrounding an ancient commonwealth do something to sustain the dignity of the body and induce good men to enter it. This legislature, called the General Court, is, according to the best authorities, substantially pure, and does its work well. Its composition is inferior to that of the General Courts of sixty years ago, but does not seem to be declining at present. Connecticut has a good Senate, and a fair House of Representatives. It is also reported to be honest, though not free from demagogism. Vermont is pure; New Hampshire, a State where constituencies are reproached with bribery, less respectable. Next come some of the North-Western States, where the population, consisting almost entirely of farmers, who own as well as work their land, sends up members who fairly repre- sent its average intelligence, and are little below the level of its average virtue. There are no traditions in such States, and there
516 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It
are already corporations rich enough to corrupt members and be themselves black-mailed. Hence one is prepared to find among the legislators professional politicians of the worst class. But the percentage of such men is small in States like Michigan, Towa, Minnesota, Oregon, probably not more than from five to ten per cent, the other members being often ignorant and narrow, but honest and well-intentioned. In Ohio and Indiana the pro- portion of black sheep may be a little higher.
It is hard to present a general view of the Southern States, both because there are great differences among them, and because they are still ina state of transition, generally, it would seem, tran- sition towards a better state of things. Roughly speaking, their legislatures seem to stand below those of the North-West, though in most a few men of exceptional ability and standing may be found. Kentucky and Georgia are among the better States, Louisiana and Arkansas, the former infected by New Orleans, the latter a singularly rude community, among the worst.
The lowest place belongs to the States which, possessing the largest cities, have received the largest influx of European im- migrants, and have fallen most completely under the control of unscrupulous party managers. New York, Philadelphia, Balti- more, Chicago, San Francisco have done their best to poison the legislatures of the States in which they respectively lie by filling these bodies with members of a low type, as well as by being themselves the centres of enormous accumulations of capital. They have brought the strongest corrupting force into contact with the weakest and most corruptible material ; and there has followed in Pennsylvania and New York such a Witches’ Sabbath of jobbing, bribing, thieving, and prostitution of legislative power to private interest as the world has seldom seen. Of course even in these States the majority of the members are not bad men, for the majority come from the rural districts or smaller towns, where honesty and order reign as they do generally in Northern and Western America outside a few large cities. Many of them are farmers or small lawyers, who go up meaning to do right, but fall into the hands of schemers who abuse theirinexperience and practise on their ignorance. One of the ablest and most vivacious of the younger generation of American politicians! says:—“ The New York legislature taken as a whole is not so bad a body as we
1 Mr. Theodore Roosevelt of New York, from whose instructive article in the Century Magazime for April 1885, I quote the passage in the text.
“CHAP. XLIV WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 517
would be led to believe, if our judgment was based purely on what we read in the metropolitan papers; for the custom of the latter is to portray things as either very much better or very much worse than they are. Where a number of men, many of them poor, some of them unscrupulous, and others elected by constituents too ignorant too hold them to a proper accountability for their actions, are put into a position of great temporary power, where they are called to take action upon questions affecting the welfare of large corporations and wealthy private individuals, the chances for corruption are always great; and that there is much viciousness and political dishonesty, much moral cowardice, and a good deal of actual: bribe-taking at Albany, no one who has had practical experience of legislation can doubt. At the same time, I think the good members outnumber the bad... . The representatives from the country districts are usually good men, well-to-do farmers, small lawyers, or prosperous  store- keepers, and are shrewd, quiet, and honest. They are often narrow-minded, and slow to receive an idea; but they cling to it with the utmost tenacity. For the most part they are native Americans, and those who are not are men who have become completely Americanized in their ways and habits of thought. ... The worst legislators come from the great cities. They are usually foreigners of little or no education, with exceedingly misty ideas as to morality, and possessed of an ignorance so profound that it could only be called comic were it not for the fact that it has at times such serious effects on our laws. It is their ignorance quite as much as actual viciousness which makes it so difficult to procure the passage of good laws, or to prevent the passage of bad ones; and it is the most irritating of the many elements with’ which we have to contend in the fight for good government.” + The same writer goes on to say that after sitting in three New York legislatures he came to think that about one-third of the members were open to corrupt influences, but that although the characters of those men were known to their colleagues and to the “lobby,” it was rarely possible to eonvict them. Many of this worst third had not gone into the legislature meaning to make gain out of the position, but had been corrupted by it. They found that no distinction was to be won there by legitimate
1 Any one with experience of legislative bodies will agree with the view that ignorance and stupidity cause more trouble than bad intentions, seeing that they are the materials on which men of bad intentions play.
518 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
methods, and when temptation came in their way they fell, hav- ing feeble consciences and no statesmanlike knowledge. Or they were anxious above all things to pass some local measure on which their constituents were set, and they found they could not win the support of other members except by becoming accomplices in the jobs or “steals” which these members were “putting through.”! Or they gained their seat by the help of some influential man or powerful company, and found themselves obliged to vote according to the commands of their “ owner.” ? The corrupt member has several methods of making gains. One, the most obvious, is to exact money or money’s worth for his vote. A second is to secure by it the support of a group of his colleagues in some other measure in which he is personally interested, as for instance a measure which will add to the value of land near a particular city. This is “log-rolling,” and is the most difficult method to deal with, because its milder forms are scarcely distinguishable from that legitimate give and take which must go on in all legislative bodies. A third is black-mailing. A member brings in a bill either specially directed against some particular great corporation, probably a railway, or propos- ing so to alter the general law as in fact to injure such a corporation, or a group of corporations. He intimates
1 “There are two classes of cases in which corrupt members get money—one is when a wealthy corporation puts through some measure which will be of great benefit to itself, although perhaps an injury to the public at large; the other when a member introduces a bill hostile to some moneyed interest with the ex- pectation of being paid to let the matter drop. The latter, technically called a ‘strike,’ is much the most common, for in spite of the outcry against them in legislative matters, corporations are more often sinned against than sinning. It is difficult in either case to convict the offending member, though we have very good laws against bribery.”—Mr. Theodore Roosevelt, ut supra.
2 “There came before a committee (of the New York House) of which I hap- pened to be a member, a perfectly proper bill in the interest of a certain corpora- tion ; the majority of the committee, six in number, were thoroughly bad men, who opposed with the hope of being paid to cease their opposition. When I consented to take charge of the bill, I stipulated that not a penny should be paid to ensure its passage. It therefore became necessary to see what pressure could be brought to bear on the recalcitrant members ; and accordingly we had to find out who were the authors and sponsors of their political being. Three proved to be under the control of local statesmen of the same party as themselves, and of equally bad moral character ; one was ruled by a politician of unsavoury reputa- tion from a different city ; the fifth, a Democrat, was owned by a Republican (1) Federal official, and the sixth by the president of a horse-car [street tramway] company. A couple of letters from these two magnates forced the last-mentioned members to change front on the bill with surprising alacrity.”—Mr. Theodore Roosevelt, ut supra.
Sa
Zi phiae
. CHAP. XLIV WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 519
privately that he is willing to ‘‘see” the directors or the
law-agents of the corporation, and is in many cases bought off by them, keeping his bill on the paper till the last moment so as to prevent some other member from repeating the trick. Even in the North-Western States there is usually a group of such “scallawag” members, who, finding the $300 they receive insufficient, increase their legislative income by levying this form of taxation upon the companies of the State. Nor is the device quite unknown in New England, where a ten hours labour bill, for instance, has frequently ‘been ‘prought i in to frighten the large corporations and other capitalists into inducing its author to drop it, the inducements being such as capitalists can best apply. Every considerable railway keeps an agent or agents continually on the spot while a State legislature is in session, watching the bills brought in and the committees that deal with them. Such an agent sometimes relies on the friends of the railway to defeat these bills, and uses the usual expedients for creating friends. But it is often cheaper and easier to square the assailant.! Of course the committees are the focus of intrigue, and the chair- manship of a committee the position which affords the greatest facilities for an unscrupulous man. ound the committees there buzzes that swarm of professional agents which Americans call “the lobby,” soliciting the members, threatening them with trouble in their constituencies, plying them with all sorts of in- ducements, treating them to dinners, drinks, and cigars.?
In these demoralized States the State Senate is apt to be a worse body than the House, whereas in the better States the Senate is usually the superior body.* The reason is two-fold.
1 The president of a Western railroad, an upright as well as able man, told me that he was obliged to keep constant guard at the capital of the State in which the line lay, while the legislature was sitting, and to use every means to defeat bills aimed at the railway, because otherwise the shareholders would have been ruined. He deplored the necessity. It was a State of comparatively good tone, but there was such a prejudice against railroads among the farming population, that mischievous bills had a chance of success, and therefore desperate remedies were needed.
2 “One senator, who was generally known as ‘the wicked Gibbs,’ spent two years at Albany, in which he pursued his ‘ business’ so shamelessly that his con- stituents refused to send him there again; but he coolly came out a year later and begged for a return to the Assembly on the ground that he was financially em- barrassed, and wished to go to the Assembly in order to retrieve his fortunes on the salary of an Assembly-man, which is $1500 (£300)!”—Mr. J. B. Bishop of New York, in a paper entitled Money in City Hlections, p. 6.
3 Some of my American informants would not admit this ; and some fixed the percentage of corrupt men, even at Albany, much lower than Mr. Roosevelt
520 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
As the Senate is smaller—in New York it consists of 32 members against 128 in the Assembly —the vote of each member is of more consequence, and fetches, when venal, a higher price. Other things being equal, a stronger temptation is more likely to overcome virtue, and other things practically are equal, because it is just as hard to fix responsibility ona senator as on an Assembly man, and the post is no more dignified. And the second reason is that the most adroit and practised intriguers work their way up into the Senate, where their power (which includes the confirmation of appointments) is greater and their vote more valuable. There is a survival of the fittest, but as fitness includes the absence of scruples, this comes in practice to mean the natural selection of the worst.1
I escape from this Stygian pool to make some observations which seem applicable to State legislatures generally, and not merely to the most degraded.
The spirit of localism, surprisingly strong everywhere in America, completely rules them. A member is not a member for his State, chosen by a district but bound to think first of the general welfare of the commonwealth. He is a member for Brownsville, or Pompey, or the Seventh district, and so forth, as the case may be. His first and main duty is to get the most he can for his constituency out of the State treasury, or by means of State legislation. No appeal to the general interest would have weight with him against the interests of that spot. What is more, he is deemed by his colleagues of the same party to be the sole exponent of the wishes of the spot, and solely entitled to handle its affairs. If he approves a bill which affects the place and nothing but the place, that is conclusive. Nobody else has any business to interfere. This rule is the more readily
does. Writers of the pessimistic school make it even higher. I give here and elsewhere what seem to me to be on the whole the best supported views, though, as Herodotus says of the rise of Cyrus, “ knowing how to tell three other paths of story also.”
1 It will be remembered that the picture I am drawing is true of four or five State legislatures only. Similar faults exist in many others, but have not blossomed forth into the same luxuriance, and probably never may. Mr. Theo- dore Roosevelt says, “I have had opportunity of knowing something about the workings of but a few of our other State legislatures ; from what I have heard and seen I should say that we (New York) stand about ona par with those of Pennsyl- vania, Maryland, and Illinois, above that of Louisiana, and below those of Ver- mont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Minnesota, as well as below the national legislature at Washington.” There is great diversity between the legis- latures even of the same State (or Territory) in different years.
CHAP. XLIV WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 521
accepted, because its application all round serves the private interest of every member alike, while members of more enlarged views, who ought to champion the interests of the State and sound general principles of legislation, are rare. When such is the accepted doctrine as well as invariable practice, log-rolling becomes natural and almost legitimate. Each member being the judge of the measure which touches his own constituency, every other member supports that member in passing the measure, expecting in return the like support in a like cause. He who in the public interest opposes the bad bill of another, is certain to find that other opposing, and probably with success, his own bill, however good.
There is in State legislators, particularly in the West, a rest- lessness which, coupled with their limited range of knowledge and undue appreciation of material interests, makes them rather dangerous. Meeting for only a few weeks in the year, or per- haps in two years, they are alarmingly active during those weeks, and run measures through whose results are not appre- hended till months afterwards. It is for this reason, no less than from the fear of jobbery, that the meeting of the legislature is looked forward to with anxiety by the “good citizens” in these communities, and its departure hailed as a deliverance. I once asked the governor of a far Western commonwealth how he got on with his legislature. “I won’t say they are bad men,” he answered, “but the pleasantest sight of the year to me is when at the end of the session I see their coat tails go round the street corner.”
Both this restlessness and the general character of State legislation are illustrated by the enormous numbers of bills intro- duced in each session, comparatively few of which pass, because the time is too short, or opposing influences can be brought to bear on the committees.
There were introduced (in the sessions of 1885 or 1886)—
In Alabama 1469 bills (442 passed)
» Kentucky 2O9O, ee AOU cage) pNOWIS OBE Wp Ck 2 ssstnan( BOD Loja) ,, Lllinois LOT! PMP ES Le ut) eereuneyivaiia LOCO oo 22t.
Dew orkaes2093 f; 296681 >. 3,23
?
In ten States the total number of bills introduced was 12,449,
522 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PARY II
of which 3793 passed. The vast majority of these bills were local or special! In South Carolina, during four years, out of about 900 Acts passed, only 256 related to matters of general public concern. Acts of incorporation, grants of inheritance, changes of names and releases from indebtedness, had consumed a large proportion of the time of the legislature at a great public expense, and to the serious detriment of the State. Yet South Carolina is not a State in which there is much capital or many large undertakings. The place which the petty matters mentioned take in it would, in more prosperous communities, be taken by bills relating to railroad and other companies, and to cities. The expense to which the States are put by their legislatures, with results rather injurious than beneficial, is very great. “In South Carolina, where the session is short, the cost is reported by the secretary of state at only $52,000. But in Pennsylvania, with 158 days of session, it is $686,500 (£137,300). In Con- necticut the last session of ninety days cost $98,000, while the general expenses of the legislature of California are $130,000 for a session of sixty days. The cost of printing, of travelling, and other incidental expenses must be added in order to form an accurate estimate of the burden imposed on the tax-payers of the States to carry on this badly-managed business of law-making, which varies from a daily average cost of about $1000 per diem for every legislative session to over $4000 per diem, making an aggregate in the total number of States, and in Congress, which it is impossible to ascertain with exactness, but which cannot, I think, be less than $10,000,000 (£2,000,000), not as an excep- tional outlay, but as the price paid for current legislation.” 3 Nothing is more remarkable about these State legislators than
1 Even among the Acts which appear in the statute-books of the States, under the heading of general laws there are many of a local or special character. I find, on referring to the laws of Louisiana passed in 1886, that of 96 so-called general Acts passed, 30 were really local or special. In Nebraska, in 1887, there were passed 114 general Acts, 22 of which, while classed among general laws, were really local or personal, and 17 were described as special. In Minnesota, in 1887, of 265 classed as general Acts, 36 seem from their titles to be local or special. But it is not always easy to discover the substance from the title, so the number of special Acts classed as general may be still larger.
As remarked in an earlier chapter, the total number of bills of all kinds intro- duced in 1885 into the British Parliament, which is the sole legislative authority for a population of thirty-eight millions, was 481, of which 282 passed.
* I take these figures from the instructive and entertaining presidential address of Mr. William Allen Butler to the American Bar Association at its annual meeting in 1886. 3 Mr. W. A, Butler’s address ut supra.
CHAP, XLIV WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 523
their timidity. No one seems to think of having an opinion of his own. In matters which touch the interests of his constituents, a member is, of course, their humble servant. In burning party questions—they are few, and mostly personal—he goes with his party. In questions of general public policy he looks to see how the cat jumps; and is ready to vote for anything which the people, or any active section of the people, cry out for, though of course he may be secretly unfriendly, and may therefore slily try to spoil a measure. This want of independence has some good results. It enables a small minority of zealous men, backed by a few newspapers, to carry schemes of reform which the majority regard with indifference or hostility. Thus in bodies so depraved as the legislatures of New York and Pennsylvania, bills have lately been passed greatly improving the charters of cities, and even establishing an improved system of appointments to office. A few energetic reformers went to Albany and Harrisburg to strengthen the hands of the little knot of members who battle for good government there, and partly frightened, partly coaxed a majority of the Senate and House into adopting proposals opposed to the interests of professional politicians. Some six years ago, two or three high-minded and sagacious ladies ob- tained by their presence at Albany the introduction of valuable reforms into the charitable institutions of New York city. The ignorance and heedlessness of the “ professionals,” who do not always see the results of legislative changes, and do not look for- ward beyond the next few months, help to make such triumphs possible ; and thus, as the Bible tells us that the wrath of man shall praise God, the faults of politicians are turned to work for righteousness.
In the recent legislation of many States, especially Western States, there is a singular mixture of philanthropy and humani- tarianism with the folly and jobbery which have been described already, like threads of gold and silver woven across a warp of dirty sacking. Every year sees bills passed to restrict the sale of liquor, to prevent the sale of indecent or otherwise demoraliz- ing literature, to protect women and children, to stamp out lotteries and gambling houses, to improve the care of the blind, the insane, and the poor, which testify to a warm and increasing interest in all good works. These measures are to be explained, not merely by that power which an active and compact minority enjoys of getting its own way against a crowd of men bent each
iA
524 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
on his own private gain, and therefore not working together for
other purposes, but also by the real sympathy which many of ,
the legislators, especially in the rural districts, feel for morality and for suffering. Even the corrupt politicians of Albany were moved by the appeals of the philanthropic ladies to whom I have referred ; much more then would it be an error to think of the average legislator as a bad man, merely because he will join in a job, or deal unfairly with a railroad. The moral standard of Western America is not quite the same as that of England, just as the standard of England differs from that of Germany or France. It is both higher and lower. Some sins excite more anger or disgust than they do in England ; some are more lightly forgiven, or more quickly forgotten. Laxity in the discharge of a political trust belongs to the latter category. The newspapers accuse everybody ; the ordinary citizen can seldom tell who is innocent and who is guilty. He makes a sort of compromise in his own mind by thinking nobody quite black, but everybody gray. And he goes on to think that what everybody does cannot be very sinful.
CHAPTER XLV REMEDIES FOR THE FAULTS OF STATE GOVERNMENTS
Tue defects in State governments, which our examination of their working has disclosed, are not those we should have expected. It might have been predicted, and it was at one time believed, that these authorities, consumed by jealousy and stimulated by ambition, would have been engaged in constant efforts to extend the sphere of their action and encroach on the National government. This does not happen, and seems most unlikely to happen. The people of each State are now not more attached to the government of their own commonwealth than to the Federal government of the nation, whose growth has made even the greatest State seem insig- nificant beside it.
A study of the frame of State government, in which the executive department is absolutely severed from the legislative, — might have suggested that the former would become too inde- pendent, misusing its powers for personal or party purposes, while public business would suffer from the want of concert between the two great authorities, that which makes and that which carries out the law.
This also has proved in practice to be no serious evil. The legislature might indeed conceivably work better if the governor, or some of his chief officials, could sit in it and exercise an influ- ence on its deliberations. Such an adaptation of the English cabinet system has, however, never been thought of for American States ; and the example of the Provincial legislatures of Canada, in each of which there is a responsible ministry sitting in the legislature, does not seem to recommend it for imitation. Those who founded the State governments did not desire to place any executive leaders in a representative assembly. Probably they were rather inclined to fear that the governor, not being account-
526 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
able to the legislature, would retain too great an independence. The recent creation of various administrative officers or Boards has gone some way to meet the difficulties which the incompe- tence of the legislatures causes, for these officers or Boards fre- quently prepare bills which some member of the legislature intro- duces, and which are put through without opposition, perhaps even without notice, except from a handful of members. On the whole, the executive arrangements of the State work well, though they might, in the opinion of some judicious publicists, be improved by vesting the appointment of the chief officials in the governor, instead of leaving it to direct popular election. This would tend to give more unity of purpose and action to the administration. The collisions which occur in practice between the governor and the legislature relate chiefly to appointments, that is to say, to personal matters, not involving issues of State policy.
The real blemishes in the system of State government are all found in the composition or conduct of the legislatures. They are the following :—
Inferiority in point of knowledge, of skill, and sometimes of
conscience, of the bulk of the men who fill these bodies.
Improvidence in matters of finance.
Heedlessness in passing administrative bills.
Want of proper methods for dealing with local and special bills.
Failure of public opinion adequately to control legislation, and
particularly special bills.
The practical result of these blemishes has been to create a large mass of State and local indebtedness which ought never to have been incurred, to allow foolish experiments in law-making to be tried, and to sanction a vast mass of private enterprises, in which public rights and public interests become the sport of speculators, or a source of gain to monopolists, with the incidental consequence of demoralizing the legislators themselves and creat-
ing an often unjust prejudice against all corporate undertakings. _ What are the checks or remedies which have been provided to limit or suppress these evils? Any one who has followed the account given of the men who compose the legislatures and the methods they follow will have felt that these checks must be con- siderable, else the results would have been worse than those we see. All remedies are directed against the legislative power, and may be arranged under four heads.
First, there is the division of the legislature into two houses.
CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 527
A job may have been smuggled through one house, but the money needed to push it through the other may be wanting. Some wild scheme, professing to benefit the farmers, or the cattlemen, or the railroad employés, may, during its passage through the Assembly, rouse enough attention from sensible people to enable them to stop it in the Senate. The mere tendency of two chambers to disagree with one another is deemed a benefit by those who hold, as the Americans do, that every new measure is prima facie likely to do more harm than good. Most bills are bad—ergo, kill as many as you can. Lach house, moreover, has, even in such demoralized State legislatures as those of New York
or Pennsylvania, a satisfaction, if not an interest, in unveiling
the tricks of the other.
Secondly, there is the veto of the governor. How much the Americans value this appears from the fact that, whereas in 1789 there was only one State, Massachusetts, which vested this power in the chief magistrate, all of the present thirty-eight States ex- cept four (only one of these a new State) give it to him. Some Constitutions contain the salutary provision that the governor may reject one or more items of an appropriation bill while approving the bill as a whole; and this has been found to strengthen his hands immensely in checking the waste of public money on bad enterprises. This veto power, the great stand-by of the people of the States, illustrates admirably the merits of concentrated responsibility. The citizens, in choosing the gover- nor to represent the collective authority of the whole State, lay on him the duty of examining every bill on its merits. He can- not shelter himself behind the will of the representatives of the people, because he is appointed to watch and check those repre- sentatives as a policeman watches a suspect. He is bound to reject the bill, not only if it seems to him to infringe the Constitution of the State, but also if he thinks it in any wise injurious to the public, on pain of being himself suspected of carelessness, or of complicity in some corrupt design. ‘The legis- lature may, of course, pass the bill over his veto by a two-thirds vote; but although there may exist a two-thirds majority in favour of the measure, they may fear, after the veto has turned the lamp of public opinion upon it, to take so strong a step. There are, of course, great differences between one governor and another, as well as between one State and another, as regards the honesty with which the power is exercised, for it may be, and
528 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
sometimes is, used by a ‘Ring’ governor to defeat measures of reform. But it is a real and effective power everywhere ; and in such a State as New York, where the importance of the office often secures the election of an able and courageous man, it has rendered inestimable services.!
Thirdly, there are limitations imposed on the competence of the legislature. In the last chapter but one some of these limita- tions have been mentioned, the most numerous, and at present the most important of which relate to special and local (or what would be called in England “ private”) bills. I have remarked that these bills, while they destroy the harmony and simplicity of the law, and waste the time of the legislature, are also a fertile source of jobbery.2. To expunge them or restrict them to cases where a special statute was really needed, would be a great benefit. ‘To some extent this has been effected by the constitu- tional prohibitions I have described. Tlinois, for instance, has by such prohibitions reduced her sessional statutes to about 300
1 Tt may be suggested that the existence of this ultimate remedy tends to make good members relax their opposition to bad bills, because they know that the veto will kill them. This sometimes happens, but is a less evil than the disuse of the veto would be.
2 “In twelve States the legislature is forbidden to create any corporation whatever, municipalities included, except by general law, and in thirteen others to create by special Act any except municipal corporations, or those to which no other law is applicable. In some States corporations can be created by special Act only for municipal, charitable, or reformatory purposes. Such provisions are not intended to discourage the formation of private corporations. On the con- trary, in all these States general laws exist under which they can be formed with great facility. Indeed the defects in some of these statutes, and their failure to provide safeguards against some at least of the very evils which they were intended to meet, might well suggest to legislators the question whether in avoiding the Seylla of special legislation they have not been drawn into the Charybdis of franchises indiscriminately bestowed. Perhaps the time will come when recom- mendations such as those urged by the New York railroad commission will be acted on, and the promoters of a new railroad will be obliged to furnish some better reason for its existence, and for their exercising the sovereign power of eminent domain, than the chance of forcing a company already established to buy them out—or, failing that, the alternative of being sold out under foreclosure, pending a receivership.” —Hitchcock, State Constitutions, p. 36.
“The legislature which can grant or withhold chartered privileges at pleasure wields an immense power. And it will also readily be seen what a great field for favouritism and jobbery exists, when special Acts of incorporation are required for each case in which special favours and special privileges may be given away by a legislature that may be corruptly influenced, without imposing any reciprocal obligation on the corporation. It will be safe to say that fully two-thirds of the lobbyism, jobbery, and log-rolling, the fraud and trickery that are common to our State legislatures, is due to this power of creating private corporations.” —Ford, Citizens’ Manual, ii. p. 68,
CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 529
pages, and Iowa averages only 200-250 pages, whereas the Wisconsin statutes of 1885 reached 2000 pages, there being in that State far less effective restrictions! But the powers of evil do not yield without a battle. All sorts of evasions are tried, and some succeed. Suppose, for instance, that there is a pro- hibition in the Constitution of New York to pass any but general laws relating to the government of cities. An Act is passed which is expressed to apply to cities with a population exceeding one hundred thousand but less than two hundred thousand. There happens to be only one such city in the State, viz. Buffalo, but as there might be more, the law is general, and escapes the prohibition.
I owe to the kindness of a legal friend a very recent instance of another way in which the provisions against special legislation are evaded, viz. by passing Acts which, because they purport to amend general Acts, are themselves deemed general. The Con- stitution of New York prohibits the legislature from passing any private or local Act incorporating villages, or providing for build- ing bridges. A general Act is passed in 1885 for the incorpora- tion of villages, with general provisions as to bridges. Next year the following Act is passed, which I give verbatim. It amends the Act of 1885, by taking out of it all the counties in the State except Westchester, and then excludes application of the Act to two towns in Westchester. It is thus doubly a “private or local Act,” but the prohibition of the Constitution is got round.
CHAP. 556.
AN ACT to amend chapter two hundred and ninety-one of the laws of eighteen hundred and seventy, entitled ‘‘An Act for the Incorporation of Villages.” Passed June 4, 1886; three-fifths being present. The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly, do enact as follows :—
Section 1.—Section two of chapter four hundred Village Incorporation and fifty of the laws of eighteen hundred and eighty- five, is hereby amended so as to read as follows :—
Act of 1885, as t i Raia : a ae Section 2.—All of the counties in this State are
bridges, to apply hereby exempted from the provisions of this Act except the county of Westchester, but nothing in Galygio pases this Act contained shall be construed so as to apply
Westchester County. to the towns of Greenburgh and Mount Pleasant in g said county of Westchester. Section 3.—This Act shall take effect immediately.
1 That the evil of special legislation is generally felt to be serious is proved among other things by the disabilities in this regard which Congressional statutes have imposed upon the legislatures of the Territories.
VOL. I 2M
530 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
Where evasions of this kind become frequent the confusion of the statute-book is worse than ever, because you cannot tell with- out examination whether an Act is general or special.
The reader will have noticed in the heading of the Act just quoted the words “three-fifths being present.” This is one of the numerous safeguards imposed on the procedure of the State legislatures. Among others we find provisions that every bill shall be passed by a certain proportional majority, that it shall be read “fully and distinctly” (whatever that may be deemed to mean), on three different days (Ohio, and other States); that it “shall include only one subject which shall be expressed in its title” (nearly all States); that “no Act shall be revised or amended by mere reference to its title, but the Act revised or section amended shall be set forth at full length” (many States); that ‘‘no Act shall be passed which shall provide that any exist- ing law, or any part thereof, shall be made or deemed a part of such Act, or which shall enact that any existing law, or any part thereof, shall be applicable except by inserting it in such Act” (New York and other States'). Sometimes it is provided that no bill shall be introduced into either house within a certain period after the beginning or before the end of the session, so as to prevent bills from being smuggled through in the hurry of the last days.”
1 All these practices which American Constitutions condemn exist in the British Parliament, though the standing orders and the traditions of both Houses prevent them from being seriously harmful. However, the habit of incorporating an earlier statute with a later one by mere reference, certainly tends to confuse the law ; and sometimes the inclusion in one statute of wholly different matters operates harshly on persons who have failed to note the minor contents of a bill whose principal purpose does not affect them. The commoners of the New Forest in Hampshire were, some years ago, much surprised to wake up one morning and find that the Crown had smuggled through Parliament, in an Act relating to fore- shores in Scotland, a clause which seriously affected their interests.
2 “A practice has sprung up of evading this constitutional provision by intro- ducing a new bill after the time has expired when it may constitutionally be done, as an amendment to some pending bill, the whole of which, except the enacting clause, is struck out to make way for it. Thus, the member who thinks he may have occasion for the introduction of a new bill after the constitutional period has expired, takes care to introduce sham bills in due season, which he can use as stocks to graft upon, and which he uses irrespective of their character or contents. The sham bill is perhaps a bill to incorporate the city of iam. One of the member’s constituents applies to him for legislative permission to construct a dam across the Wild Cat River. Forthwith, by amendment, the bill, entitled a bill to incorporate the city of Siam, has all after the enacting clause stricken out, and it is made to provide, as its sole object, that John Doe may construct a dam across the Wild Cat. With this title, and in this form it is passed; but the
CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS ; 531
The inventive genius of American legislators finds or makes many holes in the net which the people have tried to throw over them by the Constitution. Yet, though there be none of the restrictions and regulations mentioned which is not sometimes violated or evaded, they have, on the whole, worked well. The enemy is held at bay, and a great deal of bad legislation is pre- vented. Some bills have to be dropped, because too plainly repugnant to the Constitution to be worth carrying farther. The more ignorant members do not always apprehend where the difficulty lies. They can barely read the Constitution, and the nature of its legal operation is as far beyond them as the cause of thunder is beyond cats. A friend of mine who sat for some years in the New York Assembly was once importuned by an Irish member (now in Congress) to support that particular mem- ber’s little bill. He answered that he could not, because the bill was against the Constitution. ‘Och, Mr. Robert,” was the reply, “shure the Constitootion should never be allowed to come between frinds.”
Some bills again it is the duty of the governor to veto, because they violate a Constitutional restriction; while of those that pass him unscathed, a fair number fall victims to the courts of law. After the explanations given in an earlier chapter, I need only say here that the enforcement of the limitations imposed by a State Constitution necessarily rests with the judges, since it is they who pronounce whether or no a statute has transgressed the bounds which the fundamental instrument sets, or whether a Constitutional amendment has been duly carried.}
Some one may remark that there are two material differences between the position of these State judges and that of the Federal judges. The latter are not appointed by a State, and are there- house then considerately amends the title to correspond with the purpose of the
bill, and the law is passed, and the Constitution at the same time saved !””— Cooley, Constit. Limit. p. 169 note.
1 A remarkable instance of the technical literalism with which the Courts some- times enforce Constitutional restrictions is afforded by the fate of a recent liquor Prohibition amendment to the Constitution of Iowa. This amendment had been passed by both Houses of the State legislature in two successive legislatures, had been submitted to the people and enacted by a large majority, had been pro- claimed by the governor and gone into force. It was subsequently discovered that one House of the first legislature had, through the carelessness of a clerk, neglected to “ spread the Amendment, in full on its journal,” as prescribed by the Constitution. The point being brought before the Supreme Court of Iowa, it was held that the Amendment, owing to this informality, had not been duly passed, and was wholly void.—Dr, A. Shaw, ué supra.
\
ry <- ial —— J . ho er oe ‘ i “ Pe ae t ‘ j ma. i Pa. : de ’ : 7 A ,
532 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il
fore in a more independent position when any question of conflict between State laws or Constitutions and the Federal Constitution or statutes comes before them. Moreover they hold office for life, whereas the State judge usually holds for a term of years, and has his re-election to think of. Can the State judge then be expected to show himself equally bold in declaring a State statute to be unconstitutional ? Will he not offend the legislature, and the party managers who control it, by flying in their faces?
The answer is that although the judge may displease the legislature if he decides against the validity of an unconstitutional statute, he may displease the people if he decides for it; and it is safer to please the people than the legislature. The people at large may know little about the matter, but the legal profession know, and are sure to express their opinion. The profession look to the courts to save them and their clients from the heed- lessness or improbity of the legislature, and will condemn a judge who fails in this duty. Accordingly, the judges seldom fail. They knock about State statutes most unceremoniously, and they seldom suffer for doing so. In one case only is their position a dangerous one. When the people, possessed by some strong desire or sentiment, have either by the provisions of a new Constitution, or by the force of clamour, driven the legislature to enact some measure meant to cure a pressing ill, they may turn angrily upon the judge who holds that measure to have been unconstitutional. This has several times happened, and is always liable to happen where elective judges hold office for short terms, with the unfortunate result of weakening the fortitude of the judges. In 1786 the supreme court of Rhode Island decided that an Act passed by the legislature was invalid, because con- travening the provisions of the Colonial Charter (which was then still the Constitution of the State), securing to every accused person the benefit of trial by jury.! The legislature were furious, and proceeded to impeach the judges for disobeying their will. The impeachment failed, but the judges were not re-elected by the legislature when their term of office expired at the end of
1 See p. 244, ante. The Act was one for forcing State paper money into circu- lation by imposing a penalty, recoverable on summary conviction without a jury, on whoever should refuse to receive on the same terms as specie the bills of a State-chartered bank. No question of the United States Constitution could arise, because it did not yet exist. To these Rhode Island judges belongs the credit not only of having resisted a reckless multitude, but of having set the first example in American history of the exercise of a salutary function.
CHAP, XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 533
the year, and were replaced by a more subservient bench, which held the statute valid. In Ohio, the legislature passed in 1805 an Act which Judge Pease, in a case arising under it, held to be repugnant to the Constitution of Ohio, as well as to the Federal Constitution, and accordingly declined to enforce. In 1808, he and another judge of the supreme court of the State who had concurred with him, were impeached by the House before the Senate of Ohio, but were acquitted. In 1871, the legislature of Illinois passed a law, intending to carry out a provision of the Constitution of 1870, which was held unconstitutional by Judge Lawrence, greatly to the disappointment of the farmers, who had expected valuable results from it. He was not impeached, but when shortly afterwards he sought re-election, he was defeated solely on the ground of this decision. These instances show that the courts ‘have had to fight for their freedom in the dis- charge of the duty which the Constitutions throw on them. But the paucity of such conflicts shows that this freedom is now generally recognized, and may be deemed, at least for the present, to be placed above the storms of popular passion.”
It will be seen from what has been said that the judges are an essential part of the machinery of State government. But they are so simply as judges, and not as invested with political powers or duties. They have not received, any more than the Federal judges, a special commission to restrain the legislature or pronounce on the validity of its acts. There is not a word in
1 TI quote from Mr. ; Hadley’s book on railroad transportation-(through Dr. Hitchcock’s essay already referred to) the following account of the circum- stances :—“ The Constitutional Convention of Illinois in 1870 made an important declaration concerning State control of railway rates, on the basis of which a law was passed in 1871 establishing a system of maxima. This law was pronounced unconstitutional by Judge Lawrence. The result was that he immediately after- wards failed of re-election, solely on this ground. The defeat of Judge Lawrence showed the true significance of the farmers’ movement [the so-called Granger movement]. They were concerned in securing what they felt to be their rights, and were unwilling that any constitutional barrier should be made to defeat the popular will. They had reached the point where they regarded many of the forms of law as mere technicalities. They were dangerously near the point where revolutions begin. But they did not pass the point. The law of 1873 avoided the issue raised by Judge Lawrence against that of 1871. Instead of directly fixing maxima, it provided that rates must be reasonable, and then pro- vided for a commission to fix reasonable rates.” The courage of Judge Lawrence was therefore not thrown away ; it cost him his place, but it served the people and vindicated the law. d :
2 There have of course been other instances in which judges have been im- peached or removed ; but I am here dealing only with those in which the ground of complaint was the declaring a legislative act to be invalid.
534 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
the State Constitutions, any more than in the Federal Constitu- tions, conferring any such right upon the courts, or indeed con- ferring any other right- than all courts of law must necessarily enjoy. When they declare a statute unconstitutional they do so merely in their ordinary function of expounding the law of the State, its fundamental law as well as its laws of inferior authority, just as an English judge might hold an order made by the Queen in Council to be invalid, because in excess of the powers granted by the Act of Parliament under which it was made. It would be as clearly the duty of an English county court judge so to hold as of the highest court of appeal. So it is the duty of the humblest American State judge to decide on the constitutionality of a statute.
So far we have been considering restrictions imposed on the competence of the legislature, or on the methods of its procedure. We now come to the fourth and last of the checks which the prudence of American States imposes. It is a very simple, not to say naive, one. It consists in limiting the time during which the legislature may sit. Formerly these bodies sat, like the English Parliament, so long as they had business to do. The business seldom took long. When it was done, the farmers and lawyers naturally wished to go home, and home they went. But when the class of professional politicians grew up, these whole- some tendencies lost their power over a section of the members. Politics was their business, and they had none other to call them back to the domestic hearth.1 They had even a motive for pro- longing the session, because they prolonged their legislative salary, which was usually paid by the day. Thus it became the interest of the tax-payer to shorten the session. His interest, however, was still stronger in cutting short the jobs and impro- vident bestowal of moneys and franchises in which he found his representatives employed. Accordingly twenty-two States have fixed a number of days beyond which the legislature may not sit. Most of these fix it absolutely ; but a few prefer the method of cutting off the pay of their legislators after the prescribed number of days has expired, so that if they do continue to devote | themselves still longer to the work of law-making, their virtue
1 The English Parliament found the tendency of members to slip away so strong that in the sixteenth century it passed an Act ‘‘ that no knight of the shire or burgess do depart before the end of Parliament,” which inflicted on the member
leaving without the permission of Mr. Speaker, the penalty of losing “all those sums of money which he should or ought to have had for his wages.”
CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 535
shall be its own reward.! Experience has, however, disclosed a danger in these absolutely limited sessions. It is that of haste and recklessness in rushing bills through without due discussion. Sometimes it happens that a bill introduced in response to a vehement popular demand is carried with a run (so to speak), because the time for considering it cannot be extended, whereas longer consideration would have disclosed its dangers. An ill- framed railway bill was thus lately lost in the Iowa legislature because full discussion (there being no time-limit) brought out its weak points. Hence some States have largely extended their sessions.” Thus California has recently lengthened the days during which her legislators may receive pay from 60 to 100; and Colorado in 1885 extended the maximum of her session from 40 to 90 days, also raising legislative pay from $4 to $7 per diem.
Many recent Constitutions have tried another and probably a better expedient than that of limiting the length of sessions. They have made sessions less frequent. At one time every legislature met once a year. Now in all the States but six (all of these six belonging to the original thirteen) it is permitted to meet only once in two years. Within the last ten years, at least six States have changed their annual sessions to biennial. It does not appear that the interests of the commonwealths suffer by this suspension of the action of their chief organ of govern- ment. On the contrary, they get on so much better without a legislature that certain bold spirits ask whether the principle might not with advantage be pushed farther. As Mr. Butler says—
“For a people claiming pre-eminence in the sphere of popular government, it seems hardly creditable that in their seeming despair of a cure for the chronic evils of legislation, they should be able to mitigate them only by making them intermittent.
1 Thus the Constitution of Oregon, for instance, gives its members $3 a day, but provides that they shall never receive more than $120 in all, thus practically limiting the session to forty days. Texas is a little more liberal, for her Consti- tution is content to reduce the pay after sixty days from $5 to $2 per day, at which reduced rate members may apparently go on as long as they please. All the States which fix a limit of time are Southern or Western, except Pennsylvania and Maryland, whose legislatures certainly need every check that can be applied. The forty days session of Georgia may be extended by a two-thirds vote of an absolute majority of each House.
2 I give what I have been able to ascertain, but may say in passing that it is not easy even in America, and very difficult in Europe, to discover exactly what amendments have been made in the Constitutions of the States.
yt ae
536 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS "PART II
Under the biennial system the relief enjoyed in what are called the ‘off-years’ seems to have reconciled the body politic of the several States which have adopted it to the risk of an aggrava- tion of the malady when the legislative year comes round and the old symptoms recur.
“The secretaries of State (of the several States) with whom I have communicated concur in certifying that no public incon- venience is caused by the biennial system ; and one of them, of the State of Nebraska, in answer to my query if biennial sessions occasion any public inconvenience, writes ‘None whatever. The public interests would be better subserved by having legislative sessions held only once in four years.’ ”
The Americans seem to reason thus: “Since a legislature is very far gone from righteousness, and of its own nature inclined to do evil, the less chance it has of doing evil the better. If it meets, it will pass bad laws. Let us therefore prevent it from meeting.”
They are no doubt right as practical men. They are consist- ent, as sons of the Puritans, in their application of the doctrine of original sin. But this is a rather pitiful result for self-governing democracy to have arrived at.
The European reader will ask, “‘ Why all these efforts to deal with the symptoms of the malady, instead of striking at the root of the malady itself? Why not reform the legislatures by induc- ing good men to enter them, and keeping a more constantly vigilant public opinion fixed upon them ?”
The answer to this very pertinent question will be found in the chapters of Part III. which follow. I will only so far anticipate what is there stated as to observe that the better citizens have found it so difficult and troublesome to reform the legislatures that they have concluded to be content with curing such and so many symptoms as they can find medicines for, and waiting to see in what new direction the virus will work. “ After all,” they say, “the disease, though it is painful and vexing, does not endanger the life of the patient, does not even diminish his strength. The worst that the legislatures can do is to waste some money, and try some foolish experiments from which the good sense of the people will presently withdraw. Every one has his crosses to bear, and ours are comparatively light.” All which is true enough, but ignores one important feature in the situation, viz. the fact that the tremendous influence exerted by wealth
CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 537
and the misuse of public rights permitted to capitalists, and especially to companies, have created among the masses of the people ideas which may break out in demands for legislation of a new and dangerous kind.
The survey of the State governments which we have now completed suggests several reflections.
One of these is that the political importance of the States is no longer what it was in the early days of the Republic. Although the States have grown enormously in wealth and popu- lation, they have declined relatively to the central government. The excellence of State laws and the merits of a State adminis- tration make less difference to the inhabitants than formerly, because the hand of the National government is more frequently felt. The questions which the State deals with, largely as they influence the welfare of the citizen, do not touch his imagination like those which Congress handles, because the latter determine the relations of the Republic to the rest of the world, and affect all the area that lies between the two oceans. The State set out
- as an isolated and self-sufficing commonwealth. It is now merely a part.of a far grander whole, which seems to be slowly absorbing its functions and stunting its growth, as the great tree stunts the shrubs over which its spreading boughs have begun to cast their shade.
I do not mean to say that the people have ceased to care for their States; far from it. They are proud of their States, even where there may be little to be proud of. That passionate love of competition which possesses English-speaking men, makes them eager that their State should surpass, in the number of the clocks it makes, the hogs it kills, the pumpkins it rears, the neighbour- ing States, that their particular star should shine at least as
brightly as the other thirty-seven in the national flag. But if these commonwealths meant to their citizens what they did in the days of the Revolution, if they commanded an equal measure of their loyalty, and influenced as largely their individual welfare, the State legislatures would not be left to professionals or third- rate men. The truth is that the State has shrivelled up It retains its old legal powers over the citizens, its old legal rights as against the central government. But it does not interest its citizens as it once did! And as the central government over-
1 In 1782 Fisher Ames wrote: ‘‘ Instead of feeling as a nation, a State is our country. We look with indifference, often with hatred, fear, and aversion to the
538 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il
shadows it in one direction, so the great cities have encroached upon it in another. The population of a single city is sometimes a fourth or a fifth part of the whole population of the State ; and city questions interest this population more than State questions do, city officials have begun to rival or even to dwarf State officials.
Observe, however, that while the growth of the Union has relatively dwarfed the State, the absolute increase of the State in population has changed the character of the State itself. In 1790 seven of the thirteen original States had each of them less than 300,000, only one more than 500,000 inhabitants. Now at least twenty-three have more than 1,000,000, and six of these more than 2,000,000. We must expect to find that, in spite of railroads and telegraphs, the individual citizens will know less of one another, will have less personal acquaint- ance with their leading men, and less personal interest in the affairs of the community than in the old days when the State was no more populous than an English county like Bedford or Somerset. Thus the special advantages of local government have to a large extent vanished from the American States of to-day. They are local bodies in the sense of having no great imperial interests to fire men’s minds. They are not local in the sense of giving their members a familiar knowledge and a lively interest in the management of their affairs. Hamilton may have been right in thinking that the large States ought to be subdivided. At any rate it is to this want of direct local interest on the part of the people, that some of the faults of their legislatures may be ascribed.
The chief lesson which a study of the more vicious among the State legislatures teaches, is that power does not necessarily
bring responsibility in its train. I should be ashamed to write .
other States.” — Works, i. p. 118 (quoted by Von Holst). Even in 1811 Josiah Quincy said in Congress: “Sir, I confess it, the first public love of my heart is the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. There is my fireside : there are the tombs of my ancestors.” —Putnam’s American Orations, i. p. 168. No one would speak in that strain now.
1 On the other hand I have heard it argued that there are some large States in which the mischievous action of the multitude of a great city is held in check by the steadier rural voters. If such States had been subdivided, the subdivision He happened to contain the great city would lie at the mercy of this multi- tude.
Hamilton’s reason seems to have been a fear that the States would be too strong for the National government.
CHAP, XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 539
down so bald a platitude, were it not that it is one of those
platitudes which are constantly forgotten or ignored. People who know well enough that, in private life, wealth or rank or any other kind of power is as likely to mar a man as to make him, to lower as to raise his sense of duty, have nevertheless contracted the habit of talking as if human nature changed when it entered public life, as if the mere possession of public functions, whether of voting or of legislating, tended of itself to secure their proper exercise. We know that power does not purify men in despotic governments, but we talk as if it did so in free governments. Every one would of course admit, if the point were put flatly to him, that power alone is not enough, but that there must be added to power, in the case of the voter, a direct interest in the choice of good men, in the case of the legislator, responsibility to the voters, in the case of both, a measure of enlightenment and honour. What the legislatures of the worst States show is not merely the need for the existence of a sound public opinion, for such a public opinion exists, but the need for methods by which it can be brought into efficient action upon representatives, who, if they are left to themselves, and are not individually persons with a sense of honour and a character to lose, will be at least as bad in public life as they could be in private. The greatness of the scale on which they act, and of the material interests they control, will do little to inspire them. New York and Pennsyl- vania are by far the largest and wealthiest States in the Union. Their legislatures are confessedly the worst.
a a ., ae
CHAPTER XLVI STATE POLITICS
IN the last preceding chapters I have attempted to describe first the structure of the machinery of State governments, and then this machinery in motion as well as at rest,—that is to say, the actual working of the various departments in their relations to one another. We may now ask, What is the motive power which sets and keeps these wheels and pistons going? What is the steam that drives the machine ?
The steam is supplied by the political parties. In speaking of the parties I must, to some slight extent, anticipate what will be more fully explained in Part IIL: but it seems worth while to incur this inconvenience for the sake of bringing together all that refers specially to the States, and of completing the picture of their political life.?
The States evidently present some singular conditions for the development of a party system. They are self-governing com- munities with large legislative and administrative powers, exist- ing inside a much greater community of which they are for many purposes independent. They must have parties, and this com- munity, the Federal Union, has also parties. What is the rela- tion of the one set of parties to the other ?
There are three kinds of relations possible, viz.—
Each State might have a party of its own, entirely uncon- nected with the national parties, but created by State issues— i.€@. advocating or opposing measures which fall within the exclusive competence of the State.
Each State might have parties which, while based upon State issues, were influenced by the national parties, and in some sort of affiliation with the latter.
1 Many readers may find it better to skip this chapter until they have read
those which follow (Chapters LIII.-LVI.) upon the history, tenets, and present condition of the great national parties.
CHAP, XLVI STATE POLITICS 541
The parties in each State might be merely local subdivisions of the national parties, the national issues and organizations swallowing up, or rather pushing aside, the State issues and the organizations formed to deal with them.
The nature of the State governments would lead us to expect to find the first of these relations existing. The sphere of the State is different, some few topics of concurrent jurisdiction excepted, from that of the National government. What the State can deal with, the National government cannot touch. What the National government can deal with lies beyond the province of the State. The State governor and legislature are
_ elected without relation to the President and Congress, and when
elected have nothing to do with those authorities. Hence a question fit to be debated and voted upon in Congress can seldom be a question fit to be also debated and voted upon in a State legislature, and the party formed for advocating its passage through Congress will have no scope for similar action within a State, while on the other hand a State party, seeking to carry some State law, will have no motive for approaching Congress, which can neither help it nor hurt it. The great questions which have divided the Union since its foundation, and on which national parties have been based, have been questions of foreign policy, of the creation of a national bank, of a protective tariff, of the extension of slavery, of the reconstruction of the South after the war. With none of these had a State legislature any title to deal: all lay within the Federal sphere. So at this moment the questions of currency and of the disposal of the surplus, which are among the most important questions before the country, are outside the province of the State governments. We might therefore expect that the State parties would be as distinct from the national parties as are the State governments from the Federal.
The contrary has happened. The national parties have engulfed the State parties. The latter have disappeared absol- utely as independent bodies, and survive merely as branches of the national parties, working each in its own State for the tenets and purposes which a national party professes and seeks to attain. So much is this the case that one may say that a State party has rarely any marked local colour, that it is seldom and then but slightly the result of a compromise between State issues and national issues, such as I have indicated in suggesting the
542 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
second form of possible relation. The national issues have thrown matters of State competence entirely into the shade, and have done so almost from the foundation of the Republic. The local parties which existed in 1789 in most or all of the States were soon absorbed into the Federalists and Democratic Repub- licans who sprang into life after the adoption of the Federal Constitution.
The results of this phenomenon have been so important that we may stop to examine its causes.
Within four years from their origin, the strife of the two great national parties became intense over the whole Union. From 1793 till 1815 grave issues of foreign policy, complicated with issues of domestic policy, stirred men to fierce passion and strenuous effort. State business, being more commonplace, exciting less feeling, awakening no interest outside State bound- aries, fell into the background. ‘The leaders who won fame and followers were national leaders; and a leader came to care for his influence within his State chiefly as a means of gaining strength in the wider national field. Even so restlessly active and versatile a people as the Americans cannot feel warmly about two sets of diverse interests at the same time, cannot create and work simultaneously two distinct and unconnected party organi- zations. The State, therefore, had, to use the transatlantic phrase, “to take the back seat.” Before 1815 the process was complete ; the dividing lines between parties in every State were those drawn by national questions. And from 1827 down to 1877 the renewed keenness of party warfare kept these parties constantly on the stretch, and forced them to use all the support they could win in a State for the purposes of the national struggle.
There was one way in which predominance in a State could be so directly used. The Federal senators are chosen by the State legislatures. The party therefore which gains a majority in the State legislature gains two seats in the smaller and more powerful branch of Congress. As parties in Congress are generally pretty equally balanced, this advantage is well worth fighting for, and is a constant spur to the efforts of national politicians to carry the State elections in a particular State. Besides, in America, above all countries, nothing succeeds like success ; and in each State the party which carries the State elections is held likely to carry the elections for the national House of Representatives, and for the President also.
CHAP, XLVI STATE POLITICS 543
Moreover, there are the offices. The Federal offices in each State are very numerous. They are in the gift of whichever national party happens to be in power, #.e counts among its members the President for the time being. He bestows them upon those who in each State have worked hardest for the national party there. Thus the influence of Washington and its presiding deities is everywhere felt, and even the party which is in a minority in a particular State, and therefore loses its share of the State offices, is cheered and fed by morsels of patronage from the national table. The national parties are in fact all- pervasive, and leave little room for the growth of any other groupings or organizations. A purely State party, indifferent to national issues, would, if it were started now, have no support from outside, would have few posts to bestow, because the State offices are neither numerous nor well paid, could have no pledge of permanence such as the vast mechanism of the national parties provides, would offer little prospect of aiding its leaders to win wealth or fame in the wider theatre of Congress.
Accordingly the national parties have complete possession of the field. In every State from Maine to Texas all State elections for the governorship and other offices are fought on their lines ; all State legisatures are divided into members belonging to one or other of them. Every trial of strength in a State election is assumed to presage a similar result in a national election. Every State office is deemed as fitting a reward for services to the national party as for services in State contests. In fact the whole machinery is worked exactly as if the State were merely a subdivision of the Union for electoral purposes. Yet nearly all the questions which come before State legislatures have nothing whatever to do with the tenets of the national parties, while votes of State legislatures, except in respect of the choice of senators, can neither advance nor retard the progress of any cause which lies within the competence of Congress.
How has this system affected the working of the State govern- ments, and especially of their legislatures ?
It has prevented the growth within a State of State parties addressing themselves to the questions which belong to its legis- lature, and really affect its welfare.
The natural source of a party is a common belief, a common aim and purpose. For this men league themselves together, and agree to act in concert. A State party ought therefore to be
544 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
formed out of persons who desire the State to do something, or not to do it; to pass such and such a law, to grant money to such and such an object. It is, however, formed with reference to no such aim or purpose, but to matters which the State can- not influence. Hence a singular unreality in the State parties. In the legislatures as well as through the electoral districts they cohere very closely. But this cohesion is of no service or sig- nificance for nine-tenths of the questions that come before the legislature for its decision, seeing that such questions are not touched by the platform of either party. Party therefore, does not fulfil its legitimate ends. It does not produce the co-opera- tion of leaders in preparing, of followers in supporting, a measure or line of policy. It does not secure the keen criticism by either side of the measures or policy advocated by the other. It is an artificial aggregation of persons linked together for purposes unconnected with the work they have to do.
This state of things may seem to possess the advantage of permitting questions to be considered on their merits, apart from that spirit of faction which in England, for instance, disposes the men on one side to reject a proposal of the other side on the score, not of its demerits, but of the quarter it proceeds from. Such an advantage would certainly exist if members were elected to the State legislatures irrespective of party, if the practice was to look out for good men who would manage State business prudently and pass useful laws. This, however, is not the practice. The strength of the national parties prevents it. Every member is elected as a party man; and the experiment of legislatures working without parties has as little chance of being tried in the several States as in Congress itself. There is yet another benefit which the plan seems to promise. The State legislatures may seem a narrow sphere for an enterprising genius, and their work uninteresting to a superior mind. But if they lead into the larger field of national politics, if distinction in them opens the door to a fame and power extending over the country, able men will seek to enter and to shine in the legislatures of the States. This is the same argument as is used by those who defend the practice, now general in England, of fighting municipal and other local elections on party lines. Better men, it is said, are glad to enter the town councils than could other- wise be induced to do so, because in doing so they serve the party, and establish a claim on it; they commend themselves
CHAP, XLVI STATE POLITICS 545
to their fellow-citizens as fit candidates for Parliament. The possible loss of not getting a good set of town councillors irre- spective of party lines is thought to be more than compensated by the certain gain of men whose ambition would overlook a town council, were it not thus made a stage in their political career. This case is the more like that of America because these English municipal bodies have rarely anything to do with the issues which divide the two great English parties. Men are elected to them as Tories or Liberals whose Toryism or Liberalism is utterly indifferent so far as the business of the council goes.
Whether or no this reasoning be sound as regards England, I doubt if the American legislatures gain in efficiency by having only party men in them, and whether the elections would be any worse cared for if party was a secondary idea in the voters’ minds. Already these elections are entirely in the hands of party managers, and the people have little say in the matter. Experience in a State legislature certainly gives a politician good chances of seeing behind the scenes, and makes him familiar with the methods employed by professionals. But it affords few opportunities for distinction in the higher walks of public life, and it is as likely to lower as to raise his aptitude for them. However, a good many men find their way into Congress through the State legislatures—though it is no longer the rule that persons chosen Federal senators by those bodies must have served in them—and perhaps the average capacity of members is kept up by the presence of persons who seek to use the State legislature as a stepping-stone to something further. The question is purely speculative. Party has dominated and will dominate all State elections. Under existing conditions the thing cannot be otherwise.
It is, however, obviously impossible to treat as party matters many of the questions that come before the legislatures. Local and personal bills, which, it will be remembered, occupy by far the larger part of the time and labours of these bodies, do not fall within party lines at all. The only difference the party system makes to them is that a party leader who takes up such a bill has exceptional facilities for putting it through, and that a district which returns a member belonging to the majority has some advantage when trying to secure a benefit for itself. It is the same with appropriations of State funds to any local purpose. Members use their party influence and party affiliations ; but the
VOL. I 2N
oF 1 ies:
546 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART 11
advocacy of such schemes and opposition to them have compara- tively little to do with party divisions, and it constantly happens that men of both parties are found combining to carry some project by which they or their constituents will gain. Of course the less reputable a member is, the more apt will he be to enter into “rings” which have nothing to do with politics in their proper sense, the more ready to scheme with any trickster, to whichever party he adheres. Of measures belonging to what may be called genuine legislation, 7.c. measures for improving the general law and administration of the State, some are so remote from any party issue, and so unlikely to enure to the credit of either party, that they are considered on their merits. A bill, for instance, for improving the State lunatic asylums, or forbidding lotteries, or restricting the freedom of divorce, would have nothing either to hope or to fear from party action. It would be introduced by some member who desired reform for its own sake, and would be passed if this member, having convinced the more enlightened among his colleagues that it would do good, or his colleagues generally that the people wished it, could overcome the difficulties which the pressure of a crowd of competing bills is sure to place in its way. Other public measures, however, may excite popular feeling, may be demanded by one class or section of opinion and resisted by another. Bills dealing with the sale of intoxicants, or regulating the hours of labour, or attacking railway companies, or prohibiting the sale of oleomar- garine as butter, are matters of such keen interest to some one section of the population, that a party will gain support from many citizens by espousing them, and may possibly estrange others. Hence, though such bills have rarely any connection with the tenets of either party, it is worth the while of a party to win votes by throwing its weight for or against them, accord- ing as it judges that there is more to gain by taking the one course or the other. In the case of oleomargarine, for instance, there is clearly more to be gained by supporting than by opposing, because the farmers, especially in the agricultural North-West, constitute a much stronger vote than any persons who could suffer by restricting the sale of the substance. We should accordingly expect to find, and should find, both parties com- peting for the honour of passing such a bill. There would be a race between a number of members, anxious to gain credit for themselves and their friends. Intoxicants open up a more
\
CHAP, XLVI STATE POLITICS 547
difficult problem. Strong as the Prohibitionists and local option men are in all the northern and western, as well as in some of the southern States, the Germans, not to speak of the Irish and the liquor dealers, are in many States also so strong, and so fond of their beer, that it is a hazardous thing for a party to hoist the anti-liquor flag. Accordingly both parties are apt to fence with this question. Speaking broadly, therefore, these questions of general State legislation are not party questions, though liable at any moment to become so, if one or other party takes them up.
Is there then no such thing as a real State party, agitating or working solely within State limits, and inscribing on its banner a principle or project which State legislation can advance ?
Such a party does sometimes arise. In California, for instance, there has long been a strong feeling against the Chinese, and a desire to exclude them. Both Republicans and Democrats were affected by the feeling, and fell in with it. But there sprang up ten or fifteen years ago a third party, which claimed to be specially “anti-Mongolian,” while also attacking capitalists and railways ; and it lasted for some time, confusing the politics of the State. Questions affecting the canals of the State became at one time a powerful factor in the parties of New York. In Virginia the question of repudiating the State debt gave birth a few years ago to a party which called itself the “ Readjusters,” and by the help of negro votes carried the State at several elections. In some of the North-Western States the farmers associated themselves in societies called “ Granges,” purporting to be formed for the promotion of agriculture, and created a Granger party, which secured drastic legislation against the railroad com- panies and other so-called monopolists. And in most States there now exists an active Prohibitionist party, which agitates for the strengthening and better enforcement of laws restricting or forbidding the sale of intoxicants. It deems itself also a national party, since it has an organization which covers a great part of the Union. But its operations are far more active in the States, because the liquor traffic belongs to State legislation.1 Since, however, it can rarely secure many members in a State legislature, it acts chiefly by influencing the existing parties, and frightening them into pretending to meet its wishes.
All these groups or factions were or are associated on the
1 Congress has of course power to impose, and has imposed, an excise upon liquor, but this is far from meeting the demands of the temperance party.
548 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART 1
basis of some doctrine or practical proposal which they put forward. But it sometimes also happens that, without any such basis, a party is formed in a State inside one of the regular national parties; or, in other words, that the national party in the State splits up into two factions, probably more embittered against each other than against the other regular party. Such State factions, for they hardly deserve to be called parties, generally arise from, or soon become coloured by, the rivalries of
leaders, each of whom draws a certain number of politicians:
with him. New York is the State that has seen most of them ; and in it they have tended of late years to grow more distinctly personal. The Hunkers and Barnburners who divided the Democratic party forty years ago, and subsequently passed into the “ Hards” and the “Softs,” began in genuine differences of opinion about canal management and other State questions. The “Stalwart” and “ Half-breed” sections of the Republican party in the same State, whose bitter feuds amused the country a few years ago, were mere factions, each attached to a leader, or group of leaders, but without distinctive principles.
It will be seen from this fact, as well as from others given in the preceding chapter, that the dignity and magnitude of State politics have declined. They have become more pacific in methods, but less serious and more personal in their aims. In old days the State had real political struggles, in which men sometimes took up arms. There was a rebellion in Massachusetts in 1786-87, which it needed some smart fighting to put down, and another in Rhode Island in 1842, due to the discontent of the masses with the then existing Constitution.? The battles of this generation are fought at the polling-booths, though sometimes won in the rooms where the votes are counted by partisan officials. That
1 The names of these factions, the changes they pass through, and the way in
which they immediately get involved with the ambitions and antipathies of particular leaders, recall the factions in the Italian cities of the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries, such as the White and Black Guelfs of Florence in the
time of Dante.
2 In these miniature civil wars there was a tendency for the city folk to be on one side and the agriculturists on the other, a phenomenon which was observed long ago in Greece, where the aristocratic party lived in the city and the poor in the fields. In the sixth century B.c. the oligarchic poet Theognis mourned over the degradation of political life which had followed the intrusion of the country churls, The hostility of the urban and rural population sometimes recurs in Switzerland. The country people of the canton of Basil fought a bloody battle some years ago with the people of the city, and the little commonwealth had to be subdivided into two, Basil City and Basil Country.
a Nia ii
CHAP, XLVI STATE POLITICS 549
heads are counted instead of being broken is no doubt an im- provement. But these struggles do not always stir the blood of the people as those of the old time did, they seem to evoke less patriotic interest in the State, less public spirit for securing her good government. |
This change does not necessarily indicate a feebler sense of political duty. It is due to that shrivelling up of the State to which I referred in last chapter. A century ago the State was a commonwealth comparable to an Italian republic like Bologna or Siena, or one of the German free imperial cities of the middle ages, to Liibeck, for instance, or to Niirnberg, which, though it formed part of the Empire, had a genuine and vigorous political life of its own, in which the faiths, hopes, passions of the citizens were involved. Nowadays the facilities of communication, the movements of trade, the unprecedented diffusion of literature, and, perhaps not least, the dominance of the great national parties, whose full tide swells all the creeks and inlets of a State no less than the mid channel of national politics at Washington, have drawn the minds of the masses as well as of the more en- lightened citizens away from the State legislatures, whose func- tions have come to seem trivial and their strifes petty.
In saying this I do not mean to withdraw or modify what was said, in an earlier chapter, of the greatness of an American State, and the attachment of its inhabitants to it. Those propositions are, I believe, true of a State as compared to any local division of any European country, the cantons of Switzerland excepted. I am here speaking of a State as compared with the nation, and of men’s feelings towards their State to-day as compared with the feelings of a century ago. I am, moreover, speaking not so much of sentimental loyalty to the State, considered as a whole, for this is still strong, but of the practical interest taken in its govern- ment. Even in Great Britain many a man is proud of his city, of Edinburgh say, or of Manchester, who takes only the slenderest interest in the management of its current business.
There is indeed some resemblance between the attitude of the inhabitants of a great English town towards their municipal government and that of the people of a State to their State government. The proceedings of English town councils are little followed or regarded either by the wealthier or the poorer resi- dents. The humble voter does not know or care who is mayor. The head of a great mercantile house never thinks of offering
550 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
himself for such a post. In London the Metropolitan Board of Works raised and spent a vast revenue ; but its discussions were commented on in the newspapers only four or five times a year, and very few persons of good social standing were to be found among its members. Allowing for the contrast between the English bodies, with their strictly limited powers, and the im- mense competence of an American State legislature, this English phenomenon is sufficiently like those of America to be worth taking as an illustration.
We may accordingly say that the average American voter, belonging to the labouring or farming or shopkeeping class, troubles himself little about the conduct of State business. He votes the party ticket at elections as a good party man, and is pleased when his party wins. When a question comes up which interests him, like that of canal management, or the regulation of railway rates, or a limitation of the hours of labour, he is eager to use his vote, and watches what passes in the legislature. He is sometimes excited over a contest for the governorship, and if the candidate of the other party is a stronger and more honest man, may possibly desert his party on that one issue. But in ordinary times he does not follow the proceedings of the legisla- ture, as indeed how could he? seeing that they are most scantily reported. The politics which he reads by preference are national politics ; and especially whatever touches the next presidential election. In State contests that which chiefly fixes his attention is the influence of a State victory on an approaching national contest.
The more educated and thoughtful citizen, especially in great States, like New York and Pennsylvania, is apt to be disgusted by the sordidness of many State politicians and the pettiness of most. He regards Albany and Harrisburg much as he regards a wasps’ nest in one of the trees of his suburban garden. The insects eat his fruit, and may sting his children; but it is too much trouble to set up a ladder and try to reach them. Some public-spirited young men have, however, thrown themselves into the muddy whirlpool of the New York legislature, chiefly for the sake of carrying Acts for the better government of cities. If their tenacity proves equal to their courage, they will gain in time the active support of those who have hitherto stood aloof, regarding State politics as a squabble over offices and jobs. But the prevalence of the rule that a man can be elected only in the
CHAP, XLVI STATE POLITICS 551
district where he lives, renders it difficult to create a reforming party in a legislature, so the men who, instead of shrugging their shoulders put them to the wheel, generally prefer to carry their energies into the field of national politics, thinking that larger and swifter results are to be obtained there, because victories achieved in and through the National government have an imme- diate moral influence upon many States at once, whereas reforms in New York make no great difference to Pennsylvania or Ohio.
A European observer, sympathetic with the aims of the reformers, is inclined to think that the battle for honest govern- ment ought to be fought everywhere, in State legislatures and city councils as well as in the national elections and in the press, and is at first surprised that so much effort should be needed to secure what all good citizens, to whichever party they belong, might be expected to work for. But he would be indeed a self- confident European who should fancy he had discovered anything which had not already occurred to his shrewd American friends ; and the longer such an observer studies the problem, the better does he learn to appreciate the difficulties which the system’ of party organization, which I must presently proceed to describe, throws in the way of all reforming efforts.
CHAPTER XLVI THE TERRITORIES
Or the 3,501,404 square miles which constitute the area of the United States, 2,040,780 are included within the bounds of the thirty-eight States whose government has been described in the last preceding chapters. The 1,460,624 square miles which remain fall into the three following divisions :—
Eight organized Territories, viz. Dakota, Wyoming, Montana, Idaho, Washington, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico 859,325 sq. miles. Two unorganized Territories, viz.
Alaska. ; ; ‘ «531,409... sides Indian territory W. of Arkansas . 7469,830 50) oi The Federal district of Columbia . ; Ove yudes
Of these the three latter may be dismissed in a word or two. The District of Columbia is a piece of land set apart to contain the city of Washington, which is the seat of the Federal govern- ment. It is governed by three commissioners appointed by the President, and has no local legislature nor municipal government, the only legislative authority being Congress.
Alaska (population in 1880, 30,178, of whom 392 were whites) and the Indian territory are also under the direct authority of officers appointed by the President and of laws passed by Con- | gress. Both are chiefly inhabited by Indian tribes, some of which, however, in the Indian Territory, and particularly the Cherokees, have made considerable progress in civilization! Neither region
1 There are five civilized tribes in this territory, Cherokees, Choctaws, Chicka- saws, Creeks, and Seminoles. “ Hach tribe manages its own affairs under a con- stitution modelled upon that of the United States. Hach has a common school system, including schools for advanced instruction, all supported by the Indians themselves. The agent of the National Indian Defence Association says that there is not in the Cherokee Nation a single Indian of either sex over fifteen years of age who cannot read or write.” —Report of the U.S. Commissioner of Education,
CHAP. XLVI1 THE TERRITORIES 553
is likely for a long time to come to receive regular political institutions,
The eight organized Territories form a broad belt of country extending from Canada on the north to Mexico on the south, and separating the States of the Mississippi valley from those of the Pacific slope. They require a somewhat fuller description, because they present an interesting form of autonomy or local self-government, differing’ from that which exists in the several States, and in some points more akin to that of the self-govern- ing colonies of Great Britain. This form has in each Territory been created by Federal statutes, beginning with the great Ordinance for the Government of the Territory of the United States north-west of the River Ohio, passed by the Congress of the Confederation in 1787. Since that year many Territories have been organized under different statutes and on different plans out of the western dominions of the United States, under the general power conferred upon Congress by the Federal Con- stitution (Art. iv. § 3). Most of these Territories have now become States, but there remain the eight already mentioned. At first local legislative power was vested in the Governor and the judges; it is now exercised by an elective legislature. The present organization of these eight is in most respects identical ; and in describing it I shall for the sake of brevity ignore minor differences.
The fundamental law of every Territory, as of every State, is the Federal Constitution ; but whereas every State has also its own popularly enacted State Constitution, the Territories are not regulated by any similar instruments, which for them are replaced by the Federal statutes passed by Congress establishing their government and prescribing its form. However, some Territories have created a sort of rudimentary constitution for themselves by enacting a Bill of Rights.
In every Territory, as in every State, the executive legislative and judicial departments are kept distinct. The Executive con- sists of a governor, appointed for four years by the President of the United States, with the consent of the Senate, and removable 1886. The total population of the Indian Territory is estimated at from 60,000 to 75,000; the total number of tribal Indians in the United States (excluding Alaska) at 250,000, besides 66,407 non-tribal (census of 1880).
1 Arizona in providing that her Bill of Rights shall be changeable only by the vote of a majority of all the members elected to the Territorial legislature gives it a species of rigidity.
"2 0
554 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
by the President, together with a secretary, treasurer, auditor, and usually also a superintendent of public instruction, and a librarian. The governor commands the militia, and has a veto upon the acts of the legislature, which, however, may (except in Utah and Arizona) be overridden by a two-thirds majority in each house. He is responsible to the Federal government, and reports yearly to the President on the condition of the Territory, often making his report a sort of prospectus in which the advan- tages which his dominions offer to intending immigrants are fondly set forth. He also sends a message to the legislature at the beginning of each session. Important as the post of Governor is, it is often bestowed as a mere piece of party patronage, with no great regard to the fitness of the appointee.
The Legislature is composed of two Houses, a Council, con- sisting of twelve persons (in Dakota of twenty-four), and a House of Representatives of twenty-four persons (in Dakota of forty- eight), elected by districts. Each is elected by the voters of the Territory for two years, and sits only once in that period. The session is limited (by Federal statutes) to sixty days, and the salary of a member is $4 per day. The Houses work much like those in the States, doing the bulk of their business by standing committees, and frequently suspending their rules to run mea- sures through with little or no debate. The electoral franchise is left to be fixed by Territorial statute, but Federal statutes prescribe that every member shall be resident in the district he represents. The sphere of legislation allowed to the legislature is wide, indeed practically as wide as that enjoyed by the legis- lature of a State, but subject to certain Federal restrictions.} It is subject also to the still more important right of Congress to annul or modify by its own statutes any Territorial act. In some Territories every act must be submitted to Congress for its approval, and, if disapproved, is of no effect; in others sub-
1 Revised Statutes of U.S. of 1878, § 1851.—“The legislative power of every Territory shall extend to all rightful subjects of legislation not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States. But no law shall be passed interfering with the primary disposal of the soil ; no tax shall be imposed on the property of the United States, nor shall the lands or other property of non- residents be taxed higher than the lands or other property of residents.”
§ 1889.—“ The legislative assemblies of the several Territories shall not grant private charters or especial privileges, but they may, by general incorporation acts, permit persons to associate themselves together” for various industrial and benevolent purposes specified. Other restrictions have been imposed by subse- guent statutes. See especially Acts of 1886, chap. 818, § 5.
Ae
a
CHAP. XLVII THE TERRITORIES 555
mission is not required. But in all Congress may exercise without stint its power to override the statutes passed by a Territorial legislature, as the British Parliament may override those of a self-governing colony. This power is not largely or often exer- cised. The most remarkable instance has been furnished by
Utah, where congressional legislation has had a hard fight in
: breaking down polygamy, finding it necessary even to impose a test oath upon voters.
The Judiciary consists of three or more judges of a Supreme Court, appointed for four years by the President, with the con- sent of the Senate (salary $3000), together with a U.S. district attorney and a U.S. marshal. The law they administer is partly Federal, all Federal statutes being construed to take effect, where properly applicable, in the Territories, partly local, created in each Territory by its own statutes; and appeals, where the sum in dispute is above a certain value, go to the Supreme Federal Court. Although these courts are created by Congress in pur- suance of its general sovereignty—they do not fall within the provisions of the Constitution for a Federal judiciary—the Terri- torial legislature is allowed to regulate their practice and pro- cedure. The expenses of Territorial governments are borne by the Federal treasury.
The Territories send neither senators nor representatives to Congress, nor do they take part in presidential elections. The House of Representatives, under a statute, admits a delegate from each of them to sit and speak, but of course not to vote, because the right of voting in Congress depends on the Federal Constitution. The position of a citizen in a Territory is there- fore a peculiar one. What may be called his private or passive citizenship is complete: he has all the immunities and_ benefits which any other American citizen enjoys. But the public or active side is wanting, so far as the National government is con- cerned, although complete for local purposes. He is in the position of an Australian subject of the British Crown, who has full British citizenship as respects private civil rights, and a share in the government of his own colony, but does not partici- pate in the government of the British empire at large.’ It may seem inconsistent with principle that citizens should be taxed by
1 The Romans drew a somewhat similar distinction between the private rights of citizenship and the public rights, which included the suffrage and eligibility
to office.
556 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
a government in whose legislature they are not represented ; but the practical objections to giving the full rights of States to these comparatively rude communities outweigh any such theo- retical difficulties. It must moreover be remembered that a Territory, which may be called an inchoate or rudimentary State, looks forward to become a complete State. When its popula- tion becomes equal to that of an average congressional district, its claim to be admitted as a State is strong, and in the absence of specific objections will be granted. Congress, however, has absolute discretion in the matter, and often uses its discretion under party political motives. Nevada was admitted to be a State when its population was only about 20,000. It subse- quently rose to 62,000, but has now declined to about 40,000. Utah and New Mexico, the former with 143,963, the latter with 119,565 inhabitants, at the last census (1880), have been refused admission, the population of the latter being largely of Mexican blood, while the former is deemed, on account of the strength and peculiar institutions of the Mormon Church, not fit for that emancipation from the tutelage of Congress which its erection into a State would confer. When Congress resolves to turn a Territory into a State, it usually passes an enabling act, under which the inhabitants elect a Constitutional Convention, which frames a draft constitution ; and when this has been submitted to and accepted by the voters of the Territory, the act of Con- gress takes effect: the Territory is transformed into a State, and proceeds to send its senators and representatives to Congress in the usual way. The enabling act may prescribe conditions to be fulfilled by the State constitution, but cannot legally narrow the right which the citizens of the newly-formed State will enjoy of subsequently modifying that instrument in any way not incon- sistent with the provisions of the Federal Constitution.
The arrangements above described seem to work well. Self- government is practically enjoyed by the Territories, despite the supreme authority of Congress, just as it is enjoyed by Canada and the Australian colonies of Great Britain despite the legal right of the British Parliament to legislate for every part of the Queen’s dominions. The want of a voice in Congress and presi- dential elections, and the fact that the governor is set over them by an external power, are not felt to be practical grievances, partly of course because these young communities are too small and too much absorbed in the work of developing the country to
CHAP, XLVII THE TERRITORIES 557
be keenly interested in national politics. Their local political life much resembles that of the newer Western States. Both Democrats and Republicans have their regular party organiza- tions, but the business of a Territorial legislature gives little opportunity for any real political controversies, though abundant opportunities for local jobbing.
Before we pass away from the Territories, it may be proper to say a few words regarding the character and probable future of some among them, because they are the raw material out of which several new States will presently be shaped ; and a contemplation of their future suggests some interesting problems.
The largest, the most populous, and in every way the most advanced is Dakota, which lies west of Minnesota, and south of the Canadian province of Manitoba. Its area is 147,700. square miles, greater than that of Prussia, and much greater than that of the United Kingdom (120,500 square miles). Its eastern and southern parts are becoming rapidly filled by an intelligent farming population, largely Scandinavian in blood. The southern half has recently applied to be organized and admitted as a State, and is likely soon to have its wishes gratified! Possessing a vast area of undulating prairie land, well fitted for wheat crops, and at least the eastern part of which receives enough rain to make tillage easy without irrigation, Dakota is evidently destined to be one of the wealthiest and most powerful commonwealths in the Union. Out of it may be carved three States, each equal to Illinois or New York.
Very different is the character of the three Territories of Montana, Wyoming, and Idaho, which lie farther to the west, and are traversed by a number of lofty ranges belonging to the Rocky Mountain system. A comparatively small part of these regions is suited for agriculture, not merely because the surface is mountainous, but owing to the dryness of the climate. There is, however, plenty of pasture land; there are rich mineral deposits, especially in Montana and Idaho, there are in some places extensive forests, though of trees inferior in size to those of the Pacific coast. The population of these Territories is there- fore certain to increase rapidly, especially when the fertile lands
1 A poll taken in 1887 showed, however, only a small majority of the inhabit- ants for the sundering of Dakota with a view to the admission of the southern half as a State, so that it is possible that the Territory may not be divided but admitted as a whole. The southern half has already a population of nearly half a million.
558 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il
of Dakota have been filled up.!. But that population is likely to remain less dense, and less stable in its character, than the Dakotan. It may therefore be doubted whether even Montana, which has the largest area and much the largest quantity of good land, will be fit to become a State for many years to come.
Washington Territory, situated on the shores of the Pacific between Oregon and British Columbia, is in these respects more fortunate. That part of it which lies west of the Cascade Range has a moist and equable climate, much resembling the climate of western England, though somewhat less variable. Many of the familiar genera and even species of British plants reappear on its hillsides. The forests are by far the finest which the United States possess, and will, though they are being sadly squandered, remain a source of wealth for a century or more tocome. I have travelled through many miles of woodland where nearly every tree was over 250 feet high. The eastern half of the Territory, lying on the inland side of the mountains, is very much drier, and with greater extremes of heat and cold; but it is in parts extremely fertile. To all appearances Washington, which had in 1880 a population of 75,000, having more than trebled since 1870, will by the end of this century have at least 800,000, and long before then have been admitted as a State.
Utah was, before the arrival of the Mormons in 1848, a desert, and indeed an arid desert, whose lower grounds were covered with that growth of alkaline plants which the Ameri- cans call sage-brush.2_ The patient labour of the Saints, directed, at least during the pontificate of Brigham Young, by an able and vigilant autocracy, has transformed the tracts lying along the banks of streams into fertile grain, vegetable, and fruit farms. The water which descends from the mountains is turned over the level ground ; the alkaline substances are soon washed out of the soil, and nothing more than irrigation is needed to produce excellent crops. After this process had advanced some way the discovery of rich silver mines drew in a swarm of Gentile colonists, and the non-Mormon population of some districts is now considerable. As Utah had in 1880, 144,000 inhabitants,
1 In 1880 these three Territories had only about 92,000 people between them. ? The so-called sage-brush plants are not species of what in England is called sage (Salvia) but mostly belong to the order Compositae, which is unusually strong in America. Something like a third of the total phaenogamous genera of the United States have been estimated to belong to it.
CHAP, XLVII THE TERRITORIES 559
it would long ago have been admitted as a State but for the desire of Congress to retain complete legislative control, and thereby to stamp out polygamy. This object seems at last not unlikely to be attained, and although much of the Territory is likely to remain barren and uninhabited, enough is fit for tillage and for dairy-farming to give it a prospect of supporting a large settled population.
New Mexico, with an area larger than the United Kingdom (population in 1880, 120,000), is still largely peopled by Indo- Spanish Mexicans,! who speak Spanish, and are obviously ill fitted for the self-government which organization as a State implies. Water is too scarce and the soil too hilly to make agriculture generally available. The same remark applies to Arizona, the sides of whose splendid mountain groups are barren, and most of whose plains support only a scanty vegetation. Both Territories are rich in minerals, but a mining population is not only apt to be disorderly, but is fluctuating, moving from camp to camp as richer deposits are discovered or old veins worked out. It seems doubtful, therefore, whether any one of the five mining and ranching Territories (Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, New Mexico, Arizona) is likely to be formed into a State at any presently assignable date. The time must come when the increase of population in the region immediately to the east of the Rocky Mountains will turn a fuller stream of immigration into these less promising regions, and bring under irrigation culture large tracts which are now not worth working. No one can yet say when that time will arrive. Tull it arrives it will be for the benefit of these Territories themselves that they should remain content with that limited and qualified form of self-government which they now enjoy, and under which they can practically legislate for their own peculiar conditions with sufficient freedom.
Europeans may, however, ask why the theory of American democracy, which deems all citizens entitled to a voice in the National government, should not at least so far prevail as to give the inhabitants of the Territories the right of suffrage in con- gressional and presidential elections. ‘Does not,” he may say, ‘the fact that each sends a delegate, though a voteless delegate, to the House of Representatives and two delegates to the
1 There are also about 10,000 Indians, some of them settled and comparatively civilized. It is here that the so-called ‘‘ pueblos” are found, so interesting to the ethnologist.
560 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il
National Nominating Conventions (to be hereafter described) imply that the unenfranchised position of the residents in a Territory is felt to be indefensible in theory ?”
This is true. If it were possible under the Federal Constitu- tion to admit Territorial residents to active Federal citizenship— that is to say, to Federal suffrage—admitted they would be. But the Union is a union of States. It knows no representatives in Congress, no electors for the Presidency, except those chosen in States by State voters. The only means of granting Federal suffrage to citizens in a Territory would be to turn the Territory into a State. This would confer a power of self-government, guaranteed by the Federal Constitution, for which the Territory might be still unfit. But it would do still more. It would entitle this possibly small and rude community to send two senators to the Federal Senate who would there have as much weight as the two senators from New York with its six millions of people. This is a result from which Congress may fairly recoil. And a practical illustration of the evils to be feared has been afforded by the case of Nevada, a State whose inhabitants number only about 40,000, and which is really a group of burnt-out mining camps. Its population is obviously unworthy of the privi- lege of sending two men to the Senate, and has in fact allowed itself to sink, for political purposes, into a sort of rotten borough which can be controlled or purchased by the leaders of a Silver Ring. It would evidently have been better to allow Nevada to remain in the condition of a Territory till a large settled and orderly community had occupied her surface, which is at present a parched and dismal desert, in which the streams descending from the eastern slope of the Sierra Nevada soon lose themselves in lakes or marshes. On a review of the whole matter it may safely be said that the American scheme of Territorial government, though it suffers from the occasional incompetence of the Gover- nor, and is inconsistent with democratic theory, has in practice worked well, and gives little ground for discontent even to the inhabitants of the Territories themselves.
CHAPTER XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT
THIS is the place for an account of local government in the United States, because it.is a matter regulated not by Federal law but by the several States and Territories, each of which establishes such local authorities, rural and urban, as the people of the State or Territory desire, and invests them with the requisite powers. But this very fact indicates the immensity of the subject. Each State has its own system of local areas and authorities, created and worked under its own laws; and though these systems agree in many points, they differ in so many others, that a whole volume would be needed to give even a summary view of their peculiarities. All I can here attempt is to distinguish the leading types of local government to be found in the United States, to describe the prominent features of each type, and to explain the influence which the large scope and popular character of local administration exer- cise upon the general life and well-being of the American people.
Three types of rural local government are discernible in America. The first is characterized by its unit, the Town or Township, and exists in the six New England States. The second is characterized by a much larger unit, the county, and prevails in the southern States. The third combines some features of the first with some of the second, and may be called the mixed system. It is found, under a considerable variety of forms, in the middle and north-western States. The differences of these three types are interesting, not only because of the practical instruction they afford, but also because they spring from original differences in the character of the colonist who settled along the American coast, and in the conditions under which the communities there founded were developed.
The first New England settlers were Puritans in religion, and sometimes inclined to republicanism in politics. They were
VOL, I 20
562 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il
largely townsfolk, accustomed to municipal life and to vestry meetings. They planted their tiny communities along the sea- shore and the banks of rivers, enclosing them with stockades for protection against the warlike Indians. Each was obliged to be self-sufficing, because divided by rocks and woods from the others. Each had its common pasture on which the inhabitants turned out their cattle, and which officers were elected to manage. Each was a religious as well as a civil body politic, gathered round the church as its centre; and the equality which prevailed in the congregation prevailed also in civil affairs, the whole community meeting under a president or moderator to discuss affairs of common interest. Each such settlement was called a Town, or Township, and was in fact a miniature commonwealth, exercising a practical sovereignty over the property and persons of its members—for there was as yet no State, and the distant home government scarcely cared to interfere—but exercising it on thoroughly democratic principles. Its centre was a group of dwellings, often surrounded by a fence or wall, but it included a rural area of several square miles, over which farmhouses and clusters of houses began to spring up when the Indians retired. The name “town” covered the whole of this area, which was never too large for all the inhabitants to come together to a central place of meeting. This town organization remained strong and close, the colonists being men of narrow means, and held together in each settlement by the needs of defence. And though presently the towns became aggregated into counties, and the legislature and governor, first of the whole colony, and, after 1776, of the State, began to exert their superior authority, the towns (which, be it remembered, remained rural communities, making up the whole area of the State) held their ground, and are to this day the true units of political life in New England, the solid foundation of that well-compacted structure of self- government which European philosophers have admired and the new States of the West have sought to reproduce. ‘Till 18211
1 Boston continued to be a town governed by a primary assembly of all citizens till 1822; and even then the town-meeting was not quite abolished, for a pro- vision was introduced, intended to ‘satisfy conservative democratic feeling, into the city charter granted by statute in that year, empowering the mayor and alder- men to call general meetings of the citizens qualified to vote in city affairs “to consult upon the common good, to give instructions to their representatives, and to take all lawful means to obtain a redress of any grievances.” Such primary assemblies are, however, never now convoked.
CHAP.’ XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 563
the towns were the only political corporate bodies in Massa- chusetts, and till 1857 they formed, as they still form in Connecti- cut, the basis of representation in her Assembly, each town, however small, returning at least one member. Much of that robust, if somewhat narrow, localism which characterizes the representative system of America is due to this originally distinct and self-sufficing corporate life of the seventeenth-century towns. Nor is it without interest to observe that although they owed much to the conditions which surrounded the early colonists, forcing them to develop a civic patriotism resembling that of the republics of ancient Greece and Italy, they owed something also to those Teutonic traditions of semi-independent local com- munities, Owning: common property, and governing themselves by a primary assembly of all free inhabitants, which the English had brought with them from the Elbe and the Weser, and which had been perpetuated in the practice of many parts of England down till the days of the Stuart kings.+
Very different were the circumstances of the Southern colonies. The men who went to Virginia and the Carolinas were not Puritans, nor did they mostly go in families and groups of families from the same neighbourhood. Many were casual adventurers, often belonging to the upper class, Episcopalians in religion, and with no such experience of, or attachment to, local self-government as the men of Massachusetts or Connecticut. They settled in a region where the Indian tribes were com- paratively peaceable, and where therefore there was little need of concentration for the purposes of defence. The climate along the coast was somewhat too hot for European labour, so slaves were imported to cultivate the land. Population was thinly scattered; estates were large; the soil was fertile and soon en- riched its owners. Thus a semi-feudal society grew up, in which authority naturally fell to the landowners, each of whom was the centre of a group of free dependants as well as the master of an increasing crowd of slaves. There were therefore compara- tively few urban communities, and the life of the colony took a rural type. The houses of the planters lay miles apart from one another; and when local divisions had to be created, these were made large enough to include a considerable area of territory
1’ See upon this subject the essay of Prof. Herbert B. Adams on the “Ger- manic Origin of New England Towns,” in Johns Hopkins University Studies, First Series.
564 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
and number of land-owning gentlemen. They were therefore rural divisions, counties framed on the model of English counties. Smaller circumscriptions there were, such as hundreds and parishes, but the hundred died out,! the parish ultimately became a purely ecclesiastical division, and the parish vestry was re- stricted to ecclesiastical functions, while the county remained the practically important unit of local administration, the unit to which the various functions of government were aggregated, and which, itself controlling minor authorities, was controlled by the State government alone. ' The affairs of the county were usually managed by a board of elective commissioners, and not, like those of the New England towns, by a primary assembly; and in an aristocratic society the leading planters had of course a pre- dominating influence. Hence this form of local government was not only less democratic, but less stimulating and educative than that which prevailed in the New England States. Nor was the Virginian county, though so much larger than the New Eng- land town, ever as important an organism over against the State. It may almost be said, that while a New England State is a com- bination of towns, a Southern State is from the first an adminis- trative as well as political whole, whose subdivisions, the counties, had never any truly independent life, but were and are mere subdivisions for the convenient dispatch of judicial and financial business.
In the middle States of the Union, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York, settled or conquered by Englishmen some time later than New England, the town and town meeting did not as a rule exist, and the county was the original basis of organiza- tion. But as there grew up no planting aristocracy like that of Virginia or the Carolinas, the course of events took in the middle States a different direction. As trade and manufactures grew, population became denser than in the South. New England influenced them, and-influenced still more the newer common-
1 In Maryland hundreds, which still exist in Delaware, were for a long time the chief administrative divisions. We hear there also of ‘‘baronies” and “ town- lands,” as in Ireland; and Maryland is usually called a ‘‘ province,” while the other settlements are colonies. Among its judicial establishments there were courts of pypowdry (pié poudré) and ‘‘hustings.” See the interesting paper on
“Local Institutions in Maryland,” by Dr. Wilhelm, in Johns Hopkins University Studies, Third Series.
The hundred is a division of small consequence in southern England, but in Lancashire it has some important duties. It repairs the bridges ; it is liable for damage done in a riot ; and it had its high constable.
PHAP. XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT _ 56h
wealths which arose in the North-west, such as Ohio and Michigan, into which the surplus population of the East poured. And the result of this influence is seen in the growth through the middle and western States of a mixed system, which presents a sort of compromise between the County system of the South and the Town system of the North-east. There are great differ- ences between the arrangements in one or other of these middle and western States. But it may be said, speaking generally, that in them the county is relatively less important than in the southern States, the township less important than in New England. The county is perhaps to be regarded, at least in New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio, as the true unit, and the town- ships (for so they are usually called) as its subdivisions. But the townships are vigorous organisms, which largely restrict the functions of the county authority, and give to local government, especially in the North-west, a character generally similar to that which it wears in New England.
So much for the history of the subject; a history far more interesting in its details than will be supposed from the rough sketch to which limits of space restrict me. Let us now look at the actual constitution and working of the organs of local govern- ment in the three several regions mentioned, beginning with New England and the town system.! I will first set forth the dry but necessary outline, reserving comments for the following chapter.
The Town is in rural districts the smallest local circumscrip- tion. English readers must be reminded that it is a rural, not an urban community, and that the largest group of houses it contains may be only what would be called in England a hamlet or small village.? Its area seldom exceeds five square miles; its population is usually small, averaging less than 3000, but occa- sionally ranges up to 13,000, and sometimes falls below 200. It
1 In New England the word ‘‘town” is the legal and usual one ; in the rest of the country ‘‘township.” I find in Massachusetts one town (Gosnold) with only 152 inhabitants, and one (Brockton) with 13,608. But both in this and other New England States most towns have a population of from 1200 to 2500.
2 The word Town, which I write with a capital when using it in the American sense, is the Icelandic ¢ém, Anglo-Saxon tan, German zaun, and seems originally to have meant a hedge, then a hedged or fenced plot or enclosure. In Scotland (where it is pronounced ‘‘toon”’) it still denotes the farmhouse and buildings; in Tceland the manured grass plot, enclosed within a low green bank or raised dyke, which surrounds the baer or farmhouse. In parts of eastern England the chief cluster of houses in a parish is still often called ‘‘the town.” In the North of Hngland, where the parishes are more frequently larger than they are in the South, the civil divisions of a parish are called townships.
566 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
is governed by an assembly of all qualified voters resident within. its limits, which meets at least once a year, in the spring (a reminiscence of the Easter vestry of England), and from time to time as summoned. There are usually three or four meetings each year. Notice is required to be given at least ten days previously, not only of the hour and place of meeting, but of the business tobe brought forward. This assembly has, like the Roman Comitia and the Landesgemeinde in four of the older Swiss Cantons, the power both of electing officials and of legislating. It chooses the selectmen, school committee, and executive officers for the coming year; it enacts byelaws and ordinances for the regulation of all local affairs; it receives the reports of the select- men and the several committees, passes their accounts, hears what sums they propose to raise for the expenses of next year, and votes the necessary taxation accordingly, appropriating to the various local purposes—schools, aid to the poor, the repair of highways, and so forth—the sums directed to be levied. Its powers cover the management of the town lands and other property, and all local matters whatsoever, including police and sanitation. Every resident has the right to make, and to support by speech, any proposal. The meeting which is presided over by a chairman called the Moderator—a name recalling the ecclesi- astical assemblies of the English Commonwealth 1—is held in the town hall, if the Town possesses one, or in the principal church or schoolhouse, but sometimes in the open air. The attendance is usually good; the debates sensible and practical. Much of course depends on the character and size of the population. Where it is of native American stock, and the number of voting citizens is not too great for thorough and calm discussion, no better school of politics can be imagined, nor any method of managing local affairs more certain to prevent jobbery and waste, to stimulate vigilance and breed contentment.2 When, however, the town meeting has grown to exceed seven or eight hundred persons, and still more when any considerable section
1 The presiding officer in the synods and assemblies of the Scottish Presbyterian Churches is still called the Moderator. This is also the president’s title in the synods of the American Presbyterian churches, and in the councils of the Con- gregationalist churches.
* See an interesting account of the town meeting thirty years ago in Mr. J. K. Hosmer’s Life of Samuel Adams, chap. xxiii. An instructive description of a typical New England Town may be found in a pamphlet entitled The Town of Groton, by Dr. 8. Green, late Mayor of Boston.
CHAP. XLYVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 567
are strangers, such as the Irish or French Canadians who have
latterly poured into New England, the institution works less
perfectly, because the multitude is too large for debate, factions are likely to spring up, and the new immigrants, untrained in self-government, become the prey of wirepullers or petty dema- gogues. Yet even under these drawbacks those who know the system commend its working, and echo the famous eulogism of Jefferson, who seventy years ago desired to see it transplanted to his own Virginia :
“Those wards called townships in New England are the vital principle of their governments, and have proved themselves the wisest invention ever devised by the wit of man for the perfect exercise of self-government, and for its preservation. . .. As Cato then concluded every speech with the words ‘ Carthago delenda est,’ so do I every opinion with the injunction ‘Divide the counties into wards.’”
The executive of a Town consists of the selectmen, from three to nine in number, usually either three, five, or seven. They are elected annually, and manage all the ordinary business, of course under the directions given them by the last preceding meeting. There is also a Town-clerk, who keeps the records, and minutes the proceedings of the meeting, and is generally also registrar of births and deaths; a treasurer; assessors, who make a valuation of property within the Town for the purposes of taxation; the collector, who gathers the taxes, and divers minor officers, such as hog-reeves! (now usually called field drivers), cemetery trustees, library trustees, and so forth, accord- ing to local needs. There is always a school committee, with sometimes sub-committees for minor school districts if the Town be a large one. As a rule, these officers and committees are unpaid, though allowed to charge their expenses actually in- curred in Town work; and there has generally been no difli- culty in getting respectable and competent men to undertake the duties. Town elections are not professedly political, ze. they are not usually fought on party lines, though occasionally party spirit affects them, and a man prominent in his party is more likely to obtain support.”
1 Mr. R. W. Emerson served in this capacity in his Town, fulfilling the duty understood to devolve on every citizen of accepting an office to which the Town appoints him.
2 When a Town reaches a certain population it is usually transformed by law into a City ; but occasionally, while the City is created as a municipal corpora-
ae Peete ee ea
568 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
Next above the Town stands the county. Its area and population vary a good deal. Massachusetts with an area of 8040 square miles has fourteen counties; Rhode Island with 1085 square miles has five; the more thinly peopled Maine, with 29,985 square miles, has sixteen, giving an average of about 1100 square miles to each county on these three States, though in Rhode Island the average is only 217 square miles. Similarly the populations of the counties vary from 4000 to 216,000; the average population being, where there are no large cities, from 20,000 to 40,000.1 The county was originally an aggregation of Towns for judicial purposes, and is still in the main a judicial district in and for which civil and criminal courts are held, some by county judges, some by State judges, and in
tion within the limits of a Town, the Town continues to exist as a distinct organization. A remarkable instance is furnished by the Town and City of New Haven, in Connecticut. New Haven was incorporated as a city in 1784. But it continued to be and is still a town also. Three-fourths of the area of the town and seventeen-eighteenths of its population are within the limits of the city. But the two governments remain completely distinct. The city has its mayor, alder- men, and common council, and its large executive staff. The town meeting elects its selectmen and other officers, 152 in all, receives their reports, orders and appropriates taxes, and so forth. Practically, however, it is so much dwarfed by the city as to attract little attention. Says Mr. Levermore: “This most venerable institution appears to-day in the guise of a gathering of a few citizens, who do the work of as many thousands. The few individuals who are or have been officially interested in the government of the town, meet together, talk over matters in a friendly way, decide what the rate of taxation for the coming year shall be, and adjourn. If others are present, it is generally as spectators rather than as participants. Even if Demos should be present in greater force, he would almost inevitably obey the voice of some well-informed and influential member of the town government of his own party. But citizens of all parties and of all shades of respectability ignore the town meeting and school meeting alike. Not one-seventieth part of the citizens of the town has attended an annual town meet- ing ; they hardly know when it is held. The newspapers give its transactions a scant notice, which some of their subscribers probably read. The actual govern- ing force of the town is therefore an oligarchy in the bosom of a slumbering democracy. But the town is well governed. Its government carries too little spoil to attract those unreliable politicians who infest the city council. If the ruling junto should venture on too lavish a use of the town’s money, an irresistible check would appear at once. Any twenty citizens could force the selectmen to summon the town together, and the apparent oligarchy would doubtless go down before the awakened people.” —“ The Town and City Government of New Haven,” in Johns Hopkins University Studies, Fourth Series.
The student of Roman history will find in this quaint survival of an ancient assembly some resemblance to the comitia curtata of Rome under the later Re- public, when the lictors met as representatives of the ancient curie to constitute an assembly for the passing of wills and adoptions. But the American survival is the more vigorous of the two.
1 The average population of a Massachusetts county is 127,000, the smallest county having only 4300.
CHAP, XLVI LOCAL GOVERNMENT 569
and for which certain judicial officers are elected by the people at the polls, who also choose a sheriff and a clerk. Police belongs to the Towns and cities, not to the county within which they lie. The chief administrative officers are the county com- missioners, of whom there are three in Massachusetts (elected for three years, one in each year), and county treasurer.1_ They are salaried officers, and have the management of county build- ings, such as court-houses and prisons, with power to lay out new highways from town to town, to grant licences, estimate the amount of taxation needed to defray county charges,? and apportion the county tax among the towns and cities by whom it is to be levied. But except in this last-mentioned respect the county authority has no power over the Towns, and it will be perceived that while the county commissioners are controlled by the legislature, being limited by statute to certain well-defined administrative functions, there exists nothing in the nature of a county board or other assembly with legislative functions, The functions of the county are in fact of small consequence: it is a judicial district and a highway district and little more.
This New England system resembles that of Old England as the latter stood during the centuries that elapsed between the practical disappearance of the old County Court or Shire Moot and the creation by comparatively recent statutes of such inter- mediate bodies and authorities as poor-law unions, highway dis- tricts and boards, local sanitary authorities. If we compare the New England scheme with that of the England of to-day, we are struck not only by the greater simplicity of the former, but also by the fact that it is the smaller organisms, the Towns, that are most powerful and most highly vitalized. Nearly everything belongs to them, only those duties devolving on the counties which a small organism obviously cannot undertake. An Eng- lishman may remark that the system of self-governing Towns works under the supervision of a body, the State legislature, which can give far closer attention to local affairs than the English parliament can give to English local business. This is true. But in point of fact the State legislature interferes but little (less, I think, than the Local Government Board interferes
1 In Rhode Island there are none but judicial officers for the counties. In Vermont I find besides judges, a state attorney, high bailiff, and county clerk. In Massachusetts all judges are appointed by the governor.
2 The chief items of county expenditure are those for judicial purposes, in- cluding the maintenance of buildings, and for roads and bridges.
570 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
in England) with the conduct of rural local business, though often required to deal with the applications which Towns make to be divided or have their boundaries altered, and which are frequently resisted by a part of the inhabitants.
The system which prevails in the southern States need not long detain us, for it is less instructive and has proved less suc- cessful. Here the unit is the county, except in Louisiana, where the equivalent division is called a parish. The county was originally a judicial division, established for the purposes of local courts, and a financial one, for the collection of State taxes. It has now, however, generally received some other functions, such as the superintendence of public schools, the care of the poor, and the management of roads. In the South counties are larger than in New England, but not more populous, for the country is thinly peopled.t The county officers, whose titles and powers vary somewhat in different States, are usually the Board or Court of county commissioners, an assessor (who pre- pares the valuation), a collector (who gathers the taxes”), a treasurer, a superintendent of education, an overseer of roads— all of course salaried, and now, as a rule, elected by the people, mostly for one or two years.? These county officers have, besides the functions indicated by their names, the charge of the police and the poor of the county, and of the construction of public works, such as bridges and prisons. The county judges and the sheriff, and frequently the coroner, are also chosen by the people. The sheriff is everywhere in America neither an orna- mental person, as he has become in England, nor a judge, with certain executive functions, as in Scotland, but the chief execu- tive officer of the judicial machinery of the county.
In these southern States there exist various local divisions smaller than the counties. Their names and their attributions
1 Georgia, with 59,475 square miles, has 137 counties ; Alabama, with 52,250 square miles, has 66. Speaking generally, the newer States have the larger counties, just as in England the smallest parishes are in the first settled parts of
England, or rather in those parts where population was comparatively dense at the time when parishes sprang up.
2 Sometimes, as in Louisiana, the sheriff is also tax collector.
3 In some States some of these officials are nominated by the governor. In Florida the governor appoints even the board of five county commissioners. Constit. of 1886, Art. viii. § 5. The other county officers, viz. clerk of circuit court, sheriff, constables, assessor of taxes, tax-collector, treasurer, superintendent of public instruction, and surveyor, are elected by the people for two or four years (§ 6).
* In South Carolina the parish was originally a pretty strong local unit, but
CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 571
vary from State to State, but they have no legislative authority like that of the Town meeting of New England, and their officers have very limited powers, being for most purposes controlled by the county authorities. The most important local body is the school committee for each school district. In several States, such as Virginia and North Carolina, we now find townships, and the present tendency seems in these States to be towards the development of something resembling the New England Town. It is a tendency which grows with the growth of popula- tion, with the progress of manufactures and of the middle and industrious working class occupied therein, and especially with the increased desire for education. The school, some one truly says, is becoming the nucleus of local self-government in the South now, as the church was in New England two centuries ago. Nowhere, however, has there appeared either a primary assembly or a representative local assembly. All local authorities in the South, and in the States which, like Nevada, Nebraska,! and Oregon, may be said to have adopted the county system, are executive officers and nothing more.
The third type is less easy to characterize than either of the two preceding, and the forms under which it appears in the middle and north-western States are even more various than those referable to the second type. Two features mark it. One is the importance and power of the county, which in the history of most of these States appears before any smaller division; the other is the activity of the township, which has more independ- ence and a larger range of competence than under the system of the South. Now of these two features the former is the more conspicuous in one group of States—Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Indiana, Iowa; the latter in another group— Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, the reason being that the New Englanders, who were often the largest and always the most intelligent and energetic element among the settlers in the more northern of these two State groups, carried with them their attachment to the Town system and their sense of its value, and succeeded, though sometimes not without a struggle, in establish- ing it in the four great and prosperous commonwealths which
it withered away as the county grew under the influence of the plantation system, The word “parish” is in America now practically equivalent to “congregation,”
and does not denote a local area. : 1 Nebraska, however, is now beginning to introduce the township system.
572 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I]
form that group. On the other hand, while Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York had not (from the causes already stated) started with the Town system, they never adopted it completely ; while in Ohio and Indiana the influx of .settlers from the Slave States, as well as from New York and Pennsylvania, gave to the county an early preponderance, which it has since retained. The conflict of the New England element with the Southern element is best seen in Illinois, the northern half of which State was settled by men of New England blood, the southern half by pioneers from Kentucky and Tennessee. The latter, coming first, established the county system, but the New Englanders fought against it, and in the constitutional convention of 1848 carried a provision, embodied in the constitution of that year, and repeated in the present constitution of 1870, whereby any county may adopt a system of township organization “ whenever the majority of the legal voters of the county voting at any general election shall so determine.” Under this power four- fifths of the 102 counties have now adopted the township system.?
Illinois furnishes so good a sample of that system in its newer form that I cannot do better than extract, from a clear and trustworthy writer, the following account of the whole scheme of local self-government in that State, which is fairly typical of the North-west :—
‘When the people of a county have voted to adopt the township system, the commissioners proceed to divide the county into towns, making them con- form with the congressional or school townships, except in special cases. Every town is invested with corporate capacity to be a party in legal suits, to own and control property, and to make contracts. The annual town meet- ing of the whole voting population, held on the first Tuesday in April, for the election of town officers and the transaction of miscellaneous business, is the central fact in the town government. The following is a summary of what the people may do in town meeting. They may make any orders concerning the acquisition, use, or sale of town property ; direct officers in the exercise of their duties ; vote taxes for roads and bridges, and for other lawful purposes ;
1 See Constitution of 1870, Art. x. § 5, where a provision is added that any county desiring to forsake township organization may do so by a vote of the electors in the county, in which case it comes under the county system prescribed in the following sections of that article.
? Tilinois has 102 counties, with an average population, in 1880, of 30,000; Towa 99 counties, with an average population, in 1880, of 16,500. England
(excluding Wales) has 40 counties, with an average population, in 1881], of 615,000.
CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 573
vote to institute or defend suits at law ; legislate on the subject of noxious weeds, and offer rewards to encourage the extermination of noxious plants and vermin ; regulate the running at large of cattle and other animals ; establish pounds, and provide for the impounding and sale of stray and trespassing animals ; provide public wells and watering-places ; enact bye-laws and rules to carry their powers into effect ; impose fines and penalties, and apply such fines in any manner conducive to the interests of the town.!
‘The town officers are a supervisor, who is ex officio overseer of the poor, a clerk, an assessor, and a collector, all of whom are chosen annually; three commissioners of highways elected for three years, one retiring every year ; and two justices of the peace and two constables, who hold office for four years.
‘On the morning aypoiuted for the town meeting the voters assemble, and proceed to choose a moderator, who presides for the day. Balloting for town officers at once begins, the supervisor, collector, and assessor acting as election judges. Every male citizen of the United States who is twenty-one years old, who has resided in the State a year, in the county ninety days, and in the township thirty days, is entitled to vote at town meeting; but a year’s resi- dence in the town is required for eligibility to office. At two o’clock the moderator calls the meeting to order for the consideration of business pertain- ing to those subjects already enumerated. Everything is done by the usual rules and methods of parliamentary bodies. The clerk of the town is secre- tary of the meeting, and preserves a record of all the proceedings. Special town meetings may be held whenever the supervisor, clerk, or justices, or any two of them, together with fifteen voters, shall have filed with the clerk a statement that a meeting is necessary, for objects which they specify. The clerk then gives public notice in a prescribed way. Such special meetings act only upon the subjects named in the call.
“The supervisor is both a town and a county officer. He is general manager of town business, and is also a member of the county board, which is composed of the supervisors of the several towns, and which has general con- trol of the county business. As a town officer, he receives and pays out all town money, excepting the highway and school funds. His financial report is presented by the clerk at town meeting. The latter officer is the custodian of the town’s records, books, and papers. The highway commissioners, in their oversight of roads and bridges, are controlled by a large body of statute law, and by the enactments of the town meeting. Highways are maintained by taxes levied on real and personal property, and by a poll-tax of two dollars, exacted from every able-bodied citizen between the ages of twenty-one and fifty. It may be paid in money or in labour under the direction of the commissioners. One of the commissioners is constituted treasurer, and he receives and pays out all road moneys.
“<The supervisor acts as overseer of the poor. The law leaves it to be de-
1 There are English analogies to all these powers, but in England some of them are or were exercised in the Manor court and not in the Vestry.
574 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IL
termined by the people of a county whether the separate towns or the county at large shall assume the care cf paupers. When the town has the matter in oleree the overseer generally provides for the indigent by a system of out- door cae If the county supports the poor, the county board is authorized to establish a poor-house and farm for the permanent care of the destitute, and temporary relief is afforded by the overseers in their respective towns, at the county’s expense.
“The board of town auditors, composed of the supervisor, the clerk, and the justices, examine all accounts of the supervisor, overseer of poor, and highway commissioners ; pass upon all claims and charges against the town, and audit all bills for compensation presented by town officers. The accounts thus audited are kept on file by the clerk for public inspection, and are reported at the next town meeting. The supervisor, assessor, and clerk con- stitute a Board of Health. The clerk records their doings, and reports them at the meetings of the town.
‘No stated salaries are paid to town officers. They are compensated according to a schedule of fixed fees for specific services, or else receive certain per diem wages for time actually employed in official duties. The tax- collector’s emolument is a percentage.
‘“‘ For school purposes, the township is made a separate and distinct cor- poration, with the legal style, ‘Trustees of Schools of Township ——, Range ——,’ according to the number by which the township is designated in the Congressional Survey. The school trustees, three in number, are usually elected with the officers of the civil township at town meetings, and hold office for three years. They organize by choosing one of their number presi- dent, and by selecting some fourth person for school treasurer, who shall also be, ex: officio, their secretary. They have authority to divide the township into school districts. It must be remembered that the township is exactly six miles square. It is the custom to divide it into nine districts, two miles square, and to erect a schoolhouse near the centre of each. As the county roads are, in most instances, constructed on the section lines—and therefore run north and south, east and west, at intervals of a mile—the traveller expects to find a schoolhouse at every alternate crossing. The people who live in these sub-districts elect three school directors, who control the school in their neighbourhood. They are obliged to maintain a free school for not less than five nor more than nine months in every year, are empowered to build and furnish schoolhouses, hire teachers and fix their salaries, and determine what studies shall be taught. They may levy taxes on all the taxable property in their district, but are forbidden to exceed a rate of two per cent for educational or three per cent for building purposes. They certify to the township school treasurer the amount they require, and it is col- lected as hereafter described. This last-named officer holds all school funds belonging to the township, and pays out on the order of the directors of the several districts.
‘‘The township funds for the support of schools arise from three sources, (1) The proceeds of the school lands given by the United States Government,
CHAP. XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 575
the interest from which alone may be expended. (2) The State annually levies on all property a tax of one-fifth of one per cent, which constitutes a
- State school fund, and is divided among the counties in the ratio of their school population, and is further distributed among the townships in the same ratio. (8) Any amount needed in addition to these sums is raised by taxa- tion in the districts under authority of the directors.
‘* All persons between the ages of six and twenty-one years are entitled to free school privileges. Women are eligible to every school office in the State, and are frequently chosen directors. The average Illinois county contains sixteen townships. The county government is established at some place designated by the voters, and called the ‘county seat.’ The corporate powers of the county are exercised by the county board, which, in counties under township organization, is composed of the several town supervisors, while in other counties it consists of three commissioners elected by the people of the whole county. The board manage all county property, funds, and business ; erect a court-house, jail, poorhouse, and any necessary build- ings ; levy county taxes, audit all accounts and claims against the county, and, in counties not under township organization, have general oversight of highways and paupers. Even in counties which have given the care of highways to the townships, the county board may appropriate funds to aid in constructing the more important roads and expensive bridges. The treasurer, sheriff,+ coroner, and surveyor are county functionaries, who perform the duties usually pertaining to their offices.”
‘The county superintendent of schools has oversight of all educational matters, advises town trustees and district directors, and collects complete school statistics, which he reports to the county board, and transmits to the State superintendent of public instruction.
“Every county elects a judge, who has full probate jurisdiction, and appoints administrators and guardians. He also has jurisdiction in civil suits at law, involving not more than $1000, in such minor criminal cases as are cognizable by a justice of the peace, and may entertain appeals from justices or police courts. The State is divided into thirteen judicial districts, in each of which the people elect three judges, who constitute a circuit court. The tribunal holds two or more sessions annually in each county within the circuit, and is attended at every term by a grand or petit jury. It hasa general original jurisdiction, and hears appeals from the county judge and from justices’ courts.
“To complete the judicial system of the State there are four appellate courts and one supreme court of last resort. Taxes whether for State, county, or town purposes are computed on the basis of the assessment made by the town assessor, and are collected by the town collector. The assessor views
1 The sheriff is the executive officer of the higher courts, with responsibility for the peace of the county. In case of riot he may call out the county militia.
2 Ordinary police work, other than judicial, is not a county matter, but left to the township with its constables. In cities, police belongs to the municipal authority, unless committed by some State statute to a special board.
"iyo 7 a), 8 ee) ee . ; , v ' ies bles * 1 4 7
576 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PARTY II
and values all real estate, and requires from all persons a true list of their personal property. The assessor, clerk, and supervisor constitute a town equalizing board, to hear complaints and to adjust and correct the assess- ment.
“‘ The assessors’ books from all the towns then go before the county board, who make such corrections as cause valuations in one town to bear just rela- tion to valuations in the others. The county clerk transmits an abstract of the corrected assessment to the auditor of the State, who places it in the hands of a State board of equalization.
“This board adjust valuations between counties. All taxes are estimated and collected on this finally corrected assessment. The State authorities, the county board, the town supervisors, the highway commissioners, the town- ship school trustees, and the proper officers of incorporated cities and villages, all certify to the county clerk a statement of the amount they require for their several purposes. The clerk prepares a collection-book for each town explain- ing therein the sum to beraised for each purpose. Having collected the total amount the collector disburses to each proper authority its respective quota. In all elections, whether for President of the United States, representatives in Congress, State officers or county officers, the township constitutes an election precinct, and the supervisor, assessor, and collector sit as the election judges.
“The words ‘town’ and ‘township’ signify a territorial division of the county, incorporated for purposes of local government. There remains to be mentioned a very numerous class of municipal corporations known in Illinois statutes as ‘villages’ and ‘cities.’ A minimum population of three hundred, ‘occupying not more than two square miles in extent, may by popular vote become incorporated as a ‘ village,’ under provisions of the general law. Six village trustees are chosen, and they make one of their number president, | thereby conferring on him the general duties of a mayor. At their dis- cretion the trustees appoint a clerk, a treasurer, a street commissioner, a village constable, and other officers as they deem necessary. The people may elect a police magistrate, whose jurisdiction is equal to that of a justice of the peace.” ?
A similar picture of the town meeting in Michigan is given by another recent authority,—
“The first Monday in April of each year every citizen of the United ‘States twenty-one years of age and upwards who has resided in the State six months, and in the township the ten days preceding, has the right of attending and participating in the meeting. The supervisor, the chief executive officer of the township, presides. He and the justice of the peace whose term of office soonest expires, and the township clerk, constitute the inspectors of election. After the choice of officers for the ensuing year
1 “Tocal Government in Illinois,” by Albert Shaw, LL.D., in Johns Hopkins University Studies, Baltimore, 1883.
HAP, XLVIII, LOCAL GOVERNMENT 577
the electors proceed from twelve to one, or three, as the case may require, _to the discussion of town business. Complaint is perhaps made that the cattle in a certain part of the township are doing damage by running at large, a bye-law is passed forbidding the same under penalty not ane ing ten dollars.
““A bridge may be wanted in another part of the township, but the in- habitants of that road district cannot bear the expense ; the town meeting votes the necessary amount not exceeding the limits of law, for the laws restricting the amount of taxation and indebtedness are very particular in their provisions.
“The electors may regulate the keeping and sale of gunpowder, the licensing of dogs and the maintenance of hospitals, and may order the vaccina- tion of all inhabitants, The voters in town meeting are also to decide how much of the one-mil tax on every dollar of the valuation shall be applied ‘to the purchase of books for the township library, the residue going to schools.
“The annual reports of the various township officers charged with the dis- bursement of public moneys are also submitted at this time. In short, whatever is local in character and affecting the township only is subject to the control of the people assembled in town meeting.
‘“*Yet we may notice some minor differences between the New England
town meeting and its sister in Michigan. In the latter the bye-laws and regulations are less varied in character. ' This is due to the fact that in the West that part of the township where the inhabitants are most numerous, the village, and for whose regulation many laws are necessary, is set off as an incorporated village, just as in nearly all the central and western States. These villages have the privilege, either directly in village meeting or more often through a council of five or more trustees, of managing their own loeal affairs, their police, fire department, streets and waterworks. In some States, however, they are considered parts of the township, and as such vote in town meeting on all questions touching township roads, bridges, the poor and schools.”
The conspicuous feature of this system is the reappearance of the New England Town meeting, though in a somewhat less primitive and at the same time less perfect form, because the township of the West is a more artificial organism than the rural Town of Massachusetts or Rhode Island, where, until lately, everybody was of English blood, everybody knew everybody else, everybody was educated not only in book learning, but in the traditions of self-government. However, such as it is, the Illinois and Michigan system is spreading. Recent legislation in Cali- fornia, Nebraska, and other western States permits its adoption.
1 “T,ocal Government in Michigan,” by E. W. Bemis, in J. 17. U. Studies, Balti- more, 1883.
VOL. I JEP.
578 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II ,
It is already established in the magnificent Territory of Dakota, and seems destined to prevail over the whole North-west."
In the proportion to the extent in which a State has adopted the township system the county has tended to decline in import- ance. It has nevertheless of more consequence in the West than in New England. It has frequently an educational official who inspects the schools, and it raises a tax for aiding schools in the poorer townships. It has duties, which are naturally more important in a new than in an old State, of laying out main roads and erecting bridges and other public works. And some- times it has the oversight of township expenditure.? ‘The board of county commissioners consists in Michigan and Illinois of the supervisors of all the townships within the county ; in Wiscon- sin and Minnesota the commissioners are directly chosen at a county election.
I pass to the mixed or compromise system as it appears in the other group of States, of which Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, and Towa may be taken as samples. In these States we find no Town meeting. Their township may have greater or less power, but its members do not come together in a primary assembly ; it elects its local officers, and acts only through and by them. In Ohio there are three township trustees with the entire charge of local affairs, a clerk and a treasurer. In Pennsylvania the town- ship is governed by two or three supervisors, elected for three
1 Yn Switzerland the rural Gemeinde or Commune is the basis of the whole re- publican system of the Canton. It has charge of the police, the poor, and schools, and owns lands. It has a primary assembly, meeting several times a year, which discusses communal business and elects an administrative council. It resembles in these respects an American Town or Township, but is subject for some purposes to the jurisdiction of an official called the Statthalter, appointed by the Canton for a district comprising a number of communes.
* Mr. Bemis says :—“ Inasmuch as many of the thousand or more townships of a State lack the political education and conservatism necessary for perfect self- control, since also many through lack of means cannot raise sufficient money for roads, bridges, schools, and the poor, a higher authority is needed, with the power of equalizing the valuation of several contiguous towns, of taxing the whole number for the benefit of the poorer, and of exercising a general oversight over township expenses. . . . The importance of this power is not fully appreciated. For lack of similar provision in Massachusetts, there is scarcely any State or county aid or control of schools. Every town is left to its own resources with poor results [?]. All educators earnestly advocate county and State control of schools, that there may be uniformity of methods, and that the country districts, the nurseries of our great men in the past, may not degenerate. But two influ- ences oppose: the fear of centralization on the part of the small towns which
need it most, and the dislike of the rich cities to tax themselves for the country districts.”»—“ Local Government in Michigan,” wt supra, p. 18.
me Laat
CHAP, XLYIII
LOCAL GOVERNMENT 579
years, one each year, together with an assessor (for valuation
purposes), a town clerk, three auditors, and (where the poor are
_ a township charge) two overseers of the poor. The supervisors
may lay a rate on the township not exceeding one per cent on the valuation of the property within its limits for the repair of roads, highways, and bridges, and the overseers of the poor may, with the consent of two justices,' levy a similar tax for the poor. But as the poor are usually a county charge, and as any ratepayer may work out his road tax in labour, township rates amount to very little.
“In Iowa,” says Mr. Macy, ‘‘ the civil township, which is usually six miles square, is a local government for holding elections, repairing roads, testing property, giving relief to the poor, and other business of local interest. Its officers are three trustees, one clerk, a road supervisor for each road district, one assessor, two or more justices of the peace, and two or more constables. The justices and constables are in a sense county officers. Yet they are elected by townships, and if they remove from the township in which they are chosen, they céase to be officers. The trustees are chosen for three years, but their terms of office are so arranged that one is chosen each year. The other officers are chosen for two years. If there is within the limits of the township an in- corporated town or city, the law requires that at least one of the justices shall live within the town or city. The voters within the town or city choose a separate assessor. The voters of the city are not allowed to vote for road supervisors nor for the township assessor; they vote for all other township officers. . .
“The trustees of the township have various duties in the administration of the poor laws. An able-bodied person applying for aid may be required to work upon the streets or highways. If a person who has acquired a legal settlement in the county, and who has no near relatives able to support him, applies to the trustees for aid, it is their duty to look into the case and furnish or refuse relief. If they decide to furnish it, they may do so by sending the person to the county poorhouse, or by giving him what they think needful in food, clothing, medical attendance, or money. If they refuse aid the applic- ant may go to the county supervisors, and they may order the trustees to furnish aid ; or if the supervisors think the trustees are giving aid unwisely they may order them to withhold it. In all cases where aid is furnished directly by the trustees to the applicant they are required to send a statement of the expense incurred to the auditor of the county, who presents the bills to the board of supervisors. All bills for the relief of the poor are paid by the county, and the supervisors if they choose may take the entire business out of the hands of the trustees. But in counties where no poorhouse is provided, and where the supervisors make no provision for the poor, the trustees are required
1 Justices are elected by the people for five years, and commissioned by the governor of the State.
ay,
580 ‘THE STATE GOVERNMENTS — PART II
fr
to take entire charge of the business. Yet in any case the county must meet the expenses. The trustees are the health officers of the township. They may require persons to be vaccinated ; they may require the removal of filth injurious to health ; they may adopt bye-laws for preserving the health of the community and enforce them by fine and imprisonment.” ?
In most of these States the county overshadows the township. Taking Pennsylvania as an example, we find each county governed by a board of three commissioners, elected for three years, upon a minority vote system, the elector being allowed to vote for two candidates only. Besides these there are officers, also chosen by popular vote for three years, viz. a sheriff, coroner, prothonotary, registrar of wills, recorder of deeds, treasurer, surveyor, three auditors, clerk of the court, district attorney. Some of these officers are paid by fees, except in counties whose population exceeds 50,000, where all are paid by salary. A county with at least 40,000 inhabitants is a judicial district, and elects its judge for a term of ten years. No new county is to contain less than 400 square miles or 20,000 inhabitants? The county, besides its judicial business and the management of the prisons incident thereto, besides its duties as respects highways and bridges, has educational and usually also poor-law functions ; and it levies its county tax and the State taxes through a collector for each town- ship whom it and not the township appoints. It audits the accounts of townships, and has other rights of control over these minor communities exceeding those allowed by Michigan or Illinois. I must not omit to remark that where any local area is not governed by a primary assembly‘ of all its citizens, as in those States where there is no Town meeting, and in all States in respect to counties, a method is frequently provided for taking the judgment of the citizens of the local area, be it township or °
1 A Government Text-Book for Iowa Schools, pp. 21-28. .
2 See Constitution of Pennsylvania of 1873, Arts. xiv. xiii. and vy.
The average population of a county in Pennsylvania was in 1880 64,000. There are sixty-seven. ;
3 See “Local Government in Pennsylvania,’ in J. H. U. Studies, by B. R. L Gould, Baltimore, 1883. ;
4 As the primary meeting is in England dying out in the form of the parish vestry, so the plebiscitary method seems to be coming in to meet the now more democratic conditions of the country. It is recognized in the Free Library Acts which provide for taking a poll of all the ratepayers within a given local area to determine whether or no a local rate shall be levied to provide a free public library. And see above (Chapter XXXIX.) as to the proposal to submit
to popular vote the question of granting licences for the sale of intoxicating liquors.
| CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 581
county, by popular vote at the polls upon a specific question, usually the borrowing of money or the levying of a rate beyond the regular amount. This is an extension to local divisions of the so-called “plebiscitary ” or referendum method, whose appli- cation to State legislation has been discussed in a preceding chapter. It seems to work well, for by providing an exceptional method of meeting exceptional cases, it enables the ordinary powers of executive officials, whether in township or county, to be kept within narrow limits.
Want of space has compelled me to omit from this sketch many details which might interest European students of local government, nor can I attempt to indicate the relations of the _ rural areas, townships and counties, to the incorporated villages and cities which lie within their compass further than by observ- ing that cities, even the smaller ones, are usually separated from the townships, that is to say, the township government is super- seded by the city government, while cities of all grades remain members of the counties, bear their share in county taxation, and join in county elections. Often, however, the constitution of a State contains special provisions to meet the case of a city so large as practically to overshadow or absorb the county, as Chicago does the county of Cook, and Cincinnati the county of Hamilton, and sometimes the city is made a county by itself. Of these villages and other minor municipalities there are various forms in different States. Ohio, for instance, divides her muni- cipal corporations into (a) cities, of which there are two classes, the first class containing three grades, the second class four grades ; (0) villages, also with two classes, the first of from 3000 to 5000 inhabitants, the second of from 200 to 3000; and (c) hamlets, incorporated places with less than 200 inhabitants.! The principles which govern these organizations are generally the same ; the details are infinite, and incapable of being summarized here. Of minor incorporated bodies therefore I say no more. But the larger cities furnish a wide and instructive field of inquiry ; and to them three chapters must be devoted.
1 Ohio Voters’ Manual, Appendix K. Ohio contains: Cities—1 first class, first grade, 1 first class, second grade, 1 first class, third grade, 2 second class, first grade, 1 second class, second grade, 9 second class, third grade, 23 second class, fourth grade ; Villages—34 first class, 395 second class ; Hamlets—32, be- sides 785 unincorporate places or towns mentioned in Secretary of State’s Report
for 1881.
CHAPTER XLIX OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Iv may serve to clear up a necessarily intricate description if I add here a few general remarks applicable to all, or nearly all, of the various systems of local government that prevail in the several States of the Union.
J. Following American authorities, ] have treated the New England type or system as a distinct one, and referred the North- western States to the mixed type. But the European reader may perhaps figure the three systems most vividly to his mind if he will divide the Union into three zones—Northern, Middle, and Southern. In the northern, which, beginning at the confluence of the Yellowstone and Missouri, stretches east to the Bay of Fundy, and includes the Territory of Dakota and the States of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, and the six New England States, he will find a primary assembly, the Town or township meeting, in preponderant activity as the unit of local government. In the middle zone, stretching from California to New Jersey and New York, inclusive, along the fortieth parallel of latitude, he will find the township dividing with the county the interests and energy of the people. In some States of this zone the county is the more important organism and dwarfs the township ; in some the township seems to be gaining on the county ; but all are alike in this, that you cannot lose sight for a moment of either the smaller or the larger area, and that both areas are governed by elected executive officers. The third zone includes all the southern States ; in which the county is the pre- dominant organism, though here and there school districts and even townships are growing in significance.
II. Both county and township are, like nearly everything else in America, English institutions which have suffered a sea change. “The Southern county is an attenuated English shire with the
cHAY. xLIx OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 583
towns left out.”1 The northern township is an English parish, a parish of the old seventeenth-century form, in which it was still in full working order as a civil no less than an ecclesiastical organization, holding common property, and often co-extensive with a town. The Town meeting is the English vestry, the selectmen are the churchwardens, or select vestrymen, called back by the conditions of colonial life into an activity fuller than they exerted in England even in the seventeenth century, and far fuller than they now retain.* In England local self-government, except as regards the poor law, tended to decay in the smaller (i.e. parish or township) areas; the greater part of such administration as these latter needed, fell either to the justices in petty sessions or to officials appointed by the county or by the central government, until the legislation of the present century began to create new districts, especially poor law and sanitary districts, for local administration.? In the larger English area, the county, true self- government died out with the ancient Shire Moot, and fell into the hands of persons (the justices assembled in Quarter Sessions) nominated by the Crown, on the recommendation of the lord- lieutenant. It is only to-day that a system of elective county councils is being created by statute. In the American colonies the governor filled the place which the Crown held in England ; but even in colonial days there was a tendency to substitute popular election for gubernatorial nomination; and county govern- ment, obeying the universal impulse, is now everywhere demo- cratic in form; though in the South, while slavery and the plantation system lasted, it was practically aristocratic in its spirit and working.
1 Professor Macy, ‘‘ Our Government,’ an admirable elementary sketch for school use of the structure and functions of the Federal and States governments.
2 Few things in English history are better worth studying, or have exercised a more pervading influence on the progress of events, than the practical dis- appearance from rural England of that Commune or Gemeinde which has remained so potent a factor in the economic and social as well as the political life of France and Italy, of Germany (including Austrian Germany) and of Switzerland. If Englishmen were half as active in the study of their own local institutions as Americans have begun to be in that of theirs, we should have had a copious literature upon this interesting subject.
3 However, the parish constables and -way-wardens in some places continue to be elected by popular vote ; and the manor courts and courts leet were semi- popular institutions. Even now the parish vestry has some civil powers.
In counties the coroner continued to be elected by the freeholders, but as these pages are passing through the press, a provision transferring the appointment to the newly-created county councils has been enacted by Parliament (51 & 52 Vict. ch. xli. § 5).
ri t er ' > y » . os 1 . ‘ :
=v SA { ; pues 5 3 es (a der is? < Sea ‘ : ae is : ie
’ - %
584 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS ¢ PART Il
II. In England the control of the central government—that is, of Parliament—is now maintained not only by statutes defining the duties and limiting the powers of the various local bodies, but also by the powers vested in sundry departments of the executive, the Local Government Board, Home Office, and Treasury, of disallowing certain acts of these bodies, and especially of super- vising their. expenditure and checking their borrowing. In American States the executive departments have no similar func- tions. The local authorities are restrained partly by the State legislature, whose statutes of course bind them, but still more effectively, because legislatures are not always to be trusted, by the State Constitutions. These instruments usually—the more recent ones I think invariably——contain provisions limiting the amount which a county, township, village, school district, or other local area may borrow, and often also the amount of tax it may levy, by reference to the valuation of the property contained within its limits. Specimens of these provisions will be found in a note at the end of this volume. They have been found valuable in checking the growth of local indebtedness, which had become, even in rural districts, a serious danger! The total local debt was in 1880 :—
Counties : . $125,452,100 (£25,090,000) Townships A : 80,190,861  (£6,038,000) School Districts . 17,493,110 (£38,498,000)
Total : . $173,186,071 (£34,626,000)
This sum bears a comparatively small proportion to the total debt of the several States and of the cities, which was then—
States. : ; i ¢ . $260,377,310 (£52,000,000) Cities over 7500 inhabitants . ‘ . 710,585,924 (£142,100,000) Other municipal bodies under 7500 inhabitants 56,310,209 (£11,200,000)
Total 2 . $1, 027,223,443 (£205, 300,000)
It is also a diminishing amount, having fallen eight per cent between 1870 and 1880, whereas city indebtedness was then still increasing.
1 See also Chapter XLIII, on “State Finance.’ These provisions are of course applied to cities also, which need them even more. They vary very much in ine details, and in some cases a special popular yote is allowed to extend the imit.
* See article ‘‘Debts,” by Mr. R. P. Porter in American Cyclopedia of Political Science.
ee K on = ‘
CHAP, XLIX OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 585
IV. County and township or school district taxes are direct
- taxes, there being no octroi in America, and are collected along
with State taxes in the smallest tax-gathering area, 1.¢. the town. ship, where townships exist. Local rates are not, however, as in England, levied on immovable property only, but also on personal property, according to the valuation made by the assessors. Much the larger part of taxable personalty escapes because its owners conceal it, and there may be no means of ascertaining what they
possess. Lands and houses are often assessed far below their
true value, because the township assessors have an interest in diminishing the share of the county tax which will fall upon their township ; and similarly the county assessors have an interest in diminishing the share of the State tax to be borne by their county. Real property is taxed in the place where it is situate; personalty only in the place where the owner re- sides.2 But the suffrage, in local as well as in State and National elections, is irrespective of property, and no citizen can vote in more than one place. A man may have a dozen houses or farms in as many cities, counties, or townships: he will vote, even for local purposes, only in the spot where he is held to reside.
The great bulk of local expenditure is borne by local taxes. But in some States a portion of the county taxes is allotted to the aid of school districts, so as to make the wealthier districts relieve the burden of the poorer, and often a similar subvention is made from State revenues. The public schools, which are everywhere and in all grades gratuitous, absorb a very large parti of the whole revenue locally raised,* and in addition to what taxation provides they receive a large revenue from the lands which, under Federal or State legislation, have been set apart for educational purposes. On the whole, the burden of taxation in
1 As to this and the Boards of Equalization see Chapter XLIII. ante. 2 Of course what is really the same property may be taxed in more than one place, e.g. a mining company may be taxed as a company in Montana, and the
shares held by individual proprietors. be possibly also taxed in the several States in which these shareholders reside.
3 The total expenditure on public schools in the United States is stated by the U.S. Commissioner of Education (Report for 1885-86) at $111,304,927 (£22,260,000). The National government has no authority over educational matters, but has, since 1867, had a Bureau which collects statistics from the States and issues valuable reports.
4 The student of economic science may be interested to hear that in some of the States which have the largest permanent school fund the effect on the efliciency of the schools, and on the interest of the people in them, has been pernicious. In
586 ‘THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PARTI
rural districts is not heavy, nor is the expenditure often wasteful, because the inhabitants, especially under the Town meeting system, look closely after it.
V. It is noteworthy that the Americans, who are supposed to be especially fond of representative assemblies, have made very little use of representation in their local government. The town- ship is governed either by a primary assembly of all citizens or else, as in such States as Ohio and Iowa, by a very small board, not exceeding three, with, in both sets of cases, several purely executive officers. In the county there is seldom or never a county board possessing legislative functions ;! usually only three commissioners or supervisors with some few executive or judicial officers. Local legislation (except in so far as it appears in the petty bye-laws of the Town meeting) is discouraged. The people
seem jealous of their county officials, electing them for short
terms, and restricting each to a special range of duties. This is perhaps only another way of saying that the county, even in the South, has continued to be an artificial entity, and has drawn to itself no great part of the interest and affections of the citizens. Over five-sixths of the Union each county presents a square figure on the map, with nothing distinctive about it, nothing “ natural” about it, in the sense in which such English counties as Kent or Cornwall are natural entities. It is too large for the personal interest of the citizens: that goes to the township. It is too small to have traditions which command the respect or touch the affections of its inhabitants: these belong to the State.?
VI. The chief functions local government has to discharge in the United States are the following :—
Making and repairing roads and bridges.—These prime neces- sities of rural life are provided for by the township, county, or State, according to the class to which a road or bridge belongs. That the roads of America are proverbially ill-built and ill-kept is due partly to the climate, with its alternations of severe frost, occasional torrential rains (in the middle and southern States), and long droughts ; partly to the hasty habits of the people, who are too busy with other things, and too eager to use their capital in
education, as well as in eleemosynary and ecclesiastical matters, endowments would seem to be a very doubtful benefit. : 1 In New York, however, there is said to be some tendency in this direction. 2 In Virginia there used to be in old days a sort of county feeling resembling
that of England, but this has vanished in the social revolution that has transformed the South.
/
CHAP. xL1x OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 587
private enterprises to be willing to spend freely on highways ; partly also to the thinness of population, which is, except in a few manufacturing districts, much less dense than in western Europe. In many districts railways have come before roads, so roads have been the less used and cared for.
The administration of justice was one of the first needs which caused the formation of the county: and matters connected with it still form a large part of county business. The voters elect a judge or judges, and the local prosecuting officer, called the district attorney, and the chief executive officer, the sheriff.! Prisons are a matter of county concern. Police is always locally _ regulated, but in the northern States more usually by the town- ship than by the county. However, this branch of government, so momentous in continental. Europe, i is in America comparatively unimportant outside the cities. The rural districts get on nearly everywhere with no guardians of the peace, beyond the township constable ;? nor does the State government, except, of course, through statutes, exercise any control over local police administra- tion. In the rural parts of the eastern and middle States pro- perty is as safe as anywhere in the world. In such parts of the West as are disturbed by dacoits, or by solitary highwaymen, ‘travellers defend themselves, and, if the sheriff is distant or slack, lynch law may usefully be invoked. The care of the poor is thrown almost everywhere upon local and not upon State authorities,* and defrayed out of local funds, sometimes by the county, sometimes by the township. The poor laws of the several States differ in so many particulars that it is impossible to give even an outline of them here. Little out-door relief is given, though in most States the relieving authority may, at his or their discretion, bestow it; and pauperism is not, and has never been, a serious malady, except in some five or six great cities, where it is now vigorously combated by volunteer organizations largely composed of ladies. The total number of persons returned as
1 The American sheriff remains something like what the English sheriff was before his wings were clipped by legislation some seventy years ago. Even then he mostly acted by deputy. ‘The justices and the county police have since that legislation largely superseded his action.
2 Or, in States where there are no townships, some corresponding officer.
*3 Michigan is now (1888) said to be instituting a sort of State police for the enforcement of her anti-liquor legislation.
4 In some States there are State poor-law superintendents, and frequently certain State institutions for the benefit of particular classes of paupers, e.g. pauper
lunatics.
588 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART HI
paupers in the whole Union in 1880 was 88,665, of whom 67,067 were inmates of alms-houses, and 21,598 in receipt of out-door relief. This was only 1 to 565 of the whole popula- tion In England and Wales in 1881 there were 803,126 paupers, to a population of 25,974,439, or 1 to 32 of population.
Sanitation, which has become so important a department of English local administration, plays a small part in the rural dis- tricts of America, because their population is so much more thinly spread over the surface that the need for drainage and the removal of nuisances is less pressing; moreover, as the humbler classes are better off, unhealthy dwellings are far less common. Public health officers and sanitary inspectors would, over the larger part of the county, have little occupation.”
Education, on the other hand, has hitherto been not only a |
more distinctively local matter, but one relatively far more important than in England, France, or Italy. And there is usually a special administrative body, often a special adminis- trative area, created for its purposes—the school committee and the school district.2 The vast sum expended on public. in- struction has been already mentioned. Though primarily dealt with by the smallest local circumscription, there is a growing tendency for both the county and the State to interest them- selves in the work of instruction by way of inspection, and to, some extent of pecuniary subventions. Not only does the county often appoint a county superintendent, but there are in some States county high schools and (in most) county boards of education, besides a State Board of Commissioners.* I need hardly add that the schools of all grades are more numerous and efficient in the northern and western than in the southern States.® In old colonial days, when the English Commissioners for Foreign Plantations asked for information on the subject of education
1 New York had 15,217 paupers (of whom 2810 were out-door), Colorado 47 (1 out-door), Arizona 4. Louisiana makes no return of indoor paupers, because
the parishes (=counties) provide for the maintenance of their poor in private institutions.
* Sanitation, however, has occupied much attention in the cities. Cleveland on Lake Erie claims to have the lowest death rate of any large city in the world.
3 Though the school district frequently coincides with the township, it has generally (outside of New England) administrative officers distinct from those of the township, and when it coincides it is often subdivided into lesser districts. -
4 In some States provision is made for the combination of several school districts to maintain a superior school at a central spot.
5 The differences between the school arrangements of different States are so numerous that I cannot attempt to describe them.
\
CHAP, XLIX OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 589
from the governors of Virginia and Connecticut, the former replied, “I thank God there are no free schools or printing presses, and I hope we shall not have any these hundred years ;”! and the latter, “One-fourth of the annual revenue of the colony is laid out in maintaining free schools for the education of our children.” The disparity was prolonged and intensified in the South by the existence of slavery. Now that slavery has gone, the South makes rapid advances ; but the proportion of illiteracy, especially of course among the negroes, is still high.?
It will be observed that of the general functions of local government above described, three, viz. police, sanitation, and poor relief, are simpler and less costly than in England, and indeed in most parts of western and central Europe. It has therefore proved easier to vest the management of all in the same local authority, and to get on with a smaller number of special executive officers, Education is indeed almost the only matter which has been deemed to demand a special body to handle it. Nevertheless, even in America the increasing complexity of civilization, and the growing tendency to invoke governmental aid for the satisfaction of wants which were not previously felt, or if felt, were met by voluntary action, tend to enlarge the sphere and multiply the functions of local government.
VII. How far has the spirit of political party permeated rural local government? I have myself asked this question a hundred times in travelling through America, yet I find it hard to give
‘any general answer, because there are great diversities in this
regard not only between different States, but between different
1 Governor Sir William Berkeley, however, was among the Virginians who in 1660 subscribed for the erection in Virginia of ‘‘a colledge of students of the liberal arts and sciences.” As to elementary instruction he said that Virginia pursued ‘‘the same course that is taken in England out of towns, every man according to his ability instructing his children. We have forty-eight parishes, and our ministry are well paid, and, by consent, should be better if they would pray oftener and preach less. ”. The College of William and Mary, by Dr. H. B. Adams.
2 The percentage of persons unable to read to the whole population of the
United States was, in 1880, 13:4; it was lowest in Iowa (2:4), highest in -
South Carolina (48:2) and Louisiana (45°8), The percentage of persons unable to write was in the whole United States, 17; lowest in Nebraska (3°6), highest in South Carolina (55:4) and Alabama (50°9).
It has recently been proposed in Congress to reduce the surplus in the U.S. treasury by distributing sums among the States in aid of education, in proportion to the need which exists for schools, 7.e. to their illiteracy. The objections on the score of economic policy, as well as of constitutional law, are so obvious as to have stimulated a warm resistance to the bill.
\ erg
590 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS © - PART ID
parts of the same State, diversities due sometimes to the char- acter of the population, sometimes to the varying intensity of party feeling, sometimes to the greater or less degree in which the areas of local government coincide with the election districts for the election of State senators or representatives. On the whole it would seem that county officials are apt to be chosen on political lines, not so much because any political questions come before them, or because they can exert much influence on State or Federal elections, as because these paid offices afford a means of rewarding political services and securing political adhesions. Each of the great parties usually holds its county convention and runs its “county ticket,” with the unfortunate result of intruding national politics into matters with which they have nothing to do, and of making it more difficult for good citizens outside the class of professional politicians to find their way into county administration. However, the party candidates are seldom bad men, and the ordinary voter is less apt to vote blindly for the party nominee than he would be in Federal or State elections. In the township and rural school district party spirit is much less active. The offices are often unpaid, and the personal merits of the candidates are better known to the voters than are those of the politicians who seek for county office.t Rings and Bosses (of whom more anon) are not unknown even in rural New England. School committee elections are often in- fluenced by party affiliations. But on the whole, the township and its government keep themselves pretty generally out of the political whirlpool: their posts are filled by honest and reasonably competent men.
VIII. The apparent complexity of the system of local govern- ment sketched in the last preceding chapter is due entirely to the variations between the several States. In each State it is, as compared with that of rural England, eminently simple. There are few local divisions, few authorities; the divisions and authorities rarely overlap. No third local area and local _ authority intermediate between township and county, and similar to the English poor law Union, or District with its Council recently proposed in England, has been found necessary. Espe- cially simple is the method of levying taxes. A citizen pays at
1 Sometimes the party “ ticket” leaves a blank space for the voter to insert the name of the candidates for whom he votes for township offices. See the specimen fowa ticket at the end of Chapter LXVI.
cap. xLIx OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT » 591
the same time, to the same officer, upon the same paper of de- mand, all his local taxes, and not only these, but also his State
tax; in fact, all the direct taxes which he is required to pay. The State is spared the expense of maintaining a separate collect- ing staff, for it leans upon and uses the local officials who do the purely local work. The tax-payer has not the worry of repeated calls upon his cheque-book.! Nor is this simplicity and activity of local administration due to its undertaking fewer duties, as compared with the State, than is the case in Europe. On the contrary, the sphere of local government is in America unusually wide,? and widest in what may be called the most characteristi- cally American and democratic regions, New England and the North-west. Americans constantly reply to the criticisms which Europeans pass on the faults of their State legislatures and the shortcomings of Congress by pointing to the healthy efficiency of
their rural administration, which enables them to bear with com- posure the defects of the higher organs of government, defects which would be less tolerable in a centralized country, where the national government deals directly with local affairs, or where local authorities await an initiative from above.
Of the three or four types or systems of local government which I have described, that of the Town or township with its popular primary assembly is admittedly the best. It is the cheapest and the most efficient ; it is the most educative to the citizens who bear a part in it. The Town meeting has been not only the source but the school of democracy.* The action of so small a unit needs, however, to be supplemented, perhaps also in some points supervised, by that of the county, and in this respect the mixed system of the middle States is deemed to have borne its part in the creation of a perfect type. For some time past an assimilative process has been going on over the United States tending to the evolution of such a type.* In adopting the
1 Some States, however, give a man the option of paying half-yearly or quarterly. In many a discount is allowed upon payment in advance.
2 The functions are not perhaps so numerous as in England, but this is because fewer functions are needed. The practical competence of local authorities for undertaking any new functions that may become needed, and which the State may entrust to them, is great.
® In Rhode Island it was the Towns that made the State.
4 This tendency is visible not least as regards the systems of educational admin- istration. The National Teachers’ Association of the U.S. not long since prepared an elaborate report on the various existing systems, and the more progressive States are on the’alert to profit by one another’s experience.
THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
sitios system of New England, the north-western States have borrowed some of the attributes of the middle States county
system. The middle States have developed the township into a higher vitality than it formerly possessed there. Some of the southern States are introducing the township, and others are
likely to follow as they advance in population and education. - It ae
is possible that by the middle of next century there will prevail — one system, uniform in its outlines, over the whole country, with
the township for its basis, and the county as the organ called _ to deal with those matters which, while they are too large for
township management, it seems inexpedient to remit to the unhealthy atmosphere of a State capital.
$5 ,
CHAPTER L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES
THE growth of great cities has been among the most significant and least fortunate changes in the character of the population of the United States during the century that has passed since 1787. The census of 1790 showed only thirteen cities with more than 5000, and none with more than 40,000 inhabitants. In 1880 there were 494 exceeding 5000, forty exceeding 40,000, twenty ex- ceeding 100,000. There are probably to-day (1888) at least thirty exceeding 100,000. The ratio of persons living in cities exceed- ing 8000 inhabitants to the total population was, in 1790, 3°3 to every 100, in 1840, 8°5, in 1880, 22°5. And this change has gone on with accelerated speed notwithstanding the enormous extension of settlement over the vast regions of the West. Needless to say that a still larger and increasing proportion of the wealth of the country is gathered into the larger cities. Their government is therefore a matter of high concern to America, and one which cannot be omitted from a discussion of transatlantic politics. Such a discussion is, however, exposed to two difficulties. One is that the actual working of municipal government in the United States is so inextricably involved with the party system that it is hard to understand or judge it with- out a comprehension of that system, an account of which I am, nevertheless, forced to reserve for subsequent chapters. The other is that the laws which regulate municipal government are even more diverse from one another than those whence I have drawn the account already given of State governments and rural local government. For not only has each State its own system of laws for the government of cities, but within a State there is, as regards the cities, little uniformity in municipal arrangements. Larger cities are often governed differently from the smaller ones ; and one large city is differently organized from another. So far as VOL, I 220)
594 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II |
the legal arrangements go, no general description, such as might be given of English municipal governments under the Municipal Corporation Acts, is possible in America. J am therefore obliged to confine myself to a few features common to most city govern- ments occasionally taking illustrations from the constitution or history of some one or other of the leading municipalities.
The history of American cities, though striking and instructive, has been short. Of the ten greatest cities of to-day only four— Baltimore, New Orleans, New York, and Philadelphia—were municipal corporations in 1820.1 Every city has received its form of government from the State in which it stands, and this form has been repeatedly modified. Formerly each city obtained a special charter ; now in nearly all States there are general laws under which a population of a certain size and density may be incorporated. Yet, as observed above, special legislation for particular cities, especially the greater ones, continues to be very frequent.
Although American city governments have a general resem- blance to those English municipalities which were their first model,” their present structure shows them to have been much influenced by that of the State governments. We find in all the larger cities—
A mayor, head of the executive, and elected directly by the
voters within the city.
Certain executive officers or boards, some directly elected by the city voters, others nominated by the mayor or chosen by the city legislature.
A legislature, consisting usually of two, but sometimes of one chamber, directly elected by the city voters.
Judges, usually elected by the city voters, but sometimes appointed by the State.
What is this but the frame of a State government applied to the smaller area of a city? The mayor corresponds to the Governor, the officers or boards to the various State officials and boards (described in Chapter XLI.) elected, in most cases, by the people ; the aldermen and common council (as they are generally
1 The term ‘‘ city ” denotes in America what is called in England a municipal borough, and has nothing to do with either size or antiquity. The constitution or frame of government of a city, which is always given by a State statute, general or special, is called its charter.
» American municipalities have, of ‘course, never been, since the Revolution, close corporations like most English boroughs before the Act of 1835.
OHAP, L _ THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 595
called) to the State Senate and Assembly; the city elective judiciary to the State elective judiciary.
A few words on each of these municipal authorities. The mayor is by far the most conspicuous figure in city governments, much more important than the mayor of an English or Irish borough, or the provost of a Scotch one. He holds office, some- times for one year,” but now more frequently for two,® three, or even five * years. In some cities he is not re-eligible. He is directly elected by the people of the whole city, and is usually not a member of the city legislature.> He has, almost everywhere, a veto on all ordinances passed by that legislature, which, however, can be overridden by a two-thirds majority. In many cities he appoints some among the heads of departments and administrative boards, though usually the approval of the legislature or of one branch of it® is required. Quite recently some city charters have gone so far as to make him generally responsible for all the departments, though limiting his initiative by the right of the legislature to give or withhold supplies, and making him liable to impeachment for misfeasance. He receives a considerable salary, varying with the size of the city, but sometimes reaching $10,000, the same salary as that allotted to the justices of the Supreme Federal Court. It rests with him, as the chief executive officer, to provide for the public peace, to quell riots, and, if necessary, to call out the militia.” He often exerts a pretty wide discretion as to
1 American municipal governments are of course subject to three general rules : that they have no powers other than those conferred on them by the State, that they cannot delegate their powers, and that their legislation and action generally is subject to the constitution and statutes as well of the United States as of the State to which they belong.
2 Generally in the cities of the second rank and in Boston.
3 New York, Brooklyn, Chicago, Baltimore, San Francisco, Cincinnati, and generally in the larger cities. 4 Philadelphia, St Louis.
5 In Chicago and San Francisco the mayor sits in the legislature.
6 The Brooklyn charter allows the mayor to appoint heads of departments without any concurrence of the council, in the belief that thus responsibility can be better fixed upon him ; and New York has lately (1884) taken the same course.
7 Some idea of the complexity due to the practice of giving special charters to particular cities, or passing special bills relating to them, may be gathered from the fact that in Ohio, for instance, the duties of the mayor vary greatly in the six chief cities of the State. There are duties which a mayor has in Cincinnati only, out of all the cities of the State ; others which he has in all the cities except Cincinnati; others in Cincinnati and Toledo only ; others in Cleveland, Toledo, Columbus, Dayton, and Springfield only ; others in Cleveland and Toledo only ; others in Cleveland only ; others in Toledo only ; others in Columbus and Dayton only. ‘These variations are the result not of ordinances made by each city for itself, but of State legislation.
596 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART il
the enforcement of the law; he may, for instance, put in force Sunday Closing Acts or regulations, or omit to do so.
The practical work of administration is carried on by a number of departments, sometimes under one head, sometimes constituted as boards or commissions. The most important of these are directly elected by the people, for a term of One, two, three, or four years. _Some, however, are chosen by the city legislature, some by the mayor with the approval of the legislature or its upper chamber. In most cities the chief executive officers have been disconnected from one another, owing no common allegiance, except that which their financial dependence on the city legis- lature involves, and communicating less with the city legislature as a whole than with its committees, each charged with some one branch of administration, and each apt to job it.
Education has been generally treated as a distinct matter, with which neither the mayor nor the legislature has been suffered to meddle. It is committed to a Board of Education, whose members are separately elected by the people, or, as in Brooklyn, appointed by the mayor, levy (though they do not them- selves collect) a separate tax, and have an executive staff of their own at their disposal.?
The city legislature usually consists in small cities of one chamber, in large ones of two, the upper of which generally bears the name of the Board of Aldermen, the lower that of the Common Council.? All are elected by the citizens, generally in wards, but the upper house occasionally by districts or on what is called a “general ticket,” 2.2. a vote over the whole city.® Usually the common council is elected for one year, or at most for two years, the upper chamber frequently for a longer period.*
1 There are some points of resemblance in this system to the government of English cities, and especially of London. The English common councils elect certain officials and manage their business by committees. In London the sheriffs and chamberlain are elected by the liverymen. Note, however, that in no Eng- lish borough or city do we find a two-chambered legislature, nor (except as last aforesaid in London) officials elected by popular vote, nor a veto on legislation vested in the mayor.
2 Some large cities, however (e.g. New York and Brooklyn, Chicago with its 36 aldermen, San Francisco with its 12 supervisors), have only one chamber.
3 In some few cities, among which is Chicago, the plan of minority representa- tion has been to some extent adopted by allowing the voter to cast his vote for two candidates only when there are three places to be filled. It was tried in New York, but the State Court of Appeals held the statute creating it to be unconstitutional.
4 Sometimes the councilman is required by statute to be a resident in the ward he represents.
CHAP. L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 597
Both are usually unpaid in the smaller cities, sometimes paid in
the larger.! All city legislation, that is to say, ordinances, bye- laws, and votes of money from the city treasury, are passed by the council or councils, subject in many cases to the mayor’s veto. Except in a few cities governed by very recent charters, the councils have some control over at least the minor officials. Such control is exercised by committees, a method borrowed from the State and National legislatures, and suggested by the same reasons of convenience which have established it there, but proved by experience to have the evils of secrecy and irresponsi- bility as well as that of disconnecting the departments from one another.
The city judges are only in so far a part of the municipal government that in most of the larger cities they are elected by the citizens, like the other chief officers. There are usually several superior judges, chosen for terms of five years and upwards, and a larger number of police judges or justices,? generally for shorter terms. Occasionally, however, the State has prudently reserved to itself the appointment of judges. Thus in New Haven, Connecticut (population in 1880, 62,882)—
‘*Constables, justices of the peace, and a sheriff, are elected by the citizens, but the city courts derive existence directly from the State legislature. . . The mode of selecting judges is this: the New Haven county delegation to the dominant party in the legislature assembles in caucus and nominates two of the same political faith to be respectively judge and assistant judge of the New Haven city court. Their choice is adopted by their party, and the nominations are duly ratified, often by a strict party vote. Inasmuch as the legislature is usually Republican, and the city of New Haven is unfailingly Democratic, these usages amount to a reservation of judicial offices from the ‘hungry and thirsty’ local majority, and the maintenance of a certain control by the Republican country towns over the Democratic city.” 3
1 Boston and Cincinnati give no salary, St. Louis pays members of both its councils $300 (£60) a year, Baltimore, $1000 (£200), New York pays and Brook- lyn does not.
2 Sometimes (asin St. Louis) the police justices are nominated by the mayor.
3 “ Turing the session of the legislature in March 1885 this argument was put forward in answer to a Democratic plea for representation upon the city court bench. ‘The Democrats possess all the other offices in New Haven. It’s only fair that the Republicans should have the city court.’ Each party accepted the statement as a conclusive reason for political action. It would be gratifying to find the subject discussed upon a higher plane, and the incumbents of the offices who had done well continued from term to term without regard to party applica- tions. But in the present condition of political morals, the existing arrangements are probably the most practicable that could be made. It goes without saying
598 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I
It need hardly be said that all the above officers, from the mayor and judges downwards, are, like State officers, elected by man- hood suffrage. Their election is usually made to coincide with that of State officers, perhaps also of Federal congressmen. This saves expense and trouble. But as it not only bewilders the voter in his choice of men by distracting his attention between a large number of candidates and places, but also confirms the tendency, already strong, to vote for city officers on party lines, there has of late years been a movement in some few spots to have the municipal elections fixed for a different date from that of State or Federal elections, so that the undistracted and non- partisan thought of the citizens may be given to the former.!
At present the disposition to run and vote for candidates according to party is practically universal, although the duty of party loyalty is deemed less binding than in State or Federal elections. When both the great parties put forward questionable men, a non-partisan list, or so-called “ citizens’ ticket,” may be run by a combination of respectable men of both parties. Some- times this attempt succeeds. However, though the tenets of Republicans and Democrats have absolutely nothing to do with the conduct of city affairs, though the sole object of the election, say of a city comptroller or auditor, may be to find an honest man of good business habits, four-fifths of the electors in nearly all cities give little thought to the personal qualifications of the candidates, and vote the “straight out ticket.”
The functions of city governments may be distributed into three groups—(a) those which are delegated by the State out of its general coercive and administrative powers, including the police power, the granting of licences, the execution of laws re- lating to adulteration and explosives; () those which though done under general laws are properly matters of local charge and. subject to local regulation, such as education and the care
that country districts are, as a rule, more deserving of political power than are cities. The method of selecting the judiciary is everywhere a moral question, but it seems to me that the State authority should designate every judge of a rank higher than a justice of the peace. If the city judges were locally elected upon the general party ticket, the successful candidates would often be under obligations to elements in the community which are the chief source and nurse of the criminal class—an unseemly position for a judge.”—Mr. Charles H. Levermore in his interesting sketch of the “Town and City Government of New Haven” (p. 77).
1 On the other hand, there are cities which hope to draw out a larger vote, and therefore obtain a better choice, by putting their municipal elections at the same time as the State elections. This has just been done by Minneapolis,
CHAP. 1 THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 599
of the poor; and (c) those which are not so much of a political as of a purely business order, such as the paving and cleansing of streets, the maintenance of proper drains, the provision of water and light. In respect of the first, and to some extent of the second of these groups, the city may be properly deemed a political entity ; in respect of the third it is rather to be com- pared to a business corporation or company, in which the tax- payers are shareholders, doing, through the agency of the city officers, things which each might do for himself, though with more cost and trouble. All three sets of functions are dealt with by American legislation in the same way, and are alike given to officials and a legislature elected by persons of whom a large part pay no direct taxes. Education, however, is usually detached from the general city government and entrusted to a separate authority,! while in some cities the control of the police has been withheld or withdrawn from that government, and entrusted to the hands of a separate board. The most remarkable instance is that of Boston, in which city a Massachusetts statute of 1885 entrusts the police department and the power to license, regulate, and restrain the sale of intoxicating liquors, to a special board of three persons, to be appointed for five years by the State governor and council. Both political parties are directed by the statute to be represented on the board. (This is a frequent pro- vision in recent charters.) The city pays on the board’s requisi- tion all the expenses of the police department. In New York the police commissioners are appointed by the mayor, but in order to “take the department out of politics” an unwritten understanding has been established that he, though himself always a partisan, shall appoint two Democratic and two Repub- lican commissioners. The post of policeman is “spoils” of
the humbler order, but spoils equally divided between the parties.
Taxes in cities, as in rural districts, are levied upon personal as well as real property ; and the city tax is collected along with the county tax and State tax by the same collectors. . There are, of course, endless varieties in the practice of different States and cities as to methods of assessment and to the minor imposts
1 Though sometimes, as in Baltimore, the city legislature appoints a Board of Education. Unhappily, in some cities education is ‘‘ within politics,” and, as may be supposed, with results unfavourable to the independence and even to the quality of the teachers, 2 So in Baltimore,
600 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS t PART I
subsidiary to the property tax. Both real and personal property are usually assessed far below their true value,’ the latter because owners are reticent, the former because the city assessors are anxious to take as little as possible of the State and county burden on the shoulders of their own community, though in this patriotic effort they are checked by the county and State Boards of Equalization. Taxes are usually so much higher in the larger cities than in the country districts or smaller municipalities, that there is a strong tendency for rich men to migrate from the city to its suburbs in order to escape the city collector. Perhaps the city overtakes them, extending its limits and incorporating its suburbs ; perhaps they fly farther afield by the railway and make the prosperity of country towns twenty or thirty miles away. The unfortunate consequence follows, not only that the taxes are heavier for those who remain in the city, but that the philan- thropic and political work of the city loses the participation of those who ought to have shared in it. For a man votes in one place only, the place where he resides, and is taxed on his per- sonalty, although he is taxed on his real property wherever it is situate, perhaps in half a dozen cities or counties. And where he has no vote, he is neither eligible for local office nor deemed entitled to take a part in local political agitation.
It may conduce to a better comprehension of the newest frame of city government if I present an outline of the municipal system in two recently reformed cities. In both of them there had been serious maladministration due to causes to be presently explained, and many efforts had been made to apply drastic remedies. In one, St. Louis, a completely new charter has been enacted, embodying, in the main, the views of municipal reformers. In the other, Boston, a number of specific improvements have been effected in a charter dating from 1854. I begin with the latter as the older city.”
Boston (population in 1880, 362,839) is divided into twenty-four wards and twelve aldermanic districts, each ward being subdivided into voting precincts,
1 In New York the assessor’s valuation of real estate is said to be about 60 per cent of its true value, in Chicago between 20 and 30 per cent of that value (City Government of Philadelphia, p. 328).
? This account of Boston government is abstracted from a-valuable paper by Mr. James M. Bugbee, entitled the “City Government of Boston,” in Johns Hopkins University Studies, fifth series (Baltimore, 1887). It contains some in- teresting extracts from the Report of the Boston Commission of 1884, suggesting reforms, somé of which were adopted by the State legislature.
- OHAP, L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES ~~ 601
with about five hundred voters in each. Municipal elections are held annually early in December.
The mayor is elected for one year by the people of the whole city ; receives $10,000 a year (£2000) ; appoints, subject to confirmation by the board of aldermen, the chief officers and boards (except the police board and street commissioners), and may remove any of them for cause. He summons the heads of departments at least once a month for consultation. Every ordi- nance, order, resolution, or vote of the city council, and every act of either branch or of the school committee involving the expenditure of money, is presented to him for approval, and if disapproved, falls to the ground, unless reconsidered and passed by a two-thirds vote. He may veto separate items in a general appropriation bill. The departments send their estimates to him, which he submits to the council with his recommendations thereon. All drafts on the city treasury, and all contracts exceeding $1000 (£200), require his written approval.! [Note that he is not himself a member of either branch of the city legislature. ]
The legislature, called collectively the City Council, consists of two branches, viz. the Board of Aldermen, elected one from each of twelve districts, and the Common Council of seventy-two members, three for each ward. Both are elected annually. They are restricted to purely legislative (including
financial) functions.
The executive departments are the following :—
Elected by popular vote.-—Three street commissioners, one each year for a three years term, with power to lay out streets and assess damages. When the estimated cost of a street exceeds $10,000 the concurrence of the council is required.
Appointed by mayor and aldermen.—Superintendent of streets, charged with paving, repairing, and watering the streets.
Fire department—three commissioners serving three years.
Head of department for the survey and inspection of buildings. Term three years.
Health department—three commissioners, with large sanitation powers for preserving public health and abating nuisances. Term three years.
Overseers of the poor—four each year. Term three years.2 They manage’ out-door relief and the trust funds which the city holds for that purpose. No salary.
Board of public institutions—nine directors, charged with the care of the alms-houses, houses of correction, of industry, of reformation, house for pauper children, and lunatic hospital. Term three years. No salary. It is in these institutions that in-door relief is given.
1 The mayor has a number of minor duties. “It appears from the latest edition of the Ordinances that no one can climb a tree, or throw stones, or lie on the grass on the Common, without getting a permit from the mayor.”
2 Formerly the people, subsequently the council, elected the overseers, As under both plans men sometimes got in who jobbed for their own benefit, the present scheme was adopted in 1885.
602 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I
City hospital board—five persons. Term five years.
Public library, supported by money voted by the council, five trustees. Term five years. No salary.
Park department—three commissioners. Term three years. No salary.
Water department—board of three which controls the waterworks and fixes price of water. Term three years.
Assessors’ department—five chief assessors, to value real and personal property, and assess city, county, and State taxes. Term three years.
City collector, who levies tax bills delivered to him by the assessors. Ap- pointed annually.
The following further officers are appointed by the mayor and aldermen. For five years—five commissioners of Cedar Grove Cemetery (unpaid) ; for three years—three registrars of voters, six sinking fund commissioners (unpaid) ; for one year—two record commissioners (unpaid), five directors of ferries (unpaid), five trustees of Mount Hope Cemetery (unpaid), city treasurer, city auditor, corporation counsel, city solicitor, superintendent of public buildings, city architect, superintendent of street lights, superintendent of sewers, superintendent of printing, superintendent of Faneuil Hall Market, superintendent of bridges, city surveyor, water registrar, registrar of births, deaths, and marriages, harbour master and ten assistants, commission for certain bridges, inspector of provisions, inspector of milk and vinegar, sealer (and four deputy sealers)’of weights and measures, nine hundred and sixty- eight election officers and their deputies.
The above (so far as paid) are paid by salary fixed by the council. The following officers, also appointed annually by mayor and aldermen, are paid by fees :—
Inspector of lime, three inspectors of petroleum, fifteen inspectors of pressed hay, culler of hoops and staves, three fence viewers, ten field drivers and pound keepers, three surveyors of marble, nine superintendents of hay scales, four measurers of upper leather, fifteen measurers of wood and bark, twenty measurers of grain, three weighers of beef, thirty-eight weighers of coal, five weighers of boilers and heavy machinery, four weighers of ballast and lighters, ninety-two undertakers, one hundred and fifty constables.
In addition to these there is a city clerk, city messenger, and clerk of committees elected by concurrent vote of the City Council, a clerk of the common council elected by that body, and many county officers elected by the voters of the county of Suffolk, in which Boston stands, and of which Boston furnishes nearly the whole population. The county judges, however, are not elected, but, like all other judges in Massachusetts, are appointed by the Governor and Council to hold office quam diw se bene gesserint. Exclusive of election officers and fee-paid officers, the mayor and aldermen appoint 107 persons, of whom 65 are appointed for one year, 61 receive salaries, and 41 aE REE ONT 8 aR cs Ls Ae
1 This board supervises the suburban parks, the Common, and the Public
Garden (together with smaller open spaces), within the city, being under the | charge of a superintendent separately appointed.
,
CHAP. L ; THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 603
serve gratuitously. In the present city administration there are forty separate
-departments and offices, most of them with a large number of subordinates and workmen. ‘This ‘‘multiplicity of departments and departments not only involves the city in expenses not to be measured merely by the salaries paid to superfluous officials,”* but affords a large field for the exercise of party patronage, a patronage partially limited, but as regards subordinates only, by the Massachusetts Civil Service Act of 1884, which is administered by a Civil Service Commission.
Distinct from the rest of the city government is the School Committee of twenty-four members, elected on a general ticket over the whole city, and serving for three years, eight retiring annually.
Also distinct is the Police Department, which, as already observed, has by a statute of 1885 been entrusted to a Board of Police, appointed by the Governor and Council, of three citizens of Boston, with power to ‘appoint, establish, and organize” the police, and to license, regulate, and restrain the sale of intoxicating liquors.? In case of riot, the mayor can take command of the police force.
The city of St. Louis (population in 1880, 350,518) is governed by a charter or scheme of government which, in pur- suance of a special provision for that purpose in the New Con- stitution of Missouri (1875), was prepared by a board of thirteen freeholders elected by the people of the city and county of St. Louis, and was finally adopted and ratified by the people them- selves by a vote at the polls, August 22, 1876.°
St. Louis is divided into 28 wards and 244 voting precincts. Elections are governed by a strict law, which generally prevents frauds, and are quiet, all drinking saloons being closed till midnight.
The mayor is elected by the people for four years, receives $5000 (£1000) salary, is not a member of the city Assembly, with which he communicates by messages. He has the power of returning any bill passed by the Assembly, subject to a power in them to reconsider and pass by a two-thirds vote. He recommends measures to the Assembly, submits reports from the heads of departments, and has a great variety of minor executive duties. He appoints to,a large number of important offices, but in conjunction with the Council (upper house of the Assembly). For the sake of protecting him from the
1 Report of the Commission of 1884.
2 In the cities and towns of Massachusetts the question of granting licences for the sale of intoxicants is annually submitted to popular vote. See note to Chapter LXVI. At present in Boston and most cities the grant has been voted. The annual revenue derived from licences is in Boston over $500,000 (£100,000) per annum.
3 I abridge the following account from a valuable paper by Mr. Marshall S. Snow (professor of history in Washington University, St. Louis), on the “ City Government of St. Louis,” in Johns Hopkins University Studies, third series,
604 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
pressure of those to whom he owes his election, these appointments are made by him at the beginning of the third year of his own term, and for a term of four years.
The Assembly is composed of two houses. The Council consists of thirteen members, elected for four years by ‘‘general ticket”: one-third go out of office every second year. The House of Delegates consists of twenty-eight members, one from each ward. Each Assembly man receives $300 a year, besides his reasonable expenses incurred in the city service. The Assembly has a general legislative power and supervision over all departments, its borrowing and taxing powers being, however, limited.
The administrative departments are the following, viz. :—Thirteen officers elected by the people, viz. comptroller, treasurer, auditor, registrar, collector, marshal, inspector of weights and measures, president of board of assessors, coroner, sheriff, recorder of deeds, public administrator, president of board of public improvements.
Twenty Boards or officers are appointed, most of them for four years, by the mayor with the approval of the Council, viz. :—Board of public improve- ments, consisting of street commissioner, water do., harbour do., park do., sewer do., assessor and collector of water rates, commissioner of public build- ings, commissioner of supplies, commissioner of health, inspector of boilers, city counsellor, jury commissioner, recorder of votes, city attorney, two police court judges, jailer, superintendent of workhouse, chief fire engineer, gas in- spector, assessors, and several city contractors and minor officers.
The four police commissioners who, along with the mayor, are charged with the public safety of St. Louis, are appointed by the Governor of Mis- souri, with the view of keeping this department ‘“‘out of city politics.” In 1886 the police force was 598 men strong, besides 200 private watchmen, paid by their employers, but wearing a uniform and sworn in by the police board.
The city School Board consists of 28 members, one from each ward, elected for three years, one-third retiring annually. It is independent of the mayor and Assembly, chooses its staff and all teachers, has charge of the large school funds, and levies a school tax, which, however, the city collector collects.
The strong points of this charter are deemed to be ‘‘the length of term of its municipal officers ; the careful provisions for honest registration and the party purity of elections ; the checks on financial administration and limita- tions of the debt, and the fact that the important offices to which the mayor appoints are not vacant till the beginning of his third year of office, so that as rewards of political work done during a heated campaign they are too far in the distance to prejudice seriously the merits of an election.” }
On the whole the charter has worked well. Nevertheless the European reader will feel some surprise at the number of elective offices and at the limited terms for which all important offices are held. He will note that even in democratic America
1 Snow, wt supra.
etal , THE GOVERNMENT OF
COs ae 605
e control of the police by city politicians has been deemed too dangerous to be suffered to remain in their hands. And he will
though also less democratic arrangements, which have been found = i ee sufficient for the management of European cities.
—
CHAPTER LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS
Two tests of practical efficiency may be applied to the govern- ment of a city: What does it provide for the people, and what does it cost the people? Space fails me to apply in detail the former of these tests, by showing what each city does or omits to do for its inhabitants; so 1 must be content with observing
that in the United States generally constant complaints are’
directed against the bad paving and cleansing of the streets, the non-enforcement of the laws forbidding gambling and _ illicit drinking, and in some places against the sanitary arrangements and management of public buildings and parks. It would appear that in the greatest cities there is far more dissatisfaction than exists with the municipal administration in such cities as Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, Dublin.
The following indictment of the government of Philadelphia is, however, exceptional in its severity, and however well founded as to that city, must not be taken to be typical. A memorial presented to the Pennsylvania legislature in 1883 by a number of the leading citizens of the Quaker City contained these words :— :
‘*The affairs of the city of Philadelphia have fallen into a most deplorable condition. The amounts required annually for the payment of interest upon the funded debt and current expenses render it necessary to impose a rate of taxation which is as heavy as can be borne.
‘In the meantime the streets of the city have been allowed to fall into such a state as to be a reproach and a disgrace. Philadelphia is now recog- nized as the worst-paved and worst-cleaned city in the civilized world.
‘The water supply is so bad that during many weeks of the last winter it was not only distasteful and unwholesome for drinking, but offensive for bathing purposes.
“The effort to clean the streets was abandoned for months, and no attempt
CHAP. LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 607
was made to that end until some public-spirited citizens, at their own expense, cleaned a number of the principal thoroughfares.
“The system of sewerage and the physical condition of the sewers is notoriously bad—so much so as to be dangerous to the health and most offen- sive to the comfort of our people.
‘* Public work has been done so badly that structures have had to be re- newed almost as soon as finished. Others have been in part constructed at enormous expense, and then permitted to fall to decay without completion.
“Inefficiency, waste, badly-paved and filthy streets, unwholesome and offensive water, and slovenly and costly management, have been the rule for years past throughout the city government.” }
‘In most of the points comprised in the above statement, Philadelphia was probably at that date—for her government has since been reformed—among the least fortunate of American cities. He, however, who should interrogate one of the “good citizens ” of Ba leinore: Cincinnati, New Orleans, New York, Chicago, San Francisco, would have heard then, and would hear now, similar complaints, some relating more to the external con- dition of the city, some to its police administration, but all show- ing that the objects for which municipal government exists have been very imperfectly attained.
The other test, that of expense, is easily applied. Both the debt and the taxation of American cities have risen with unpre- cedented rapidity, and now stand at an alarming figure.
A table of the increase of population, valuation, taxation, and debt, in fifteen of the largest cities of the United States, from 1860 to 1875 shows the following result :—
Increase in population . 2 : 70°5 per cent. 5 taxable valuation : WSO) ay - dake GnWE! Peed) azo ,. : taxation 7 : ‘ 363'27 4,
Looking at some individual cases, we find that the debt rose as follows :— Philadelphia 1867, $35,000,000—1877, $64,000,000
Chicago. . 1867, $4,750,000—1877, $13,456,000 , St. Louis . 1867, $5,500,000—1877, $16,500,000 Pittsburg . 1867, $3,000,000—1877, $13,000,008
1 The New York Commission of 1876 described in equally dark colours the management of that city.—Page 5 of Report. 2 Municipal Development of Philadelphia, by Messrs. Allinson and Penrose,
p: 275. 3 Article “Cities” (by Mr. 8. Stern) in Amer. Cyclop. of Polit. Science.
608 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PARI Il
As respects current expenditure, New York in 1884 spent on current city purposes, exclusive of payments on account of in- terest on debt, sinking fund, and maintenance of judiciary, the sum of $20,232,786—equal to $16°76 (£3: 8s.) for each inhabi-
tant (census of 1880). In Boston, in the same year, the city
expenditure was $9,909,019—equal to $27°30 (£5: 9: 3) for each inhabitant (census of 1880). It is of course true that much of this debt is represented by permanent improvements, yet for another large, and in some cities far larger, part there is nothing to show; it is due to simple waste or (as in New York) to malversation on the part of the municipal authorities.
There is no denying that the government of cities is the one conspicuous failure of the United States. The deficiencies of the National government tell but little for evil on the welfare of the people. The faults of the State governments are insignificant compared with the extravagance, corruption, and mismanage- ment which mark the administrations of most of the great cities. For these evils are not confined to one or two cities. The commonest mistake of Europeans who talk about America is to assume that the political vices of New York are found every- where. The next most common is to suppose that they are found nowhere else. In New York they have revealed them-
selves on the largest scale. They are “gross as a mountain,
monstrous, palpable.” But there is not a city with a population exceeding 200,000 where the poison germs have not sprung into a vigorous life; and in some of the smaller ones, down to 70,000, it needs no microscope to note the results of their growth. Even in cities of the third rank similar phenomena may occasionally be discerned, though there, as some one has said, the jet black of New York or San Francisco dies away into a harmless eray.
For evils which appear wherever a large population is densely aggregated, there must be some general and widespread causes. What are these causes? Adequately to explain them would be to anticipate the account of the party system to be given in the latter part of this volume, for it is that party system which has, not perhaps created, but certainly enormously aggravated them,
1 Mr. Stern observes : “The cost of opening or improving highways and of placing sewers in streets is of course not included in this vast aggregate of moneys annually levied and debt rolled up, because the cost of those improvements is
levied directly upon the land by way of assessments, and they never figure as part of the ordinary expenditure of the city.”—Article “ Cities,” ut supra.
ey CHAP 1, THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 609
and impressed on them their specific type. I must therefore restrict myself for the present to a brief enumeration of the chief sources of the malady, and the chief remedies that have been suggested for or applied to it. No political subject has been so copiously discussed of late years in America by able and experi- enced publicists, nor can I do better than present the salient
facts in the words which some of these men, speaking in a
responsible position, have employed.
The New York commissioners of 1876 appointed “to devise a plan for the government of cities in the State of New York,” sum up the mischief as follows :—
“1. The accumulation of permanent municipal debt: In New York it was, in 1840, $10,000,000; im 1850, $12,000,000; in 1860, $18,000,000 ; in 1870, $73,000,000 ; in 1876, $113,000, 000.3
“*2. The excessive increase of the annual expenditure for ordinary purposes: In 1816 the amount raised by taxation was less than $ per cent on the taxable property ; in 1850, 1°13 per cent; in 1860, 1°69 per cent; in 1870, 2°17 per cent ; in 1876, 2°67 per cent. . . . The increase in the annual expenditure since, 1850, as compared with the increase of population, is more than 400 per cent, and as compared with the increase of taxable property, more than 200
per cent.”
They suggest the following as the causes :— 1. Incompetent and unfaithful governing boards and officers.
1 See Part III., and especially Chapters LXIJ. and LXIII. See also the chapters in Vol. II. on the Tweed Ring in New York City, and the Gas Ring in Philadelphia. The full account given in those chapters of the phenomena of municipal misgovernment in the two largest cities in the United States seems to dispense me from the duty of here describing those phenomena in general.
2 The commission, of which Mr. W. M. Evarts (now senator from New York) was chairman, included some of the ablest men in the State, and its report, presented 6th March 1877, may be said to have become classical.
3 The New York commissioners say: “The magnitude and rapid increase of this debt are not less remarkable than the poverty of the results exhibited as the return for so prodigious an expenditure. It was abundantly sufficient for the construction of all the public works of a great metropolis for a century to come, and to have adorned it besides with the splendours of architecture and art. Instead of this, the wharves and piers are for the most part temporary and perishable structures ; the streets are poorly paved ; the sewers in great measure imperfect, insufficient, and in bad order; the public buildings shabby and inadequate ; and there is little which the citizen can regard with satisfaction, save the aqueduct and its appurtenances and the public park. Even these should not be said to be the product of the public debt ; forthe expense occasioned by them is, or should have been, for the most part already extinguished. In truth, the larger part of the city debt represents a vast aggregate of moneys wasted, embezzled,
or misapplied.”
VOL. I 2k
610 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
‘¢A large number of important offices have come to be filled by men possessing little, if any, fitness for the important duties they are called upon to discharge: . . . These unworthy holders of public trusts gain their places by their own exertions. The voluntary suffrage of their fellow-citizens would never have lifted them into office. Animated by the expectation of unlawful emoluments, they expend large sums to secure their places, and make promises beforehand to supporters and retainers to furnish patronage or place. The corrupt promises must be redeemed. Anticipated gains must be realized. Hence old and educated subordinates must be dismissed and new places ereated to satisfy the crowd of friends and retainers. Profitable contracts must be awarded, and needless public works undertaken. The amounts re- quired to satisfy these illegitimate objects enter into the estimates on which taxation is eventually based, in fact they constitute in many instances a superior lien upon the moneys appropriated for government, and not until they are in some manner satisfied do the real wants of the public receive atten- tion. It is speedily found that these unlawful demands, together with the necessities of the public, call for a sum which, if taken at once by taxation, would produce dissatisfaction and alarm in the community, and bring public indignation upon the authors of such burdens. For the purpose of averting such consequences divers pretences are put forward suggesting the propriety of raising means for alleged exceptional purposes by loans of money, and in the end the taxes are reduced to a figure not calculated to arouse the public to action, and any failure thus to raise a sufficient sum is supplied by an issue of bonds. . . . Yet this picture fails altogether to convey an adequate notion of the elaborate systems of depredation which, under the name of city govern- ments, have from time to time afflicted our principal cities ; and it is more- over a just indication of tendencies in operation in all our cities, and which are certain, unless arrested, to gather increased force. It would clearly be within bounds to say that more than one-half of all the present city debts are the direct results of the species of intentional and corrupt misrule above described.”
2. The introduction of State and national politics into muni- | cipal affairs.
“The formation of general political parties upon differences as to general principles or methods of State policy is useful, or at all events inevitable. But it is rare indeed that any such questions, or indeed any upon which good men ought to differ, arise in connection with the conduct of municipal affairs, Good men cannot and do not differ as to whether municipal debt ought to be restricted, extravagance checked, and municipal affairs lodged in the hands of competent and faithful officers. There is no more reason why the control of the public works of a great city should be lodged in the hands of a Democrat or a Republican than there is why an adherent of one or the other of the great parties should be made the superintendent of a business corporation. Good citizens interested in honest municipal government can
CHAP, LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 611
secure that object only by acting together. Political divisions separate them at the start, and render it impossible to secure the object desired equally by both. . . . This obstacle to the union of good citizens paralyses all ordinary efforts for good municipal government. . . . The great prizes in the shape of place and power which are offered on the broad fields of national and State politics offer the strongest incentives to ambition. Personal advancement is in these fields naturally associated with the achievement of great public objects, and neither end can be secured except through the success of a politi- cal party to which they are attached. The strife thus engendered develops into a general battle in which each side feels that it cannot allow any odds to the other. If one seeks to turn to its advantage the patronage of municipal office, the other must carry the contest into the same sphere. It is certain ‘that the temptation will be withstood by neither. It then becomes the direct interest of the foremost men of the nation to constantly keep their forces in hostile array, and these must be led by, among other ways, the patronage to be secured by the control of local affairs. . . . Next to this small number of leading men there is a large class who, though not dishonest or devoid of public spirit, are led by habit and temperament to take a wholly partisan view of city affairs. Their enjoyment of party struggles, their devotion to those who share with them the triumphs and defeats of the political game, are so intense that they gradually lose sight of the object for which parties exist or ought to exist, and considerable proportions of them in their devotion to politics suffer themselves to be driven from the walks of regular industry, and at last become dependent for their livelihood on the patronage in the hands of their chiefs. Mingled with them is nearly as large a number to whom politics is simply a mode of making a livelihood or a fortune, and who take part in political contests without enthusiasm, and often without the pretence of an interest in the public welfare, and devote themselves openly to the organization of the vicious elements of society in combinations strong enough to hold the balance in a closely-contested election, overcome the political leaders, and secure a fair share of the municipal patronage, or else extort immunity from the officers of thelaw. . . . The rest of the community, embracing the large majority of the more thrifty classes, averse to engaging in what they deem the ‘low business’ of politics, or hopeless of accomplishing any substantial good in the face of such powerful opposing interests, for the most part content themselves with acting in accordance with their respective parties. . . . It is through the agency of the great political parties, organized and operating as above described, that our municipal officers are and have long been selected. It can scarcely be matter of wonder then that the present condition of municipal affairs should present an aspect so desperate.”
3. The assumption by the legislature of the direct control of local affairs.
“This legislative intervention has necessarily involved a disregard of one of the most fundamental principles of republican government (the self-govern-
612 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
ment of municipalities). . . . The representatives elected to the central (State) legislature have not the requisite time to direct the local affairs of the municipalities. . . . They have not the requisite knowledge of details. . . « When a local bill is under consideration in the legislature, its care and ex- planation are left exclusively to the representatives of the locality to which it is applicable ; and sometimes by express, more often by a tacit understanding, local bills are ‘log-rolled’ through the houses, Thus legislative duty is dele- gated to the local representatives, who, acting frequently in combination with the sinister elements of their constituency, shift the responsibility for wrong- doing from themselves to the legislature. But what is even more important, the general representatives have not that sense of personal interest and personal responsibility to their constituents which are indispensable to the intelligent administration of local affairs. And yet the judgment of the local governing bodies in various parts of the State, and the wishes of their constituents, are liable to be overruled by the votes of legislators living at a distance of a hundred miles. . . . To appreciate the extent of the mischief done by the occupation of the central legislative body with the consideration of a multi- tude of special measures relating to local affairs, some good, probably the larger part bad, one has only to take up the session laws of any year at random and notice the subjects to which they relate. Of the 808 acts passed in 1870, for instance, 212 are acts relating to cities and villages, 94 of which relate to cities, and 36 to the city of New York alone. A still larger number have reference to the city of Brooklyn. These 212 acts occupy more than three-fourths of the 2000 pages of the laws of that year... . The multi- plicity of laws relating to the same subjects thus brought into existence is ’ itself an evil of great magnitude. What the law is concerning some of the most important interests of our principal cities can be ascertained only by the exercise of the patient research of professional lawyers. In many instances even professional skill is baffled. Says Chief-Justice Church: ‘It is scarcely safe for any one to speak confidently on the exact condition of the law in respect to public improvements in the cities of New York and Brooklyn. The enactments referring thereto have been modified, superseded, and repealed so often and to such an extent that it is difficult to ascertain just what statutes are in force at any particular time. The uncertainties arising from such multiplied and conflicting legislation lead to incessant litigation with its expensive burdens, public_and private.’ . . . But this is not all nor the worst. It may be true that the first attempts to secure legislative interven- tion in the local affairs of our principal cities were made by good citizens in the supposed interest of reform and good government, and to counteract the schemes of corrupt officials. The notion that legislative control was the proper remedy was a serious mistake. The corrupt cliques and rings thus sought to be baffled were quick to perceive that in the business of procuring special laws concerning local affairs they could easily outmatch the fitful and clumsy labours of disinterested citizens. The transfer of the control of the municipal resources from the localities to the (State) capitol had no other effect than to cause a like transfer of the methods and arts of corruption, and
CHAP, 11 THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 613
to make the fortunes of our principal cities the traffic of the lobbies. Muni- cipal corruption, previously confined within territorial limits, thenceforth escaped all bounds and spread to every quarter of the State. Cities were compelled by legislation to buy lands for parks and places because the owners wished to sell them ; compelled to grade, pave, and sewer streets without inhabitants, and for no other purpose than to award corrupt contracts for the work. Cities were compelled to purchase, at the public expense, and at extravagant prices, the property necessary for streets and avenues, useless for any other purpose than to make a market for the adjoining property thus improved. Laws were enacted abolishing one office and creating another with the same duties in order to transfer official emoluments from one man to another, and laws to change the functions of officers with a view only to a new distribution of patronage, and to lengthen the terms of offices for no other purpose than to retain in place officers who could not otherwise be elected or appointed.”
This last-mentioned cause of evil is no doubt a departure from the principle of local popular control and responsibility on which State governments and rural local governments have been based. It is a dereliction which has brought its punishment with it. But the
resulting mischiefs have been immensely aggravated by the vices
of the legislatures in a few of the States, such as New York and Pennsylvania. As regards the two former causes, they are largely due to what is called the Spoils system, whereby office becomes the reward of party service, and the whole machinery of party government made to serve, as its main object, the getting and keeping of places. Now the Spoils system, with the party machinery which it keeps oiled and greased and always working at high pressure, is far more potent and pernicious in great cities than in country districts. For in great cities we find an ignorant multitude, largely composed of recent immigrants, untrained in self-government ; we find a great proportion of the voters paying no direct taxes, and therefore feeling no interest in moderate tax- ation and economical administration; we find able citizens absorbed in their private businesses, cultivated citizens unusually sensitive to the vulgarities of practical politics, and both sets therefore specially unwilling to sacrifice their time and tastes and comfort in the struggle with sordid wirepullers and noisy dema-
‘gogues. In great cities the forces that attack and pervert demo-
cratic government are exceptionally numerous, the defensive forces that protect it exceptionally ill-placed for resistance. Satan has turned his heaviest batteries on. the weakest part of the ramparts. :
614 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
Besides these three causes on which the commissioners dwell, and the effects of which are felt in the great cities of other States as well as of New York, though perhaps to a less degree, there . are what. may be called mechanical defects in the structure of municipal governments, whose nature may be gathered from the account given in last chapter. There is a want of methods for fixing public responsibility on the governing persons and bodies. If the mayor jobs his patronage he can throw large part of the blame on the aldermen or other confirming council, alleging that he would have selected better men could he have hoped that the aldermen would approve his selection. If he has failed to keep the departments up to their work, he may argue that the city legislature hampered him and would not pass the requisite ordin- ances. Each house of a two-chambered legislature can excuse itself by pointing to the action of the other, or of its own com- mittees, and among the numerous members of the chambers—or even of one chamber if there be but one—responsibility is so much divided as to cease to come forcibly home to any one. The various boards and officials have generally had little intercom- munication ;1 and the fact that some were directly elected by the people made these feel themselves independent both of the mayor and the city legislature. The mere multiplication of elective posts distracted the attention of the people, and deprived the voting at the polls of its efficiency as a means of reproof or com- mendation.”
To trace municipal misgovernment to its sources was compar- atively easy. ‘To show how these sources might be dried up was
1 In Philadelphia some one has observed that there were four distinct and independent authorities with power to tear up the streets, and that there was no authority upon whom the duty was specifically laid to put them in repair again.
2 Mr. Seth Low remarks :—‘ Greatly to multiply important elective officers is not to increase popular control, but to lessen it. The expression of the popular will at the ballot-box is like a-great blow struck by an engine of enormous force. It can deliver a blow competent to overthrow any officer, however powerful. But, as in mechanics, great power has to be subdivided in order to do fine work, so in giving expression to the popular will the necessity of choosing amid a multitude of unimportant officers involves inevitably a loss of power to the
people.” — Address on Municipal Government, delivered at Rochester, N.Y., February 1885.
A trenchant criticism of the prevailing systems of city government may be found in an article in Scribner's Magazine for October 1887 by Mr. G. Bradford. He argues forcibly in favour of having only one elective official, the mayor, of giving every executive function, not to a Board, but to one official only, appointed by the mayor, without confirmation by any one else, and of taking all share in executive administration out of the hands of committees of the city legislature.
CHAP. LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 615
more difficult, though as to some obvious remedies all reformers were agreed. What seemed all but impracticable was to induce the men who had produced these evils, who used them and profited by them, who were so accustomed to them that even the honester sort did not feel their turpitude, to consent to the measures needed for extinguishing their own abused power and illicit gains. It was from the gangs of city politicians and their allies in the State legislatures that reforms had to be sought, and the enactment of their own abolition obtained. In vain would the net be spread in the sight of such birds.
The remedies proposed by the New York commission were the following :— —
(a) A restriction of the power of the State legislature to interfere by special legislation with municipal governments or the conduct of municipal affairs.+
() The holding of municipal elections at a different period of the year from State and National elections.
(c) The vesting of the legislative powers of municipalities in two bodies:—A board of aldermen, elected by the ordinary (manhood) suffrage, to be the common council of each city. A board of finance of from six to fifteen members, elected by voters who had for two years paid an annual tax on property assessed at not less than $500 (£100), or a rent (for premises occupied) of not less than $250 (£50).” This board of finance was to have a practically exclusive control of the taxation and expenditure of each city, and of the exercise of its borrowing powers, and was in some matters to act only by a two-thirds majority.
(d) Limitations on the borrowing powers of the municipality, the concurrence of the mayor and two-thirds of the State legis- lature, as well as of two-thirds of the board of finance being required for any loan except in anticipation of current revenue.
(¢) An extension of the general control and appointing power of the mayor, the mayor being himself subject to removal for cause by the governor of the State.
To introduce all of these reforms it became necessary to amend the constitution of the State of New York; and the commission
1 The constitutions of eleven States now prescribe that cities shall be incor- porated by general laws. This prohibition of special legislation has generally worked well, though it is sometimes evaded. See pp. 513 and 529, ante.
2 This was to apply to cities with a population exceeding 100,000. In smaller
cities the rent was to be $100 at least, and no minimum for the assessed value of the taxed property was to be fixed,
616 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I
drafted a series of amendments accordingly. These went before the State legislature. But the birds saw the net, and naturally omitted to submit the amendments to the people. The report, in fact, fell to the ground. But in the recent legislative charters of several cities, and notably of Brooklyn (as to which see next chapter), some of the commissioners’ suggestions have been adopted, and with excellent results. The most novel of them, however, and the one which excited most hostile criticism, that of creating a council elected by voters having a tax-paying (or
‘rent-paying) qualification, has never been tried in any great city.
It is deemed undemocratic; practical men say there is no use submitting it to a popular vote. Nevertheless, there are still some who advocate it, appealing to the example of Australia, where it is said to have worked well.
Among the other reforms in city government which I find canvassed in America are the following :—
(a) Civil service reform, i.¢. the establishment of examinations as a test for admission to posts under the city, and the bestowal of these posts for a fixed term of years, or generally during good behaviour, instead of leaving the civil servant at the mercy of a partisan chief, who may displace him to make room for a party adherent or personal friend.
(b) The lengthening of the terms of service of the mayor and —
the heads of departments, so as to give them a more assured position and diminish the frequency of elections.—This has been done to some extent in recent charters—witness St. Louis (see above, p. 603) and Philadelphia.
(c) The vesting of almost autocratic executive power in the —
mayor and restriction of the city legislature to purely legislative work and the voting of supplies.—This also finds place in recent charters, notably in that of Brooklyn, and bas worked, on the
1 Though, as the commission pointed out (Report, p. 33), the principle that no one should vote upon any proposition to raise a tax or appropriate its proceeds unless himself liable to be assessed for such tax, was one generally applied in the village charters of the State of New York, and even in the charters of some of the smaller cities. The report repels the charge that this proposal is inconsistent with the general recognition of the value of universal suffrage by saying, ‘‘ No surer method could be devised to bring the principle of universal suffrage into discredit and prepare the way for its overthrow than to pervert it to a use for which it was never intended, and subject it to a service which it is incapable of performing. : To expect frugality and economy in financial concerns from its operation in great cities, where perhaps half of the inhabitants feel no interest in these objects, is to subject the principle to a strain which it cannot bear. All the friends of the system should unite in rescuing it from such perils.”—Page 40.
CHAP. LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 617
_- whole, well. It is, of course, a remedy of the “cure or kill”
order. If the people are thoroughly roused to choose an able and honest man, the more power he has the better ; it is safer in his hands than in those of city councils. If the voters are apathetic and let a bad man slip in, all may be lost till the next election. I do not say “all is lost,” for there have been remark- able instances of men who have been sobered and elevated by power and responsibility. The Greek proverb “ office will show the man” was generally taken in an unfavourable sense. The proverb of the steadier headed Germans, “office gives under- standing” (Amt gibt Verstand), represents a more hopeful view of human nature, and one not seldom justified in American ex- perience.
(d) The election of a city legislature, or one branch of it, or of a school committee, on a general ticket instead of by wards.— When aldermen or councilmen are chosen by the voters of a small local area, it is assumed, in the United States, that they must be residents within it; thus the field of choice among good citizens generally is limited. It follows also that their first duty is deemed to be to get the most they can for their own ward ; they eare little for the general interests of the city, and carry on a game of barter in contracts and public improvements with the representatives of other wards. Hence the general ticket system is preferable.
(¢) The limitation of taxing powers and borrowing powers by reference to the assessed value of the taxable property within the city.—Restrictions of this nature have been largely applied to cities as well as to counties and other local authorities. The results have been usually good, yet not uniformly so, for evasions may be practised. The New York commission say: “The apparent prohibition, both as to taxation and the percentage of debt, could be readily evaded by raising the assessment. Such restrictions do not attempt to prevent the wastefulness or em- bezzlement of the public funds otherwise than by limiting the amount of the funds subject to depredation. The effect of such measures would simply be to leave the public necessities without adequate provision.” And Messrs. Allinson and Penrose
observe—
1 Another disadvantage is that such restriction may sometimes compel a public improvement to be executed piecemeal which could be executed more cheaply if
done all at once. See page 503, ante.
618 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II
“By the Constitution of 1874 it is provided that the debt of a county, city, borough, township, or school district shall never exceed 7 per cent on the assessed value of the taxable property therein. This provision was intended to prevent the encumbering of the property of any citizen for public purposes to a greater extent than 7 per cent. In its workings it has been an absolute failure. In every city of the State, except Philadelphia, the city is part of the county government. The county has power to borrow to the extent of 7 per cent: so has the city: so has the general school district: so has the ward school district-—making 28 per cent in all, which can be lawfully imposed, and has been authorized by the Act of 1874. But there is still another cause of failure to which Philadelphia is more peculiarly liable. In order to evade the provision of the Constitution limiting the power to contract debts to 7 per cent, the assessed value of property in nearly every city of the State was largely increased—in some instances, incredible as it may seem, to the extent of 1000 per cent. It is therefore clear that no sufficient protection against an undue increase of municipal debt can be found in constitutional and legislative pro- visions of this kind.”—Philadelphia, a History of Municipal Development (1887), p. 276.
Nevertheless, such restrictions are now often found embodied in State constitutions, and have, so far as I could ascertain, generally diminished the evil they are aimed at.+
The results of these various experiments, and of others which I have not space to enumerate, are now being watched with eager curiosity by the municipal reformers of the United States. The question of city government is that which chiefly occupies prac- tical publicists, and which newspapers and magazines incessantly discuss, because it is admittedly the weak point of the country. That adaptability of the institutions to the people and their con- ditions, which judicious strangers admire in the United States, and that consequent satisfaction of the people with their institu- tions, which contrasts so agreeably with the discontent of Euro- pean nations, is wholly absent as regards municipal administration. Wherever there is a large city there are loud complaints, and Americans who deem themselves in other respects a model for the Old World are in this respect anxious to study Old World models, those particularly which the cities of Great Britain present. The best: proof of dissatisfaction is to be found in the frequent changes of system and method. What Dante said of his own city may be said of the cities of America: they are like the sick man who cannot find rest upon his bed, but seeks to ease
1 See note in Appendix at the end of this volume.
—
a” THE WORKING OF crry GOVERNMENTS he met:
RV ore,
pain by turning from ee to side. are no one er studies municipal history of the last decades will doubt that things — re better than they were twenty years ago. The newer frames of government are an improvement upon the older. Rogues less audacious. Good citizens are more active. Party spirit. s less and less permitted to dominate oe pervert municipal politics. — Z
—
CHAPTER LU
AN AMERICAN VIEW OF MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT IN THE UNITED STATES!
By the Hon. Suru Low, formerly Mayor of the City of Brooklyn
A city in the United States is quite a different thing from a city in its technical sense, as the word is used in England. In England a city is usually taken to bea place which is or has been the seat of a bishop.? The head of a city govern- ment in England is a mayor, but many boroughs which are not cities are also governed by a mayor. In the United States a city is a place which has received a charter as a city from the legislature of its State. In America there is nothing whatever corresponding to the English borough. Whenever in the United States one enters a place that is presided over by a mayor, he may understand, without further inquiry, that he is in a city.
Any European student of politics who wishes to understand the problem of government in the United States, whether of city government or any other form of it, must first of all transfer himself, if he can, to a point of view precisely the opposite of that which is natural to him. This is scarcely, if at all, less true of the English than of the continental student. In England as upon the continent, from time immemorial, government has descended from the top down. Until recently, society in Europe has accepted the idea, almost without protest, that there must be governing classes, and that the great majority of men must be governed. In the United States that idea does not obtain, and, what is of scarcely less importance, it never has obtained. No distinction is recognized between governing and
1 This chapter is copyright, by Seth Low, 1888.
2 In Scotland, where there have been, since the Revolution, no bishops, Edin-
burgh, Glasgow, and Aberdeen are described as cities, Westminster is a city, but has never had a bishop.
CHAP. LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 621
governed classes, and the problem of government is conceived to be this, that the whole of society should learn and apply to itself the art of government. Bearing this in mind, it becomes apparent that the immense tide of immigration into the United States is a continually disturbing factor. The immigrants come from many countries, a very large proportion of them being of the classes which, in their old homes from time out of mind, ~have been governed. Arriving in America, they shortly become citizens in a society which undertakes to govern itself. However well-disposed they may be as a rule, they have not had experi- ence in self-government, nor do they always share the ideas which have expressed themselves in the Constitution of the United States. This foreign element settles largely in the cities of the country. It is estimated that the population of New York City contains eighty per cent of people who either are - foreign-born, or who are the children of foreign-born parents. Consequently, in a city like New York, the problem of learning the art of government is handed over to a population that begins in point of experience very low down. In many of the cities of the United States, indeed in almost all of them, the population not only is thus largely untrained in the art of self-government, but it is not even homogeneous. So that an American city is confronted not only with the necessity of instructing large and rapidly-growing bodies of people in the art of government, but it is compelled at the same time to assimilate strangely different component parts into an American community. It will be apparent to the student that either one of these functions by itself would be difficult enough. When both are found side by side the problem is increasingly difficult as to each. Together they represent a problem such as confronts no city in the United Kingdom, or in Europe.
The American city has had problems to deal with also of a material character, quite different from those which have con- fronted the cities of the Old World. With the exception of Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, New Orleans, and New York, there is no American city of great consequence whose roots go back into the distant past even of America. American cities as a rule have grown with a rapidity to which the Old World presents few parallels. London, in the extent of its growth, but not in the proportions of it, Berlin since 1870, and Rome in the last few years, are perhaps the only places in Europe which
622 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I
have been compelled to deal with this element of rapid growth in anything like a corresponding degree. All of these cities, London, Berlin, and Rome, are the seats of the national govern- ment, and receive from that source more or less help and guidance in their development. In all of them an immense nucleus of wealth existed before this great and rapid growth began. The problem in America has been to make a great city im a few years out of nothing. There has been no nucleus of wealth upon which to found the structure which every succeeding year has enlarged. Recourse has been had of necessity, under these conditions, to the freest use of the public credit. The city of Brooklyn and the city of Chicago, each with a population now of three-quarters of'a million of people, are but little more than fifty years old. In that period everything now there has been created out of the fields. The houses in which the people live, the water-works, the paved streets, the sewers, everything which makes up the permanent plant of a city, all have been produced while the city has been growing from year to year at a fabulous rate. Besides these things are to be reckoned the public schools, the public parks, and in the case of Brooklyn, the great bridge connecting it with New York, two-thirds of the cost of which is borne by Brooklyn. Looked at in this light the marvel would seem to be, not so much that the American cities are justly criticizable for many defects, but rather that results so great have been achieved in so short a time. The necessity of doing so much so quickly, has worked to the disadvantage of the American city in two ways. First, it has compelled very lavish expenditure under great pressure for quick results. This is pre- cisely the condition under which the best trained business men make their greatest mistakes, and are in danger of running into extravagance and wastefulness. No candid American will deny that American cities have suffered largely in this way, not alone from extravagance and wastefulness, but also from dishonesty ; but in estimating the extent of the reproach, it is proper to take into consideration these general conditions under which the cities have been compelled to work. The second disadvantage which American cities have laboured under from this state of things has been their inability to provide adequately for their current needs, while discounting the future so freely in order to provide their permanent plant. When the great American cities have paid for the permanent plant which they have been accumulating
CHAP, LIT MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 623
during the last half century, so that the duty which lies before them is chiefly that of caring adequately for the current life of their population, a vast improvement in all these particulars may reasonably be expected. In other words, time is a necessary element in making a great city, as it is in every other great and enduring work. American cities are judged by their size rather than by the time which has entered into their growth. It can- not be denied that larger results could have been produced with the money expended if it always had been used with complete honesty and good judgment. But to make an intelligent criticism upon the American city, in its failures upon the material side, these elements of difficulty must be taken into consideration.
Another particular in which the American city may be thought to have come short of what might have been hoped for, may be described in general terms as a lack of foresight. It would have been comparatively easy to have preserved in all of them small open parks, and generally to have made them more beautiful, if there had been a greater appreciation of the need for these things and of the growth the cities were to attain to. The western cities probably have erred in this regard less than those upon the Atlantic coast. But while it is greatly to be regretted that this large foresight has not been displayed, it is after all only repeating in America what has taken place in Europe. The improvement of cities seems everywhere to be made by tearing down and replacing at great cost, rather than by a far-sighted provision for the demands and opportunities of the future. These unfortunate results in America have flowed largely from two causes: first, from inability on the part of the cities to appreciate in advance the phenomenal growth that is coming upon them; and second, from the frequent tendency of population to grow in precisely the direction where it was not expected to. A singular illustration of this last factor is to be found in the city of Washington. The Capitol was made to face towards the east, under the impression that population would settle in that direction; as matter of fact the city has grown towards the west, so that the Capitol stands with its back to the city and faces a district that is scarcely built upon at all.
Probably no detail strikes the eye of the foreigner more un. favourably in connection with the average American city than the poor paving of the streets and their lack of cleanliness. The
Ne!
624 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS 5 PART II
comparison with cities of Europe in these respects is immensely to the disadvantage of the American city. But, in this con- nection, it is not unfair to call attention to the fact that the era of good paving and clean streets in Europe is scarcely more than thirty years old. Poor as is the condition of the streets in most American cities now, it would be risking very little to say that it would average much higher than ten years ago. ‘There are several contributing causes which are reflected in this situation — that represent difficulties from which most European -cities are free. In the first place, frost strikes much deeper in America, and is more trying to the pavements in every way. In the next place, the streets are more often disturbed in connection with gas pipes, steam pipes, and telegraph service, than in European cities. But, apart from these incidental difficulties, the fundamental trouble in connection with the streets of American cities is the lack of sufficient appropriations to put them in first-class condition and to keep them so, both as to paving and as to cleaning. The reason for this has been pointed out.
All the troubles, however, which have marked the develop- ment of cities in the United States are not due to these causes. Cities in the United States, as forms of government, are of com- paratively recent origin. The city of Boston, for example, in the State of Massachusetts, although the settlement was founded more than two hundred and fifty years ago, received its charter as a city so recently as 1822. The city of Brooklyn received its charter from the State of New York in 1835. In other words, the transition from village and town government into government by cities, has simply followed the transition of small places into large communities. This suggests another distinction between the cities of the United States and those of Great Britain. The great cities of England and of Europe, with few exceptions, have their roots in the distant past. Many of their privileges and chartered rights were wrested from the Crown in feudal times. Some of these privileges have been retained, and contribute to the income, the pride, and the influence of the municipality. The charter of an American city represents no element of prestige or inspiration. It is only the legal instrument which gives the community authority to act as a corporation, and which defines the duties of its officers. The motive for passing from town government to city government in general has been the same everywhere—to acquire a certain readiness of action, and
OHAP. LI MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 625
to make more available the credit of the community in order to
provide adequately for its own growth. The town meeting, in which every citizen takes part, serves its purpose admirably in communities up to a certain size, or for the conducting of public work on not too large a scale. But the necessity for efficiency in providing for the needs of growth has compelled rapidly- growing communities, in all the States, to seek the powers of a corporation as administered through a city government. Growing thus out of the town, it happened very naturally that the first conception of the city on the part of Americans was that which had applied to the town and the village as local subdivisions of the commonwealth. Charters were framed as though cities were little states. Americans are only now learning, after many years of bitter experience, that they are not so much little states as large corporations. Many of the mistakes which have marked the progress of American cities up to this point have sprung from that defective conception. ‘The aim deliberately was, to make a city government where no officer by himself should have power enough to do much harm. ‘The natural result of this was to create a situation where no officer had power to do much good. Meanwhile bad men united for corrupt purposes, and the whole organization of the city government aided such in throwing responsibility from one to another. Many ‘recent city charters in the United States proceed upon the more accurate theory that cities, in their organic capacity, are chiefly large corporations. The better results flowing from this theory are easily made clear. Americans are sufficiently adept in the administration of large business enterprises to understand that, in any such undertaking, some one man must be given the power of direction and the choice of his chief assistants ; they understand that power and responsibility must go together from the top to the bottom of every successful business organization. Consequently, when it began to be realized that a city was a business corporation rather than an integral part of the State, the unwillingness to organize the city upon the line of concentrated power in connection with concentrated responsibility began to disappear. The charter of the city of Brooklyn is probably as advanced a type as can be found of the results of this mode of thinking. In Brooklyn the executive side of the city government is represented by the mayor and the various heads of departments. The legislative side consists of a common council of nineteen members, twelve of
VOL. I 28
626 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IL
whom are elected from three districts each having four aldermen, the remaining seven being elected as aldermen at large by the whole city. The people elect three city officers besides the board of aldermen; the mayor, who is the real, as well as the nominal, head of the city ; the comptroller, who is practically. the book-keeper of the city ; and the auditor, whose audit is necessary, for the payment of every bill against the city whether large or small. The mayor appoints absolutely, without confirmation by the common council, all the executive heads of departments. He appoints, for example, the police commissioner, the fire com- missioner, the health commissioner, the commissioner of city works, the corporation counsel or counsellor at law, the city treasurer, the tax collector, and in general all the officials who are charged with executive duties. These officials in turn appoint their own subordinates, so that the principle of defined responsi- bility permeates the city government from top to bottom. The mayor also appoints the board of assessors, the board of education, and the board of elections. The executive officers appomted by the mayor are appointed for a term of two years, that is to say for a term similar to his own. The mayor is elected at the general election in November; he takes office on the first of January following, and for one month the great departments of the city are carried on for him by the appointees of his predecessor. On the first of February it becomes his duty to appoint his own heads of departments, and inasmuch as they serve for the same term as himself, each incoming mayor thus has the opportunity to make an administration in all its parts in sympathy with him- self. Each one of these great executive departments is under the charge of a single head, the charter of the city conforming absolutely, with one exception which is felt to be an anomaly, to the theory that where executive work is to be done it should be com- mitted to the charge of oneman. Where boards of officials exist in Brooklyn, it is because the work committed to them is dis- cretionary more than it is executive in character. These boards, also, are appointed by the mayor without confirmation by the board of aldermen, but they are appointed for terms not coterminous with his own; so that, in most cases, no mayor would appoint the whole of any such board unless he were to be | twice elected by the people. In other words, with quite unim- portant exceptions, the charter of Brooklyn, a city with 750,000 inhabitants, makes the mayor entirely responsible for the con- ©
ih eae he el a! a % Mae SP |p — ¥s ee <r Se han ; wy ae Pye ie Mae = Noe " a seen ; y * Peetu ¥ neh 7a et
v
(
CHAP, LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 627
duct of the city government on its executive side, and, in holding him to this responsibility, equips him fearlessly with the necessary power to discharge his trust. This charter went into effect on the first of January 1882. It has been found to have precisely the merits and the defects which one might expect of such an
‘instrument. A strong executive can accomplish satisfactory
results ; a weak one can disappoint every hope. The community, however, is so well satisfied that the charter is a vast improve- ment on any system which it has tried before, that no voice is raised against it. It has had one notable and especially satisfactory effect. It can be made clear to the simplest citizen that the entire character of the city government for two years depends upon the man chosen for the office of mayor. As a consequence more people have voted in Brooklyn on the subject of the mayoralty than have voted there as to who should be State Governor or who should be President. This is a great anda direct gain for good city government, because it creates and keeps alert a strong public sentiment, and tends to increase the interest of all citizens in the affairs of their city. In the absence of a historic past which ministers to civic pride, and in the presence of many thousands of new-comers at every election, this effect is especially valuable. It may also be said that under present conditions the voting is more intelligent than formerly. The issue is so important, yet so simple, that it can be made clear even to people who have lived but a short time in the city. The same influences tend to secure for the city the services, as mayor, of a higher grade of men, because under such a charter the mayor is given power and opportunity to accomplish some- thing. It appeals to the best that is in a man as strongly as it exposes him to the fire of criticism if he does not do well.
In undertaking to administer this charter, as the first mayor to whom such powers had been committed, the writer adopted two principles which he believed to be essential to success. In the first place, he determined to hold each head of department responsible for results within his department ; and in the second place, he determined to hold himself entirely aloof from the use of patronage, except in so far as the charter of the city, in ex- press terms, made it his duty to make appointments. The effect of this attitude towards his appointees was to leave them entirely free in the choice of their subordinates. Being free, they could justly be held responsible, to the fullest extent, for results.
628 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il
Further than that, being free from pressure from the mayor, they were much stronger to resist pressure as to patronage from out- siders, than otherwise they would have been. Another effect of the mayor’s attitude with reference to patronage, was to secure for himself the confidence of the community, without regard to party, to an unusual extent. Any alarm there might have been, as to the use of the great and unusual powers committed to the mayor by the charter, was quieted at once.
The duties of the mayor under the charter may be considered under three heads. First, in his relation to the executive work of the city ; second, in his relation to the common council or local legislature ; third, in his relation to the legislature of the State.
The successful use of the power of appointment, in the selec- tion of ‘efficient heads of departments, of course underlies the success of a city administration on its executive side. The heads of departments having been appointed, it was the custom of the writer to hold a meeting in the mayor’s office with all his execu- tive appointees, once every week, excepting during the summer when the common council was not in session. This meeting served several purposes. The minutes of the common council at their previous meeting were laid before this informal gather- ing, and the mayor received the advice of the officer whose department would be affected by any proposed resolution or ordinance, as to its probable effect. When a question was brought up of general interest to the city the whole company discussed it, giving to the mayor the advantage of their experi- ence and judgment. These weekly councils were of great value . to the mayor, in determining his attitude on the various questions raised during his term by the common council of the city, every resolution of which body had by law to be passed upon by the mayor, and receive either his approval or his veto. These gatherings of the executive officers of the city were useful in other ways than this. They made all heads of departments personally acquainted with each other, and converted the machinery of the city government, from separate and independ- ent departments, into one organization working in complete har- mony and with singleness of aim. The mayor’s oversight of the executive work of the city, in its current aspect, was further maintained by quarterly reports submitted from each of the large departments. The mayor’s office, in an American city, is in
CHAP. LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 629
receipt of daily complaints touching this or that matter affecting one or more of the citizens. ‘The receipt of all complaints was immediately acknowledged to the persons who made them, if they came by mail, and the complaints were forwarded at once to the proper department for action or explanation. The reply _ was made to the mayor’s office, and was communicated without delay to the maker of the complaint. If remedy was available, this method secured its prompt application. If the matter were beyond reach of remedy, the citizen had at least the satisfaction of knowing why. The multiplicity and character of these com- plaints gave the mayor a daily insight into the efficiency of the departments. By these methods, the mayor was able to keep himself almost as well informed as to the work in each depart- ment of the city as the head of a great business house is informed as to the departments into which his business is divided. Nor need the comparison stop there. The mayor was able to bring the power and influence of his office to bear, to remedy abuses or to suggest improvements in methods, with the same directness and efficiency.
The mayor’s duties in relation to the common council of the city, are chiefly in connection with the obligation, laid upon him by the charter, to approve or disapprove every resolution passed by that body. The mayor’s veto is fatal, unless overridden by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to the council. For three years out of four during which the writer served as mayor, the common council was politically antagonistic to him, half of the time in the proportion of fourteen to five. Notwithstanding this, only two vetoes were overridden in the whole of his four years of service. Two influences probably contributed to this result. First, the care with which, under the advice of his appointees, the mayor took up his positions: and second, the mayor’s refusal to implicate himself, in any way, with the use of patronage. Partisan opposition largely disappeared, before a spirit manifestly free from self-seeking and from partisanship. The same influences led to unusual co-operation, on the part of the common council, in forwarding the plans of the mayor in the direction of positive action. The harmony between the executive and the legislature of the city was scarcely less complete, during this interval, to the great advantage of the city, than was the harmony between the different executive departments themselves.
The relation of the mayor to the legislature of the State
630 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS - PART II ~
proved to be important to an extent not easy to be imagined. The charter of a city, coming as it does from the legislature, is entirely within the control of the legislature. Just as there is no legal bar to prevent the legislature from recalling the charter altogether, so there is no feature of the charter so minute that the legislature may not assume to change it. In the State of New York there is no general law touching the government of cities, and the habit of interference in the details of city action has become to the legislature almost a second nature. In every year of his term, the writer was compelled to oppose at Albany, the seat of the State legislature, legislation seeking to make an increase in the pay of policemen and firemen, without any refer- ence to the financial ability of the city, or the other demands upon the city for the expenditure of money. Efforts were made, ~ also, at one time, to legislate out of office some of the officials who had been appointed in conformity to the charter. New and useless offices were sought to be created, and the mayor found that not the least important of his duties, as mayor, was to protect the city from unwise and adverse legislation on the part of the State. It is a curious circumstance that most of these propositions had their origin with members of the legislature elected to represent different districts of the city itself. The same influences which made the administration strong with the common council, at home, made it also strong with the legislature at Albany, so that, although for one or two years the power to make changes rested with a majority at Albany politically anta- gonistic, no law objected to by the mayor, during this interval, was placed upon the statute-book. The city itself is compelled at times to seek legislation for the enlargement of its powers ; that is to say, the powers committed to a city are strictly limited to those defined by the charter or granted by special acts of the legislature. Consequently, when an unforeseen situation is to be dealt with, calling for unusual methods or powers, it is neces- sary to secure authority to this end from the legislature of the State. The writer found the same general attitude, which has been referred to so often, effectual in this regard also, so that al- most every bill which he desired in the interest of the city, was enacted into law, and this alike by legislatures politically in sym- pathy with the city administration and by legislatures politically antagonistic to it. It is not too much to say, however, that the greatest anxieties of his term sprang from the uncertainties and
GHAR, IIT MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT ~ 631
ee
, _ difficulties of this annual contest, on the one hand to advance the
interest of the city, and on the other to save it from harm in its relations to the law-making power of the State.
Imitating this charter of Brooklyn, the city of Philadelphia, still more recently, has obtained a new charter involving a great departure in the same direction from old methods. Boston and New York both have moved partly along the same line, each with admitted advantage to the city, although neither has gone so far as Brooklyn or Philadelphia. Several smaller places have obtained charters of the same kind. It is not to be supposed that this new form of city charter is the result altogether of abstract thinking. It has grown out of bitter experiences. When the inhabitants of a city found that they did not receive, as matter of fact, the good government which they desired, it did not at first occur to them that the trouble was to a large extent fundamental in their form of charter; or, if it did, the first effort at remedy led to worse mistakes than before. Starting _ with the theory that the path to safety was through division of power, they resorted to all manner of expedients which would compass that end. They established, for instance, police boards and fire boards, which at different times were made to consist of three members, and at other times of four, the latter being known in American parlance as non-partisan. It was supposed that a single individual might be tempted to use his department unfairly in the interest of the party to which he belonged, but that by associating him with others of different parties this tendency would be overcome. It turned out, however, that the moment no one in particular was to blame, partisanship took complete possession of the administration of every department. When one reflects that.in the Government of the United States the immense administrative departments, like the Treasury and the Post-Office, have, from the beginning of the Government, been committed to the care of a single man, it seems strange that, in their cities, Americans should have been so unwilling to proceed upon the same theory. The reason probably is that the city, as above pointed out, has been evolved from the town by the simple process of enlargement. In the town the theory of division of power has been acted upon with substantial uni- formity, and in small communities has worked well. The attempt
1 Non-partisan practically means that the two great parties are equally re- presented upon it.
632 ° THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT
to act upon the same lines in the great and rapidly-growing cities of the country has, in the judgment of many, been as instrumental as any other one element in causing the unsatis- factory results which have marked the progress of many Ameri- can cities. For the purposes of this chapter it is not necessary to enlarge further upon this thought. It is emphasized thus far for the purpose of showing that all the large class of difficulties which American cities have been obliged to face by reason of faulty charters are not irremediable. The actual process of change from one system of charter to another has been marked incidentally by one unfortunate effect. The city charter, coming as it does from the legislature, lies entirely within the control of the legislature. The many appeals to the legislature for charter amendment of one kind and another have bred a habit in some of the States, if not in all, of constant interference by the legis- lature with the local details of city action. This interference, though often prompted by a genuine desire to relieve a city from pressing evils, has tended very greatly to lessen the sense of responsibility on the part of local officials, and upon the part of communities themselves. It is one of the best effects of Brooklyn’s charter, that it has helped to create in that city a very: decided spirit of home rule, which is ready to protest at any moment against interference on the part of the State with local matters.
It remains to be said that the one organic problem in con- nection with the charters of cities, which apparently remains as far from solution as ever in America, is that which concerns the legislative branch of city government. In some cities the legis- lative side is represented by two bodies, or houses, known by different names in different cities, and presenting the same general characteristics as a State legislature with its upper and lower house. The most conspicuous instances of this kind are furnished by the city of Boston and the city of Philadelphia. In all the cities of New York State, the legislative branch con- sists of a single chamber indifferently spoken of as the Board of Aldermen or the Common Council. But whether these bodies have been composed of one house or two, the moment a city has become large they have ceased to give satisfactory results. Originally these bodies were given very large powers, in order to carry out to the utmost the idea of local self-government. As a rule they have so far abused these powers that almost every-
| CHAP, LIT MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 633
where the scope of their authority has been greatly restricted. In the city of New York that tendency has been acted upon to so great an extent as to deprive the common council of every important function it ever possessed, except the single power to grant public franchises. How greatly they have abused this remaining power is unfortunately matter of public record. The powers thus taken away from the common council, are ordinarily lodged with boards made up of the higher city officials. Even in the city of New York it has seldom been the case that the mayor of the city has not been a man of good repute and of some parts. As a general proposition, it is found in American cities that the larger the constituency to which a candidate must appeal, and the more important the office, the more of a man the candidate must be. What may be the outcome of this difficulty as to the legislative body in cities, it is impossible to say. Some- times it seems almost as though the attempt would be made to govern cities without any local legislature. But, on the other hand, there are so many matters in regard to which such a body ought to have power, that thus far no one has ventured seriously to take so extreme a view. It may fairly be said to be, there- fore, the great unsolved organic problem in connection with municipal government in the United States. That it is so, illustrates with vividness the justice of the American view that it is a dangerous thing, in wholly democratic communities, to make the legislative body supreme over the executive.
Thus far in this chapter, the shortcomings of the American city have been admitted, and the effort has been made to show the peculiar difficulties with which such a city has to deal. It ought to be said that, despite all of these difficulties, the average American city is not going from bad to worse. There is sub- stantial reason for thinking that the general tendency, even in the larger cities, is towards improvement. Life and property are more secure in almost all of them than they used to be. Certainly there has been no decrease of security such as might reasonably have been expected to result from increased size. Less than a score of years ago it was impossible to have a fair election in New York or Brooklyn. To-day, and for the last decade, under the present system of registry laws, every elec- tion is held with substantial fairness. The health of our cities does not deteriorate, but on the average improves. So that in the large and fundamental aspect of the question the
634 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I]
progress, if slow, is steady in the direction of better things. It
is not strange that a people conducting an experiment in city government for which there is absolutely no precedent, under conditions of exceptional difficulty, should have to stumble towards correct and successful methods through experiences which may be both costly and distressing. There is no other road towards improvement in the coming time. But it is prob- able that in another decade Americans will look back on some of the scandals of the present epoch in city government, with as much surprise as they now regard the effort to control fires by the volunteer fire department, which was insisted upon, even in the city of New York, until within twenty years. As American cities grow in stability, and provide themselves with the neces- sary working plant, they approximate more and more in physical conditions to those which prevail in most European cities. As they do so, it is reasonable to expect that their pavements will improve and the cleansing of their streets will be more satisfac- tory. American cities, as a rule, have a more abundant supply of water than European cities, and they are much more enter- prising in furnishing themselves with what in Europe might be called the luxuries of city life, but which, in America, are so common as almost to be regarded as necessities. Especially is this true of every convenience involving the use of electricity. There are more telephone wires, for example, in New York and Brooklyn, than in the whole of the United Kingdom. The problem of placing these wires underground therefore, to take in passing an illustration, of another kind, of the difficulties of city
government in America, is vastly greater than in any city’
abroad, because the multiplication of the wires is so constant
and at so rapid a rate that as fast as some are placed beneath the
surface, those which have been strung while this process has been going on seem as numerous as before the underground move- ment began.
It may justly be said, therefore, that the American city, if open to serious blame, is also deserving of much praise. Every one understands that universal suffrage has its drawbacks, and in cities these defects become especially evident. It would be un- candid to deny that many of the problems of American cities spring from this factor, especially because the voting population is continually swollen by foreign immigrants whom time alone can educate into an intelligent harmony with the American
cay ee ee
CHAP. LIT MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 635
system. But because there is scum upon the surface of a boiling liquid, it does not follow that the material, nor the process to which it is subjected, is itself bad. Universal suffrage, as it exists in the United States, is not only a great element of safety in the present day and generation, but is perhaps the mightiest educational force to which the masses of men ever have been exposed. In a country where wealth has no hereditary sense of obligation to its neighbours, it is hard to conceive what would be the condition of society if universal suffrage did not compel every one having property to consider, to some extent at least, the well-being of the whole community.
It is probable that no other system of government would have been able to cope any more successfully, on the whole, with the actual conditions that American cities have béen compelled to face. It may be claimed for American institutions even in cities, that they lend themselves with wonderfully little friction to growth and development and to the peaceful assimilation of new and strange populations. Whatever defects have marked the progress of such cities, no one acquainted with their history will deny that since their problem assumed its present aspect, progress has been made, and substantial progress, from decade to decade. The problem will never be anything but a most difficult one, but with all its difficulties there is every reason to
be hopeful.
PAR Tait THE PARTY SYSTEM
CHAPTER LIII POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY
In the preceding chapters I have endeavoured to describe the legal framework of American government as it exists both in the nation and in the States. Beginning from the Federal and State Constitutions we have seen what sort of a structure has been erected upon them as a foundation, what methods of legislation and administration have been developed, what results these methods have produced. It is only occasionally and incidentally that we have had to consider. the influence upon political bodies and methods of those extra-legal groupings of men which we call political parties. But the spirit and force of party has in America been as essential to the action of the machinery of government as steam is to a locomotive engine; or, to vary the simile, party association and organization are to the organs of government almost what the motor nerves are to the muscles, sinews, and bones of the human body. They transmit the motive power, they determine the directions in which the organs act. A description of them is therefore a necessary complement to an account of the Constitution and government; for it is into the hands of the parties that the working of the government has fallen. Their ingenuity, stimulated by incessant rivalry, has turned many pro- visions of the Constitution to unforeseen uses, and given to the legal institutions of the country no small part of their present colour.
To describe the party system is, however, much harder than it has been to describe those legal institutions. Hitherto we have been on comparatively firm ground, for we have had definite data to rely upon, and the facts set forth have been mostly patent facts which can be established from books and documents. But now
cHAP. LUI POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 637
we come to phenomena for a knowledge of which one must trust to a variety of flying and floating sources, to newspaper para- graphs, to the conversation of American acquaintances, to impres- sions formed on the spot from seeing incidents and hearing stories and anecdotes, the authority for which, though it seemed sufficient at the time, cannot always be remembered. Nor have I the advantage of being able to cite any previous treatise on the sub- ject ; for though the books and articles dealing with the public life of the United States may be counted by hundreds, I know of no author who has set himself to describe impartially the actual daily working of that part of the vast and intricate political machine which lies outside the Constitution, nor, what are more important still, the influences which sway the men by whom this machine has been constructed and is daily manipulated. The task, however, cannot be declined ; for it is that very part of my undertaking which, even though imperfectly performed, may be most serviceable to the student of modern politics. A philosopher in Germany, who had mastered all the treatises on the British Constitution, perused every statute of recent years, and even followed through the newspapers the debates in Parliament, would know far less about the government and politics of England than he might learn by spending a month there con- versing with practical politicians, and watching the daily changes of sentiment during a parliamentary crisis or a general election. So, too, in the United States, the actual working of party government is not only full of interest and instruction, but is so unlike what a student of the Federal Constitution could have expected or foreseen, that it is the thing of all others which any one writing about America ought to try to portray. In the knowledge of a stranger there must, of course, be serious gaps. I am sensible of the gaps in my own. But since no native American has yet essayed the task of describing the party system of his country, it is better that a stranger should address himself to it, than that the inquiring European should have no means of satisfying his curiosity. Anda native American writer, even if he steered clear of partisanship, which I think he might, for in no country does one find a larger number of philosophically judicial observers of politics, would suffer from his own familiarity with many of those very things which a stranger finds perplexing. Describe English politics to an intelligent foreigner and you will find his questions directed to the points which you have passed
638 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II
over, because obvious to yourself, while they may probably sug- gest to you new aspects which it has never occurred to you to consider. Thus European and perhaps even American readers may find in the sort of perspective which a stranger gets of transatlantic phenomena some compensation for his necessarily inferior knowledge of details.
In America the great moving forces are the parties. The government counts for less than in Europe, the parties count for more ; and the fewer have become their principles and the fainter their interest in those principles, the more perfect has become their organization. The less of nature the more of art; the less spontaneity the more mechanism. But before I attempt to describe this organization, something must be said of the doctrines which the parties respectively profess, and the explanation of the doctrines involves a few preliminary words upon the history of party in. America.
Although the early colonists carried with them across the sea some of the habits of English political life, and others may have been subsequently imitated from the old country, the parties of the United States are pure home growths, developed by the cir- cumstances of the nation. The English reader who attempts, as Englishmen are apt to do, to identify the great American parties with his own familiar Whigs and Tories, or even to discover a general similarity between them, had better give up the attempt, for it will lead him hopelessly astray. Here and there we find points of analogy rather than of resemblance, but the moment we try to follow out the analogy it breaks down, so different are the issues on which English and American politics have turned.
In the United States, the history of party begins with the Constitutional Convention of 1787 at Philadelphia. In its debates and discussions on the drafting of the Constitution there were revealed two opposite tendencies, which soon afterwards appeared on a larger scale in the State Conventions, to which the new instrument was submitted for acceptance. These were the centrifugal and centripetal tendencies—a tendency to maintain both the freedom of the individual citizen and the independence in legislation, in administration, in jurisdiction, indeed in every- thing except foreign policy and national defence, of the several States; an opposite tendency to subordinate the States to the nation and vest large powers in the central Federal authority.
The charge against the Constitution that it endangered State
cHAP. LUI POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 639
rights evoked so much alarm that some States were induced to ratify only by the promise that certain amendments should be added, which were accordingly accepted in the course of the next three years. When the machinery had been set in motion by the choice of George Washington as president, and with him of a Senate and a House of Representatives, the tendencies which had opposed or supported the adoption of the Constitution reappeared not only in Congress but in the President’s cabinet, where Alexander Hamilton, secretary of the treasury, counselled a line of action which assumed and required the exercise of large powers by the Federal government, while Jefferson, the secretary of state, desired to practically restrict its action to foreign affairs. The advocates of a central national authority had begun to receive the name of Federalists, and to act pretty constantly together, when an event happened which, while it tightened their union, finally consolidated their opponents also into a party. This was the creation of the French Republic and its declaration of war against England. The Federalists, who were shocked by the excesses of the Terror of 1793, counselled neutrality, and were more than ever inclined to value the principle of authority, and to allow the Federal power a wide sphere of action. The party of Jefferson, who had now retired from the administration, were pervaded by sympathy with French ideas, were hostile to England whose attitude continued to be discourteous, and sought to restrict the interference of the central government with the States, and to allow the fullest play to the sentiment of State independence, of local independence, of personal independence. ‘This party took the name of Republicans or Democratic Republicans, and they are the predecessors of the present Democrats. Both parties were, of course, attached to republican government—that is to say, were alike hostile to a monarchy. But the Jeffersonians had more faith in the masses and in leaving things alone, together with less respect for authority, so that in a sort of general way one may say that while one party claimed to be the apostles of Liberty, the other represented the principle of Order.
These tendencies found occasions for combating one another, not only in foreign policy and in current legislation, but also in the construction and application of the Constitution. Like all documents, and especially documents which have been formed by a series of compromises between opposite views, it was and is susceptible of various interpretations, which the acuteness of both
640 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III
sets of partisans was busy in discovering and expounding. While the piercing intellect of Hamilton developed all those of its pro- visions which invested the Federal Congress and President with far-reaching powers, and sought to build up a system of institu- tions which should give to these provisions their full effect, Jefferson and his coadjutors appealed to the sentiment of indi- vidualism, strong in the masses of the people, and, without venturing to propose alterations in the text of the Constitution, protested against all extensions of its letter, and against all the assumptions of Federal authority which such extensions could be made to justify. Thus two parties grew up with tenets, leaders, impulses, sympathies, and hatreds, hatreds which soon became so bitter as not to spare the noble and dignified figure of Washington himself, whom the angry Republicans assailed with invectives the more unbecoming because his official position forbade him to reply.
At first the Federalists had the best of it, for the reaction against the weakness of the old Confederation which the Union had superseded disposed sensible men to tolerate a strong central power. The President, though not a member of either party, was, by force of circumstances, as well as owing to the influence of Hamilton, practically with the Federalists. But during the presidency of John Adams, who succeeded Washington, they committed grave errors. When the presidential election of 1800 arrived, it was seen that the logical and oratorical force of Hamilton’s appeals to the reason of the nation told far less than the skill and energy with which Jefferson played on their feelings and prejudices. The Republicans triumphed in the choice of their chief, who retained power for eight years (he was re-elected in 1804), to be peaceably succeeded by his friend Madison for another eight years (elected in 1808, re-elected in 1812), and his disciple Monroe for eight years more (elected in 1816, re- elected in 1820). Their long-continued tenure of office was due not so much to their own merits, for neither Jefferson nor Madi- son conducted foreign affairs with success, as to the collapse of their antagonists. The Federalists never recovered from the blow given in the election of 1800. They lost Hamilton by death in 1803. No other leader of equal gifts appeared, and the party, which had shown little judgment in the critical years
1 In mockery of the title he had won from public gratitude a few years before, he was commonly called by them ‘‘ The stepfather of his country.”
a Pe
CHAP. L111 POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 641
‘1810-14, finally disappears from sight after the second peace with England in 1815.
One cannot note the disappearance of this brilliant figure, to Europeans the most interesting in the earlier history of the Republic, without the remark that his countrymen seem to have never, either in his lifetime or afterwards, duly recognized his splendid gifts. Washington is, indeed, a far more perfect charac- ter. Washington stands alone and unapproachable, like a snow- peak rising above its fellows into the clear air of morning, with a dignity, constancy, and purity which have made him the ideal type of civic virtue to succeeding generations. No greater benefit could have befallen the republic than to have such a type set from the first before the eye and mind of the people. But Hamilton, of a virtue not so flawless, touches us more nearly, not only by the romance of his early life and his tragic death, but by a certain ardour and impulsiveness, and even tenderness of soul, joined to a courage equal to that of Washington himself. Equally apt for war and for civil government, with a profundity and amplitude of view rare in practical soldiers or statesmen, he stands in the front rank of a generation never surpassed in history, a generation which includes Burke and Fox and Pitt and Grattan, Stein and Hardenberg and William von Humboldt, Wellington and Napoleon. ‘Talleyrand, who seems to have felt for him something as near affection as that cold heart could feel, said, after knowing all the famous men of the time, that only Fox and Napoleon were Hamilton’s equals, and that he had divined Europe, having never seen it.
This period (1788-1824) may be said to constitute the first act in the drama of American party history. The people, accus- _tomed hitherto to care only for their several commonwealths, learn to value and to work their new national institutions. They become familiar with the Constitution itself, as partners get to know, when disputes arise among them, the provisions of the partnership deed under which their business has to be carried on. It is found that the existence of a central Federal power does not annihilate the States, so the apprehensions on that score are allayed. It is also discovered that there are unforeseen directions, such for instance as banking and currency, through which the Federal power can strengthen its hold on the nation. Differences of view and feeling give rise to parties, yet parties are formed by no means solely on the basis of general principles,
VOL. I Ze
642 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III.
but owe much to the influence of prominent personalities, of transient issues, of local interests or prejudices. The small farmers and the Southern men generally follow the Republican standard borne aloft by the great State of Virginia, while the strength of the Federalists lies in New England and the middle States, led sometimes by Massachusetts, sometimes by Pennsyl- vania. The commercial interest was with the Federalists, and the staid solid Puritanism of all classes, headed by the clergy. Some one indeed has described the struggle from 1796 to 1808 as one between Jefferson, who was an avowed free-thinker, and the New England ministers, and no doubt the ministers of religion did in the Puritan States exert a political influence approaching that of the Presbyterian clergy in Scotland during the seven- teenth century. Jefferson’s importance lies in the fact that he ‘became the representative not merely of democracy, but of local democracy, of the notion that government is hardly wanted at all, that the people are sure to go right if they are left alone, that he who resists authority is prima facie justified in doing so, because authority is prima facie tyrannical, that a country where each local body in its own local area looks after the objects of common concern, raising and administering any such funds as are needed, and is interfered with as little as possible by any external power, comes nearest to the ideal of a truly free people. Some intervention on the part of the State there must be, for the State makes the law and appoints the judges of appeal; but the less one has to do with the State, and a fortiori the less one has to do with the less popular and more encroaching Federal authority, so much the better. Jefferson impressed this view on his countrymen with so much force and such personal faith that he became a sort of patron saint of freedom in the eyes of the next generation, who used to name their children after him, and to give dinners and deliver high-flown speeches on his birthday, a festival only second in importance to the immortal Fourth of July. He had borrowed from the Revolutionists of France even their theatrical ostentation of simplicity. He rejected the ceremonial with which Washington had sustained the chief magistracy of the nation, declaring that to him there was no majesty but that of the people.
1 Tt is related of a New England clergyman that when, being about to baptize a child, he asked the father the child’s name, and the father replied, “Thomas Aj ehatton,” he answered i in a loud voice, ‘* No such unchristian name: John Adams, I baptize thee,” with the other sacramental words of the rite,
CHAP, L111 POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 643
As New England was, by its system of local self-government through the town meeting, as well as by the absence “of slavery, in some respects the most democratic part of the United States, it may seem surprising that it should have been a stronghold of the Federalists. The reason is to be found partly in its Puritan- ism, which revolted at the deism or atheism of the French revolu- tionists, partly in the interests of its shipowners and merchants, who desired above all things a central government which, while strong enough to make and carry out treaties with England and so secure the development of American commerce, should be able also to reform the currency of the country and institute a national banking system.. Industrial as well as territorial interests were already beginning to influence politics. That the mercantile and manufacturing classes, with all the advantages given them by their wealth, their intelligence, and their habits of co-operation, | should have been vanquished by the agricultural masses, may be ascribed partly to the fact that the democratic impulse of the War of Independence was strong among the citizens who had grown to manhood between 1780 and 1800, partly to the tactical errors of the Federalist leaders, but largely also to the skill which Jefferson showed in organizing the hitherto undisciplined battalions of Republican voters. Thus early in American history was the secret revealed, which Europe is only now discovering, that in free countries with an extended suffrage, numbers without organization are helpless and with it omnipotent.
ai have ventured to dwell on this first period, because being the first it shows the origin of tendencies which were to govern the subsequent course of party strife. But as I am not writing a history of the United States I pass by the particular issues over which the two parties wrangled, most of them long since extinct. One remark is however needed as to the view which each took of the Constitution. Although the Federalists were in general the advocates of a loose and liberal construction of the fundamental instrument, because such a construction opened a wider sphere to Federal power, they were ready, when- ever their local interests stood in the way, to resist Congress and the executive, alleging that the latter were overstepping their jurisdiction. In 1814 several of the New England States, where the opposition to the war then being waged with England was strongest, sent delegates to a convention at Hartford, which, while discussing the best means for putting an end to the war
644 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III
and restricting the powers of Congress in commercial legislation,
was suspected of meditating a secession of the trading States from the Union. On the other hand, the Republicans did not hesitate to stretch to their utmost, when they were themselves in
power, all the authority which the Constitution could be construed |
to allow to the executive and the Federal government generally. The boldest step which a president has ever taken, the purchase from Napoleon of the vast territories of France west of the Missis- sippi which went by the name of Louisiana, was taken by Jefferson without the authority of Congress. Congress subsequently gave its sanction. But Jefferson and many of his friends held that under the Constitution even Congress had not the power to acquire new territories to be formed into States. They were therefore in the dilemma of either violating the Constitution or losing a golden opportunity of securing the Republic against the growth on its western frontier of a powerful and possibly hostile foreign state. Some of them tried to refute their former arguments against a
lax construction of the Constitution, but many others avowed the ~
dangerous doctrine that if Louisiana could be brought in only by breaking down the walls of the Constitution, broken they must be.1
The disappearance of the Federal party between 1815 and 1820 left the Republicans masters of the field. But in the United States if old parties vanish nature produces new ones. Sectional divisions soon arose among the men who joined in electing Monroe in 1820, and under the influence of the personal hostility of Henry Clay and Andrew Jackson (chosen President in 1828), two great parties were again formed (about 1830) which some few years later absorbed the minor groups. One of these two parties carried on, under the name of Democrats, the dogmas and traditions of the Jeffersonian Republicans. It was the defender of States’ Rights and of a restrictive construction of the Constitution ;-it leant mainly on the South and the farming classes generally, and it was therefore inclined to free trade. The other section, which called itself at first the National Repub- lican, ultimately the Whig party, represented many of the views of the former Federalists, such as their advocacy of a tariff for the protection of manufactures, and of the expenditure of public
1 The best authorities now hold that the Constitution did really permit the Federal government to acquire the new territory, and Congress to form States out of it. —See the interesting pamphlet of Judge Thomas M. Cooley, The Purchase of Louisiana, Indianapolis, 1886. Many of the Federalist leaders warmly opposed the purchase, but the far-seeing patriotism of Hamilton defended it.
cHAP. LI POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 645
_ money on internal improvements. It was willing to increase the army and navy, and like the Federalists found its chief, though by no means its sole, support in the commercial and manufacturing parts of the country, that is to say, in New England and the middle States. Meantime a new question far more exciting, far more menacing, had arisen. In 1819, when Missouri applied to be admitted into the Union as a State, a sharp contest broke out in Congress as to whether slavery should be permitted within her limits, nearly all the Northern members voting against slavery, nearly all the Southern members for. The struggle might have threatened the stability of the Union but for the compromise adopted next year, which, while admitting slavery in Missouri, forbade it for the future north of lat. 36°30’. The danger seemed to have passed, but in its very suddenness there had been something terrible. Jefferson, then over seventy, said that it startled him “like a fire-bell in the night.” After 1840 things grew more serious, for whereas up till that time new States had been admitted substantially in pairs, a slave State balancing a free State, it began to be clear that this must shortly cease, since the remaining territory out of which new States would be formed lay north of the line 36°30’. As every State held two seats in the Senate, the then existing balance in that chamber between slave States and free States would evidently soon be overset by the admission of a larger number of the latter. The apprehension of this event, with its probable result of legislation unfriendly to slavery, stimulated the South to the annexation of Texas, and made them increasingly sensitive to the growth, slow as that growth was, of Abolitionist opinions at the North. The question of the extension of slavery west of the Missouri river had become by 1850 the vital and absorbing question for the people of the United States, and as in that year California, having organized herself without slavery, was knock- ing at the doors of Congress for admission as a State, it had become an urgent question which evoked the hottest passions, and the victors in which would be victors all along the line. But neither of the two great parties ventured to commit itself either way. ‘The Southern Democrats hesitated to break with those Democrats of the Northern States who sought to restrict slavery. The Whigs of the North, fearing to alienate the South by any decided action against the growing pretensions of the slave-holders, temporized and suggested compromises which
646 THE PARTY SYSTEM ~ PART III
practically served the cause of slavery. They did not perceive that in trying to preserve their party they were losing hold of the people, alienating from themselves the men who cared for principle in politics, sinking into a mere organization without a faith worth fighting for. That this was so presently appeared. The Democratic party had by 1852 passed almost completely under the control of the slave-holders, and was adopting the dogma that Congress enjoyed under the Constitution no power to prohibit slavery in the territories. This dogma obviously overthrew as unconstitutional the Missouri compromise of 1820. The Whig leaders discredited themselves by Henry Clay’s com- promise scheme of 1850, which, while admitting California as a free State, appeased the South by the Fugitive Slave Law. They received a crushing defeat at the presidential election of 1852 ; and what remained of their party finally broke in pieces in 1854 over the bill for organizing Kansas as a territory in which the question of slaves or no slaves should be left to the people, a bill which of course repealed the Missouri compromise. Singu- larly enough, the two great orators of the party, Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, both died in 1852, wearied with strife and disappointed in their ambition of reaching the presidential chair. Together with Calhoun, who passed away two years earlier, they are the ornaments of this generation, not indeed rising to the stature of Washington or Hamilton, but more remarkable than any, save one, among the statesmen who have followed them! With them ends the second period in the annals of American parties, which, extending from about 1820 to 1856, includes the rise and fall of the Whig party. Most of the controversies which filled it have become matter for history only. But three large results, besides the general demo- cratization of politics, stand out. One is the detachment of the United States from the affairs of the Old World. Another is the growth of a sense of national life, especially in the Northern and Western States, along with the growth at the same time of a secessionist spirit among the slave-holders. And the third is the development of the complex machinery of party organization, with the adoption of the principle on which that machinery so largely rests, that public office is to be enjoyed only by the adherents of the President for the time being.
1 Powerful pictures of the political struggles of this time may be found in Mr. Schurz’s Life of Henry Clay, and Dr. von Holst’s Life of John C. Calhoun.
cHaP. ur POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 647
‘
The Whig party having vanished, the Democrats seemed to be for the moment, as they had been once before, left in possession of the field. But this time a new antagonist was quick to appear. The growing boldness of the slave-owners had begun to alarm the Northern people when they were startled by the decision of the Supreme court, pronounced in the case of the slave Dred Scott, which laid down the doctrine that Congress had no power to forbid slavery anywhere, and that a slave-holder might carry his slaves with him where he pleased, seeing that they were mere objects of property, whose possession the Constitution guaranteed.! This hastened the formation out of the wrecks of the Whigs of a new party, which took in 1856 the name of Republican, while at the same time it threw an apple of discord among the Democrats. In 1860 the latter could not agree upon a candidate for President. The Southern wing pledged themselves to one man, the Northern wing to another; a body of hesitating and semi-detached politicians put forward a third. Thus the Republicans through the divisions of their opponents triumphed in the election of Abraham Lincoln, presently followed by the secession of eleven slave States.
The Republican party, which had started by denouncing the Dred Scott decision and proclaiming the right of Congress to restrict slavery, was of course throughout the Civil War the defender of the Union and the assertor of Federal authority, stretched, as was unavoidable, to lengths previously unheard of. When the war was over, there came the difficult task of recon- structing the now reconquered slave States, and of securing the position in them of the lately liberated negroes. The outrages perpetrated on the latter, and on white settlers in some parts of the South, required further exertions of Federal authority, and made the question of the limit of that authority still a practical one, for the old Democratic party, almost silenced during the war, had now reappeared in full force as the advocate of State rights, and the watchful critic of any undue stretches of Federal authority. It was found necessary to negative the Dred Scott decision and set at rest all questions relating to slavery and to the political equality of the races by the adoption of three important amendments to the Constitution. The troubles of the South by degrees settled down as the whites regained possession of the State
1 This broad doctrine was not necessary for the decision of the case, but de- livered as an obiter dictum by the majority of the court.
648 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART ILI
governments and the Northern troops were withdrawn. In the presidential election of 1876 the war question and negro question had become dead issues, for it was plain that a large and increasing number of the voters were no longer, despite the appeals of the Republican leaders, seriously concerned about them.
This election marks the close of the third period, which em- braces the rise and overwhelming predominance of the Republican party. Formed to resist the extension of slavery, led on to destroy it, compelled by circumstances to expand the central authority in a way unthought of before, that party had now worked out its programme and fulfilled its original mission. The old aims were accomplished, but new ones had not yet been substituted, for though new problems had appeared, the party was not prepared with solutions. Similarly the Democratic party had discharged its mission in defending the rights of the reconstructed States, and criticizing excesses of executive power ; similarly it too had refused to grapple either with the fresh questions which had begun to arise since the war, or with those older questions which had now reappeared above the subsiding flood of war days. ‘The old parties still stood as organizations, and still claimed to be the exponents of principles. Their respective principles had, however, little direct application to the questions which confronted and divided the nation. A new era was opening which called either for the evolution of new parties, or for the transformation of the old ones by the adoption of tenets and the advocacy of views suited to the needs of the time. But this fourth period, which began with 1876, has not yet seen such a transformation, and we shall therefore find, when we come to examine the existing state of parties, that there is an unreality and lack of vital force in both Republicans and Democrats, powerful as their organizations are.
The foregoing sketch, given only for the sake of explaining the present condition of parties, suggests some observations on the foundations of party in America.
If we look over Europe we shall find that the grounds on which parties have been built and contests waged since the - beginning of free governments have been in substance but few. In the hostility of rich and poor, or of capital and labour, in the fears of the Haves and the desire of the Have-nots, we perceive the most frequent ground, though it is often disguised as a
cHAP. LIT POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 649
dispute about the extension of the suffrage or some other civic right. Questions relating to the tenure of land have played a large part ; so have questions of religion ; so too have animosities or jealousies of race; and of course the form of government, whether it shall be a monarchy or a republic, has sometimes been in dispute. None of these grounds of quarrel substantially affected American parties during the three periods we have been examining. No one has ever advocated monarchy, or a restricted suffrage, or a unified instead_of a Federal republic. Nor down to 1876 was there ever any party which could promise more to the poor than its opponents. In 1852 the Know-nothing party came forward as the organ of native American opinion against recent immigrants, then chiefly the Irish, for German immigration was comparatively small in those days. But as this party failed to face the problem of slavery, and roused jealousy by its secret organization, it soon passed away. The complete equality of all sects, with the complete neutrality of the government in religious matters, has fortunately kept religious passion outside the sphere of politics.
Have the American parties then been formed only upon narrow and local bases, have they contended for transient objects, and can no deeper historical meaning, no longer his- torical continuity, be claimed for them ?
Two permanent oppositions may, I think, be discerned run- ning through the history of the parties, sometimes openly recognized, sometimes concealed by the urgency of a transitory question. One of these is the opposition between a centralized or unified and a federalized government. In every country there are centrifugal and centripetal forces at work, the one or the other of which is for the moment the stronger. There has seldom been a country in which something might not have been gained, in the way of good administration and defensive strength, by a greater concentration of power in the hands of the central government, enabling it to do things which local bodies, or a more restricted central government, could not do equally cheaply or well. Against this gain there is always to be set the danger that such concentration may weaken the vitality of local com- munities and authorities, and may enable the central power to stunt their development. Sometimes needs of the former kind are more urgent, or the sentiment of the people tends to magnify them ; sometimes again the centrifugal forces obtain the upper
650 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III
hand. English history shows several such alternations. But in America the Federal form of government has made this per- manent and natural opposition specially conspicuous. The salient feature of the Constitution is the effort it makes to establish an equipoise between the force which would carry the planet States off into space and the force which would draw them into the sun of the National government. There have always therefore been minds inclined to take sides upon this fundamental question, and a party has always had something definite and weighty to appeal to when it claims to represent either the autonomy of communities on the one hand, or the majesty and beneficent activity of the National government on the other. The former has been the watchword of the Demo- cratic party. The latter was seldom distinctly avowed, but was generally in fact represented by the Federalists of the first period, the Whigs of the second, the Republicans of the third. The other opposition, though it goes deeper and is more pervasive, has been less clearly marked in America, and less consciously admitted by the Americans themselves. It is the opposition between the tendency which makes some men prize the freedom of the individual as the first of social goods, and that which disposes others to insist on checking and regulating his impulses. The opposition of these two tendencies, the love of liberty and the love of order, is permanent and necessary, because it springs from differences in the intellect and feelings of men which one finds in all countries and at all epochs. There are always persons who are struck by the weakness of mankind, by their folly, their passion, their selfishness: and these persons, distrusting the action of average mankind, will always wish to see them guided by wise heads and restrained by strong hands. Such guidance seems the best means of progress, such restraint the only means of security. Those on the other hand who think better of human nature, and have more hope in their own tempers, hold the impulses of the average man to be generally towards justice and peace. They have faith in the power of reason to conquer ignorance, and of generosity to overbear selfishness. They are therefore disposed to leave the individual alone, and to entrust the masses with power. Every sensible man feels in himself the struggle between these two tendencies, and is on his guard not to yield wholly to either, because the one degenerates into tyranny, the other into an anarchy out of
NI .
CHAP. L111 POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 651
which tyranny will eventually spring. The wisest statesman is he who best holds the balance between them.
Each of these tendencies found among the fathers of the American Republic a brilliant and characteristic representative. Hamilton, who had a low opinion of mankind, but a gift and a passion for large constructive statesmanship, went so far in his advocacy of a strong government as to be suspected of wishing to establish a monarchy after the British pattern. He has left on record his opinion that the free constitution of England, which he admired in spite of the faults he clearly saw, could not be worked without its corruptions.1 Jefferson carried further than any other person set in an equally responsible place has ever done, his faith that government is either needless or an evil, and that with enough liberty, everything will go well. An insurrection every few years, he said, must be looked for, and
-even desired, to keep government in order. The Jeffersonian
tendency has always remained, like a leaven, in the Democratic party, though in applying Jeffersonian doctrines the slave-holders stopped when they came to a black skin. Among the Federalists, and their successors the Whigs, and the more recent Republicans, there has never been wanting a full faith in the power of free- dom. The Republicans gave a remarkable proof of it when they bestowed the suffrage on the negroes. Neither they nor any American party has ever professed itself the champion of authority and order; that would be a damaging profession. Nevertheless it is rather towards what I may perhaps venture to call the Federalist- Whig-Republican party than towards the Democrats that those who have valued the principle of authority have been generally drawn. It is for that party that the Puritan spirit, not extinct in America, has felt the greater affinity, for this spirit, having realized the sinfulness of human nature, is inclined to train and control the natural man by laws and force.
The tendency that makes for a strong government being akin to that which makes for a central government, the Federalist- Whig-Republican party, which has, through its long history, and under its varying forms and names, been the advocate of the national principle, found itself for this reason also led, more frequently than the Democrats, to exalt the rights and powers of government. It might be thought that the same cause would
1 David Hume had made the same remark, natural at a time when the power of Parliament was little checked by responsibility to the people.
652 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III
have made the Republican party take sides in that profound opposition which we perceive to-day in all civilized peoples, between the tendency to enlarge the sphere of legislation and State action, and the doctrine of laissez faire. So far, however, this has not happened. There is more in the character and temper of the Republicans than of the Democrats that leans towards State interference. But neither party has thought out the question ; neither has shown any more definiteness of policy regarding it than the Tories and the Liberals have done in England.
American students of history may think that I have pressed the antithesis of liberty and authority, as well as that of centri- fugal and centripetal tendencies, somewhat too far in making one party a representative of each through the first century of the Republic. I do not deny that at particular moments the party which was usually disposed towards a strong government resisted and decried authority, while the party which specially professed itself the advocate of liberty sought to make authority more stringent. Such deviations are however compatible with the general tendencies I have described. And no one who has gained even a slight knowledge of the history of the United States will fall into the error of supposing that order and authority mean there what they have meant in the monarchies of Continental Europe.
CHAPTER LIV THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY
THERE are now two great and several minor parties in the United States. The great parties are the Republicans and the Democrats. What are their principles, their distinctive tenets, their tendencies? Which of them is for free trade, for civil service reform, for a spirited foreign policy, for the regulation of telegraphs by legislation, for a national bankrupt law, for changes in the currency, for any other of the twenty issues which one hears discussed in the country as seriously involving its welfare ?
This is what a European is always asking of intelligent Republicans and intelligent Democrats. He is always asking because he never gets an answer. ‘The replies leave him in deeper perplexity. After some months the truth begins to dawn upon him. Neither party has anything definite to say on these issues; neither party has any principles, any distinctive tenets. Both have traditions. Both claim to have tendencies. Both have certainly war cries, organizations, interests enlisted in their support. But those interests are in the main the interests of getting or keeping the patronage of the government. Tenets and policies, points of political doctrine and points of political practice, have all but vanished. They have not been thrown away but have been stripped away by Time and the progress of events, fulfilling some policies, blotting out others. All has been lost, except office or the hope of it.
The phenomenon may be illustrated from the case of England, where party government has existed longer and in a more fully developed form than in any other part of the Old World.’ The
1 English parties are however not very ancient; they date only from the
struggle of the Stuart kings with the Puritan and popular party in the House of Commons, and did not take regular shape as Whigs and Tories till the reign of
Charles II.
654 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III
essence of the English parties has lain in the existence of two sets of views and tendencies which divide the nation into two sections, the party, let us say, though these general terms are not very safe, of movement and.the party of standing still, the party of liberty and the party of order. Each section believes in its own views, and is influenced by its peculiar tendencies, recollec- tions, mental associations, to deal in its own peculiar way with every new question as it comes up. The particular dogmas may change: doctrines once held by Whigs alone may now be held by Tories also; doctrines which Whigs would have rejected fifty years ago may now be part of the orthodox programme of the Liberal party. But the tendencies have been permanent and have always so worked upon the various fresh questions and problems which have presented themselves during the last two centuries, that each party has had not only a brilliant concrete life in its famous leaders and zealous members, but also an intellectual and moral life in its principles. These principles have meant something to those who held them, so that when a fresh question arose it was usually possible to predict how each party, how even the average members of each party, would regard and wish to deal with it. Thus even when the leaders have been least worthy and their aims least pure, an English party has felt itself ennobled and inspirited by the sense that it had great objects to fight for, a history and traditions which imposed on it the duty of battling for its distinctive principles. It is because issues have never been lacking which brought these respective principles into operation, forcing the one party to maintain the cause of order and existing institutions, the other that of freedom and what was deemed progress, that the two English parties have not degenerated into mere factions. Their struggles for office have been redeemed from selfishness by the feeling that office was a means of giving practical effect to their doctrines.
But suppose that in Britain all the questions which divide Tories from Liberals were to be suddenly settled and done with. Britain would be in a difficulty. Her free government has so long been worked by the action and reaction of the ministerialists and. the opposition that there would probably continue to be two parties. But they would not be really, in the true old sense of the term, Tories and Liberals; they would be merely Ins and Outs. Their combats would be waged hardly even in name for
XK \
CHAP, LIV THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY 655
principles, but only for place. The government of the country, with the honour, power, and emoluments attached to it, would still remain as a prize to be contended for. The followers would still rally to the leaders; and friendship would still bind the members together into organized bodies; while dislike and sus- picion would still rouse them against their former adversaries. Thus not only the leaders, who would have something tangible to gain, but even others who had only their feelings to gratify, would continue to form political clubs, register voters, deliver party harangues, contest elections, just as they do now. The difference would be that each faction would no longer have broad principles—I will not say to invoke, for such principles would probably continue to be invoked as heretofore—but to insist on applying as distinctively its principles to the actual needs of the state. Hence quiet or fastidious men would not join in party struggles ; while those who did join would no longer be stimu- lated by the sense that they were contending for something ideal. Loyalty to a leader whom it was sought to make prime minister would be a poor substitute for loyalty to a faith. If there were no conspicuous leader, attachment to the party would degenerate either into mere hatred of antagonists or into a struggle over places and salaries. And almost the same pheno- mena would be seen if, although the old issues had not been really determined, both the parties should have so far abandoned their former position that these issues did not divide them, but each professed principles which were, at least in their application, practicably undistinguishable.
This is what has happened with the American parties. The chief practical issues which once divided them have been settled. Some others have not been settled, but as regards these, one or other party has so departed from its former attitude that we cannot now speak of any conflict of principles.
When life leaves an organic body it becomes useless, fetid, pestiferous: it is fit to be cast out or buried from sight. What life is to an organism, principles are to a party. When they which, are its soul have vanished, its body ought to dissolve, and the elements that formed it be regrouped in some new organism :
‘The times have been That when the brains were out the man would die.”
But a party does not always thus die. It may hold together
656 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III
long after its moral life is extinct. Guelfs and Ghibelines warred in Italy for nearly two centuries after the Emperor had ceased to threaten the Pope, or the Pope to befriend the cities of Lom- bardy. Parties go on contending because their members have formed habits of joint action, and have contracted hatreds and prejudices, and also because the leaders find their advantage in using these habits and playing on these prejudices. The Ameri- can parties now continue to exist, because they have existed. The mill has been constructed, and its machinery goes on turn- ing, even when there is no grist to grind. But this is not wholly the fault of the men; for the system of government requires and implies parties, just as that of England does. These systems are made to be worked, and always have been worked, by a majority ; a majority must be cohesive, gathered into a united and organized body: such a body is a party.
If you ask an ordinary Northern Democrat to characterize the two parties, he will tell you that the Republicans are corrupt and incapable, and will cite instances in which persons prominent in that party, or intimate friends of its leaders, have been con- cerned in frauds on the government or in disgraceful lobbying transactions in Congress. When you press him for some dis- tinctive principles separating his own party from theirs, he will probably say that the Democrats are the protectors of States’ rights and of local independence, and the Republicans hostile to both. If you go on to inquire what bearing this doctrine of States’ rights has on any presently debated issue he will admit that, for the moment, it has none, but will insist that should any issue involving the rights of the States arise, his party will be, as always, the guardian of American freedom.
This is really all that can be predicated about the Democratic party. If a question involving the rights of a State against the Federal authority were to emerge, its instinct would lead it to array itself on the side of the State rather than of the central government, supposing that it had no direct motive to do the opposite. As it has at no point of time, from the outbreak of the war down to 1888, possessed a majority in both Houses of Congress as well as the President in power, its devotion to this principle has not been tested, and might not resist the temptation of any interest the other way. However, this is matter of spec- ulation, for at present the States fear no infringement of their rights. So conversely of the Republicans. Their traditions
CHAP. LIV THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY 657
ought to dispose them to support Federal power against the States, but their action in a concrete case would probably depend on whether their party was at the time in condition to use that power for its own purposes. If they were in a minority in Congress, they would be little inclined to strengthen Congress against the States. The simplest way of proving or illustrating this will be to run quickly through the questions of present practical interest.
That which most keenly interests the people, though of course not all the people, is the regulation or extinction of the liquor traffic. On this neither party has committed or will commit itself. The traditional dogmas of neither cover it, though the Democrats have been rather more disposed to leave men to themselves than the Republicans, and rather less amenable to the influence of ethical sentiment. Practically for both parties the point of consequence is what they can gain or lose. Each has clearly something to lose. The drinking part of the popu- lation is chiefly foreign. Now the Irish are mainly Democrats, so the Democratic party dare not offend them. The Germans are mainly Republican, so the Republicans are equally bound over to caution. It is true that though the parties, as parties, are neutral, most Temperance men are, in the North and West,! Republicans, most whisky-men and saloon-keepers Democrats. The Republicans therefore more frequently attempt to conciliate the anti-liquor party by flattering phrases. They suffer by the starting of a Prohibitionist candidate, since he draws more voting strength away from them than he does from the Democrats.
Free Trade v. Protection is another burning question, and has been so since the early days of the Union. The old controversy as to the constitutional right of Congress to impose a tariff for any object but that of raising revenue, has been laid to rest, for whether the people in 1788 meant or did not mean to confer such a power, it has been exerted for so many years, and on so superb a scale, that no one now doubts its legality. Before the
1 The Southern negroes are generally supposed to be Republicans, but are generally opposed to restrictions on the sale of liquor. This was strikingly shown in the recent popular vote on the subject in Texas. On the other hand, the better class of Southern whites, who are of course Democrats, are largely Temperance men, and some States, e.g. Georgia, have adopted a local option system, under which each county decides whether it will be ‘‘wet” or “dry” (e.g. permit or forbid the sale of intoxicants), At present most of the counties of Georgia are “ dry counties.”
VOL. I 2U
658 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III
war the Democrats were advocates of a tariff for revenue only, i.c. of Free Trade. Most of them still clung.to the doctrine, and have favoured a reduction of the present system of import duties. But the party trumpet has often given an uncertain sound, for Pennsylvania is Protectionist on account of its iron industries ; northern Georgia and southern Tennessee are tending that way for the same reason; Louisiana is inclined to protection on account of its sugar. As it would never do to alienate the Democrats of three such districts, the party has generally sought to remain unpledged, or, at least, in winking with one eye to the Free Traders of the North-west and South-east, it has been tempted to wink with the other to the iron men of Pittsburg and the sugar planters of New Orleans! And though it has come to advocate more and more strongly a reduction of the present high tariff, it does this not so much on Free Trade principles, as on the ground that the present surplus must be got rid of. The Republicans are bolder, and pledge themselves, when they frame a platform, to maintain the protective tariff. But some of the keenest intellects in their ranks, including a few
leading journalists, are strong for free trade and therefore sorely:
tempted to break with their party.
Civil service reform, whereof more hereafter, has for some time past received the lip service of both parties, a lip service expressed by both with equal warmth, and by the average pro- fessional politicians of both with equal insincerity. Such reforms as have been effected in the mode of filling up places, have been forced on the parties by public opinion, rather than carried through by either. None of the changes made—and they are perhaps the most beneficial of recent changes—has raised an issue between the parties, or given either of them a claim on the confidence of the country. The best men in both parties support the Civil Service Commission; the worst men in both would gladly get rid of it.
The advantages of regulating, -by Federal legislation, railroads and telegraphic lines extending over a number of States, is a subject frequently discussed. Neither party has had anything distinctive to say upon it in the way either of advocacy or of condemnation. Both have asserted that it is the duty of railways
1 The Democratic party seems at this moment (1888) more inclined than at any previous moment since the war to “go solid,” if not for Free Trade, yet for large reductions in the present protective tariff.
CHAP. LIV THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY 659
to serve the people, and not to tyrannize over or defraud them,
so the Inter-State Commerce Bill which has lately been passed with this view cannot be called a party measure. Finances have on the whole been well managed, and debt paid off with sur- prising speed. But there have been, and are still, serious problems raised by the condition of the currency. Both parties have made mistakes, and mistakes about equally culpable, for though the Republicans, having more frequently commanded a Congressional majority, have had superior opportunities for blundering, the Democrats have once or twice more definitely committed them- selves to pernicious doctrines. Neither party now proposes a clear and definite policy.
It is the same as regards minor questions, such as women’s suffrage or international copyright, or convict labour. Neither party has any distinctive attitude on these matters; neither is more likely, or less likely, than the other to pass a measure dealing with them. It is the same with regard to the doctrine of laissez fare as opposed to governmental interference. Neither Republicans nor Democrats can be said to be friends or foes of State interference: each will advocate it when there seems a practically useful object to be secured, or when the popular voice seems to call for it. It is the same with foreign policy. Both parties are practically agreed not only as to the general principles which ought to rule the conduct of the country, but as to the application of these principles. ‘The party which opposes the President may at any given moment seek to damage him by defeating some particular proposal he has made, but this it will do as a piece of temporary strategy, not in pursuance of any settled doctrine.
Yet one cannot say that there is to-day no difference between the two great parties. There is a difference of spirit or senti- ment perceptible even by a stranger when, after having mixed for some time with members of the one he begins to mix with those of the other; and doubtless much more patent to a native American. It resembles (though it is less marked than) the difference of tone and temper between Tories and Liberals in England. The intellectual view of a Democrat of the better sort is not quite the same as that of his Republican compeer, neither is his ethical standard. Each of course thinks meanly of the other ; but while the Democrat thinks the Republican “ danger- ous” (ie. likely to undermine the Constitution) the Republican
660 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART ID
is more apt to think the Democrat vicious and unscrupulous. So in England your Liberal fastens on stupidity as the char- acteristic fault of the Tory, while the Tory suspects the morals and religion more than he despises the intelligence of the Radical.
Tt cannot be charged on the American parties that they have drawn towards one another by forsaking their old principles. It is time that has changed the circumstances of the country, and made those old principles inapplicable. They would seem to have erred rather by clinging too long to outworn issues, and by neglecting to discover and work out new principles capable of solving the problems which now perplex the country. In a country so full of change and movement as America new ques- tions are always coming up, and must be answered. New troubles surround a government, and a way must be found to escape from them; new diseases attack the nation, and have to be cured. The duty of a great party is to face these, to find answers and remedies, applying to the facts of the hour the doctrines it has lived by, so far as they are still applicable, and when they have ceased to be applicable, thinking out new doc- trines conformable to the main principles and tendencies which it represents. This is a work to be accomplished by its ruling minds, while the habit of party loyalty to the leaders powerfully serves to diffuse through the mass of followers the conclusions of the leaders and the reasonings they have employed.
“But,” the European reader may ask, “is it not the interest as well as the duty of a party thus to adapt itself to new con- ditions? Does it not, in failing to do so, condemn itself to sterility and impotence, ultimately, indeed, to supersession by some new party which the needs of the time have created ?”
This is what happens in England and in Europe generally. Probably it will happen in the long run in America also, unless the parties adapt themselves to the new issues, just as the Whig party fell in 1852-57 because it failed to face the problem of slavery. That it happens more slowly may be ascribed partly to the completeness and strength of the party organizations, which make the enthusiasm generated by ideas less necessary, partly to the fact that the questions on which the two great parties still hesitate to take sides are not presently vital to the well-being of the country, partly also to the smaller influence in America than in Europe of individual leaders. English parties,
oe a te ae yin tae Sane apie z yf er en, oct i apes J ts ya a i ee 5 _— MAP UY THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY 661
ae
hesitate long over secondary questions, might hesitate longer than is now their practice over vital ones also, were they ; t accustomed to look for ‘guidance to their chiefs, and to defer _ to the opinion which the chiefs deliver. And it is only by
—— oe y - a — on 7 Bs f ; |) ie ca is = {peo — ‘ : 2 ae
NEN Sig Slee ie
NONE
= SMART NN
—— et ae
V\
APPENDIX
NOTE to CHAPTER III ON CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS
In America it is always by a convention (i.e. a representative body called together for some occasional or temporary purpose) that a constitution is framed. It was thus that the first constitutions for the thirteen revolting colonies were drawn up and enacted in 1776 and the years following ; and as early as 1780 the same plan had suggested itself as the right one for framing a constitution for the whole United States.1 Recognized in the Federal Con- stitution (Art. v.) and in the successive Constitutions of the several States as the proper method to be employed when a new constitution is to be prepared, , or an existing constitution revised throughout, it has now become a regular and familiar part of the machinery of American government, almost a necessary part, because all American legislatures are limited by a fundamental law, and therefore when a fundamental law is to be repealed or largely recast, it is desirable to provide for the purpose a body distinct from the ordinary legislature. Where it is sought only to change the existing fundamental law in a few specified points, the function of proposing these changes to the people for their acceptance may safely be left, and generally is left, to the legislature. Originally a convention was conceived of as a sovereign body, wherein the full powers of the people were vested by popular election. It is now, however, merely an advisory body, which prepares a draft of a new constitution and submits it to the people for their acceptance or rejection. And it is not deemed to be sovereign in the sense of possessing the plenary authority of the people, for its powers may be, indeed now invariably are, limited by the statute under which the people elect it.?
Questions relating to the powers of a Constitutional Convention have several times come before the courts, so that there exists a small body of law as well as a large body of custom and practice regarding the rights and powers of such
1 Tt is found in a private letter of Alexander Hamilton (then only twenty-three years of age) of that year.
> ‘The State Conventions which carried, or rather affected to carry, the seceding Slave States out of the Union, acted as sovereign bodies. Their proceedings, how- ever, though clothed with legal forms, were practically revolutionary.
ON CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS 663
assemblies. Into this law and practice I do not propose to enter. But it is worth while to indicate certain advantages which have been found to attach to the method of entrusting the preparation of a fundamental instrument of government to a body of men specially chosen for the purpose instead of to the ordinary legislature. The topic suggests interesting comparisons with the experience of France and other European countries in which constitutions have been drafted and enacted by the legislative, which has been sometimes also practically the executive, authority. Nor is it wholly without bearing on problems which have recently arisen in England, where Parliament has
_ found itself, and may find itself again, invited to enact what would be in substance a new constitution for a part of the United Kingdom.
An American Constitutional Convention, being chosen for the sole purpose of drafting a constitution,;and having nothing to do with the ordinary ad- ministration of government, no influence or patronage, no power to raise or appropriate revenue, no opportunity of doing jobs for individuals or corpor- ations, is not necessarily elected on party lines or in obedience to party considerations. Such considerations do affect the election, but they are not always dominant, and may sometimes be of little moment.” Hence men who have no claims on a party, or will not pledge themselves to a party, may be and often are elected ; while men who seek to enter a legislature for the sake of party advancement or the promotion of some gainful object do not generally care to serve in a convention.
When the convention meets, it is not, like a legislature, a body strictly organized by party. A sense of individual independence and freedom may prevail unknown in legislatures. Proposals have therefore a chance of being considered on their merits. A scheme does not necessarily command the sup-
. port of one set of men nor encounter the hostility of another set because it proceeds from a leader or a group belonging to a particular party. And as the ordinary party questions do not come up for decision while its delibera- tions are going on, men are not thrown back on their usual party affiliations, nor are their passions roused by exciting political issues.
Having no work but constitution-making to consider, a convention is free to bend its whole mind to that work. Debate has less tendency to stray off to irrelevant matters. Business advances because there are no such inter- ruptions as a legislature charged with the ordinary business of government must expect.
Since a convention assembles for one purpose only, and that a purpose specially interesting to thoughtful and public-spirited citizens, and since its duration is short, men who would not care to enter a legislature, men pressed by professional labours, or averse to the ‘‘rough and tumble” of politics, a
1 See the learned and judicious treatise of Judge Jameson on Constitutional Conventions.
2 Tt will be shown in the account of the legislatures and political parties of the States (in Vol. II. post) that the questions of practical importance to the States with which a State Convention would deal are very often not in issue between the two State parties, seeing that the latter are formed on national lines,
664 APPENDIX
class large in America and increasing in Europe, are glad to serve. on it, while mere jobbers or office-seekers find little to attract them in its functions.*
The fact that the constitution when drafted has to be submitted to the people, by whose authority it will (if accepted) be enacted, gives to the con- vention a somewhat larger freedom for proposing what they think best than a legislature, courting or fearing its constituents, commonly allows itself. As the convention vanishes altogether when its work is accomplished, the ordinary motives for popularity-hunting are less potent. As it does not legislate but merely proposes, it need not fear to ask the people to enact what may offend certain persons or classes,'for the odium, if any, of harassing these classes will rest with the people. And as the people must accept or reject the draft en bloc (unless in the rare case where provision is made for voting on particular points separately), more care is taken in preparing the draft, in seeing that it is free from errors or repugnances, than a legislature capable of repealing or altering in its next session what it now provides, is likely to bestow on the details of its measures.
Those who are familar with European parliaments may conceive that as a set-off to these advantages there will be a difficulty in getting a number of men not organized by parties to work promptly and efficiently, that a con- vention will be, so to speak, an amorphous body, that if it has no leaders nor party allegiance it will divide one way to-day and another way to-morrow, that the abundance of able men will mean an abundance of doctrinaire pro- posals and a reluctance to subordinate individual prepossessions to practical success. Admitting that such difficulties do sometimes arise, it may be ob- served that in America men quickly organize themselves for any and every purpose, and that doctrinairism is there so uncommon a fault as to be almost a merit. When a complete new constitution is to be prepared, the balance of convenience is decidedly in favour of giving the work to a convention, for — although conventions are sometimes unwise, they are usually composed of far abler men than those who fill the legislatures, and discharge their function with more wisdom.as well as with more virtue. But where it is not desired to revise the whole frame of government, the simpler and better plan is to proceed by submitting to the people specific amendments, limited to particular provisions of the existing constitution ; and this is the method now most generally employed in improving State constitutions.
The above remarks are of-course chiefly based on the history of State con- ventions, because no national constitutional convention has sat since 1787.2
1 Many of the men conspicuous in the public life of Massachusetts during the last thirty years first made their mark in the Constitutional Convention of 1853. The draft framed by that Convention was, however, rejected by the people. The new Constitution for New York, framed by the Convention of 1867, was also lost at the polls. That Convention was remarkable as being (according to Judge Jameson) the only one in which the requirement that a delegate must be resident in the district electing him was dispensed with (Constit. Conventions, § 267).
* All the amendments made in the Federal Constitution have been drafted by Congress, See as to these amendments, Chapter XXXII.
ON CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS 7 665
But they apply in principle to any constitution-making body. As regards the Convention of 1787, two observations may be made before I quit the subject. ,
It included nearly all the best intellect and the ripest political experience that the United States then contained. John Adams was absent as Minister to England, Thomas Jefferson as Minister to France. But of the other shin- ing lights of the time, Jay (afterwards first Chief-Justice of the Supreme Court) and John Marshall (afterwards third Chief-Justice, but not yet famous), were almost the only two who did not join in this national work. These men, great by their talents and the memory of their services, could not have been brought together for any smaller occasion, nor would any lower authority than theirs have sufficed to procure the acceptance of a plan which had so much prejudice arrayed against it.}
The Convention met at the most fortunate moment in American history. Between two storms there is often a perfectly still and bright day. It was in such an interval of calm that this work was carried through. Had it been attempted four years earlier or four years later, at both which times the waves of democracy were running high, it must have failed. In 1783 the people, flushed with their victory over England, were full of confidence in themselves and in liberty, persuaded that the world was at their feet, disposed to think all authority tyranny. In 1791 their fervid sympathy with the Revolution in France had not yet been damped by the excesses of the Terror nor alienated by the insolence of the French government and its diplomatic agents in America. But in 1787 the first reaction from the War of Independence had set in. Wise men had come to discern the weak side of popular government ; and the people themselves were in a comparatively humble and teachable mind. Before the next wave of democratic enthusiasm swept over the country the organization of a national government under the Constitution was in all its main features complete. It was seen that liberty was still safe, and men began ere long to appreciate the larger and fuller national life which the Federal Government opened before them. History sees so many golden oppor- tunities lost that she gladly notes those which the patriotic foresight of such men as Washington and Franklin, Hamilton and Madison and Roger Sherman seized and used.
1 Tt is remarkable that two of the strongest men in the Convention were, as not being native Americans, far less influenced than most of their colleagues py local and State feeling, and therefore threw the whole weight of their intellect and influence into the national scale. These were Alexander Hamilton, born a West Indian, the son of a Scotch father and French mother, and James Wilson, an immigrant from Scotland. The speeches of the latter (a lawyer in Philadelphia, and afterwards a justice of the Supreme Federal Court) in the Pennsylvania ratifying Convention, as well as in the great Convention of 1787, display an amplitude and profundity of view in matters of constitutional theory which place him in the front rank of the political thinkers of his age. Wilson, who was born about 1742 and died in 1792, is one of the luminaries of the time to whom, as to the still greater and far more brilliant Hamilton, subsequent generations of Americans have failed to do full justice.
666 APPENDIX
NOTE to CHAPTER IV
WHAT THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION OWES TO THE CONSTITUTIONS OF THE SEVERAL STATES
Tur following statement of the provisions of the Federal Constitution which have been taken from or modelled upon State constitutions, is extracted from a valuable article by Mr. Alexander Johnston in the New Princeton Review for September 1887 :—
“That part of the Constitution, which has attracted most notice abroad, is probably its division of Congress into a Senate and a House of Representatives, with the resulting scheme of the Senate as based on the equal representation of the States. It is probably inevitable that the upper or hereditary House in foreign legislative bodies shall disappear in time. And it is not easy to hit on any available substitute ; and English writers for example, judging from the difficulty of finding a substitute for the House of Lords, have rated too high the political skill of the Convention in hitting upon so brilliant a success as the Senate. But the success of the Convention was due to the antecedent experience of the States. Excepting Pennsylvania and Vermont, which then gave all legislative powers to one House, and executive powers to a governor and council, all the States had bicameral systems in 1787.+
‘The name ‘Senate’ was used for the Upper House in Maryland, Massa- chusetts, New York, North Carolina, New Hampshire, and South Carolina and Virginia ; and the name ‘ House of Representatives,’ for the Lower House, was in use in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and South Carolina, as well as in Pennsylvania and Vermont.
‘«The rotation, by which one-third of the Senate goes out every two years, was taken from Delaware, where one-third went out each year, New York (one- fourth each year), Pennsylvania (one-third of the council each year), and Virginia (one-fourth each year). The provisions of the whole fifth section of Art. i., the administration of the two Houses, their power to decide the elec- tion of their members, make rules and punish their violation, keep a journal, and adjourn from day to day, are in so many State constitutions that no specification is needed for them.
‘The provision that money-bills shall originate in the House of Repre- sentatives is taken almost word for word from the Constitutions of Massa- chusetts and New Hampshire, as is the provision, which has never been needed, that the President may adjourn the two Houses when they cannot agree on a time of adjournment. The provision for a message is from the
1 Georgia, however, had not till 1789 a true second chamber, her constitution of 1777 having merely created an executive council elected by the Assembly from among its own members.
Vermont was not one of the thirteen original States, but was a semi-independent commonwealth, not a member of the Confederation of 1781, not represented in the Convention of 1787, and not admitted to the Union till 1791.
THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION 667
Constitution of New York. All the details of the process of impeachment as adopted by the Convention may be found in the Constitutions of Delaware, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Vermont, Virginia, even to the provision in the South Carolina system that conviction should follow the vote of two-thirds of the members present. (It should be said, however, that the limitation of sentence in case of conviction to removal from office and disqualification for further office-holding is a new feature.) Even the much-praised process of the veto is taken en bloc from the Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, and the slight changes are so evidently introduced as improvements on the language alone as to show that the sub- stance was copied.
“The adoption of different bases for the two Houses—the House of Repre- sentatives representing the States according to population, while the Senate represented them equally—was one of the most important pieces of work which the Convention accomplished as well as the one which it reached most unwillingly. All the States had been experimenting to find different bases for their two Houses. Virginia had come nearest to the appearance of the final result in having her Senate chosen by districts and her representatives by counties; and, as the Union already had its ‘districts’ formed (in the States), one might think that the Convention merely followed Virginia’s experience. But the real process was far different and more circuitous. There were eleven States represented in the Convention, New Hampshire taking New York’s place when the latter withdrew, and Rhode Island sending no delegates. Roughly speaking, five States wanted the ‘ Virginia plan’ above stated ; five wanted one House as in the Confederation with State equality in it ; and one (Connecticut) had a plan of its own to which the other ten States finally acceded. The Connecticut system since 1699, when its legislature was
* divided into two Houses, had maintained the equality of the towns in the
Lower House, while choosing the members of the Upper House from the whole people. In like manner its delegates now proposed that the States should be equally represented in the Senate, while the House of Representatives, chosen from the States in proportion to population, should represent the people numerically. The proposition was renewed again and again for nearly a month until the two main divisions of the Convention, unable to agree, accepted the ‘Connecticut compromise,’ as Bancroft calls it, and the peculiar constitution of the Senate was adopted.
‘“‘The President’s office was simply a development of that of the governors of the States. The name itself had been familiar ; Delaware, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina, had used the title of President instead of that of Governor. In all the States the governor was commander-in-chief, except that in Rhode Island he was to have the advice of six assistants, and the major part of the freemen, before entering upon his duties. The Presi- dent’s pardoning power was drawn from the example of the States ; they had granted it to the governors (in some cases with the advice of a council) in all the States except Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Georgia, where it was retained to the legislature, and in South Carolina, where it seems to have been
668 APPENDIX
forgotten in the Constitution of 1778, but was given to the governor in 1790, The governor was elected directly by the people in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York, and Rhode Island, and indirectly by the two Houses in the other eight States ; and in this nearly equal division we may, perhaps, find a reason for the Convention’s hesitation to adopt either system, and for its futile attempt to introduce an electoral system, as a compromise. The power given to the Senate of ratifying or rejecting the President’s appointments seems to have been an echo of New York’s council of appointment ; the most strenuous and persistent efforts were made to provide a council to share in appointments with the President ; the admission of the Senate as a substitute was the furthest concession which the majority would make ; and hardly any failure of details caused more heart-burnings than the rejection of this proposed council for appointments.
‘‘The President’s power of filling vacancies, by commissions to expire at the end of the next session of the Senate, is taken in terms from the Consti- tution of North Carolina.
‘« Almost every State prescribed a form of oath for its officers ; the simple and impressive oath of the President seems to have been taken from that of Pennsylvania, with a suggestion, much improved in language, from the oath of allegiance of the same State. The office of vice-president was evidently suggested by that of the deputy, or lieutenant-governor (in four States the vice-president) of the States. The exact prototype of the office of vice-pre- sident is to be found in that of the lieutenant-governor of New York. He was to preside in the Senate, without a vote, except in case of a tie, was to succeed the governor, when succession was necessary, and was to be succeeded by the President pro tempore of the Senate.
‘‘The provisions for the recognition of inter-State citizenship, and for the rendition of fugitive slaves and criminals, were a necessity in any such form® of government as was contemplated, but were not at all new. They had formed a part of the eighth article of the New England Confederation of 1643. Finally the first ten amendments, which were tacitly taken as a part of the original instrument, are merely a selection from the substance or the spirit of the Bills of Rights which preceded so many of the State constitutions,
‘‘The most solid and excellent work done by the Convention was its state- ment of the powers of Congress (in § 8 of Art. i.) and its definition of the sphere of the Federal judiciary (in Art. iii.) The results in both of these cases were due, like the powers denied to the States and to the United States (in §§ 9 and 10 of Art. i.), to the previous experience of government by the States alone. For eleven years or more (to say nothing of the antecedent colonial experience) the people had been engaged in their State governments in an exhaustive analysis of the powers of government. The failures in regard to some, the successes in regard to others, were all before the Convention for its consideration and guidance.
‘Not creative genius, but wise and discreet selection was the proper work of the Convention ; and its success was due to the clear perception of the antecedent failures and successes, and to the self-restraint of its members.
RULES OF THE SENATE 669
“The (presidential) electoral system was almost the only feature of the Constitution not suggested by State experience, almost the only feature which was purely artificial, not a natural growth ; it was the one which met with least criticism from contemporary opponents of the Constitution and most unreserved praise from the Federalist ; and democracy has ridden right over ib.
NOTE to CHAPTER X
EXTRACTS FROM THE RULES OF THE SENATE
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the senators, duly chosen and sworn.
The legislative, the executive, the confidential legislative proceedings, and the proceedings when sitting as a Court of Impeachment, shall each be recorded in a separate book.
When the yeas and nays are ordered, the names of senators shall be called alphabetically ; and each senator shall, without debate, declare his assent or dissent to the question, unless excused by the Senate ; and no senator shall be permitted to vote after the decision shall have been announced by the pre- . siding officer, but may for sufficient reasons, with unanimous consent, change or withdraw his vote.
When a senator declines to vote on call of his name, he shall be required . to assign his reasons therefor, and on his having assigned them, the presiding officer shall submit the question to the Senate, ‘‘Shall the senator for the reasons assigned by him, be excused from voting?” which shall be decided without debate. ;
Every bill and joint resolution shall receive three readings previous to its passage ; which readings shall be on three different days, unless the Senate unanimously direct otherwise ; and the presiding officer shall give notice at each reading whether it be the first, second, or third.
When a senator desires to speak he shall rise and address the presiding _ officer, and shall not proceed until he is recognized, and the presiding officer shall recognize the senator who shall first address him. No senator shall interrupt another senator in debate without his consent, and to obtain such consent he shall first address the presiding officer ; and no senator shall speak more than twice upon any one question in debate on the same day, without leave of the Senate, which shall be determined without debate.
Any motion or resolution may be withdrawn or modified by the mover at any time before a decision, amendment, or ordering of the yeas and nays, except a motion to re-consider, which shall not be withdrawn without leave.
In the appointment of the standing committees, the Senate, unless other- wise ordered, shall proceed by ballot to appoint severally the chairman of each committee, and then, by one ballot, the other members necessary to complete the same. A majority of the whole number of votes given shall be necessary to the choice of a chairman of a standing committee, but a plurality of votes
670 APPENDIX
shall elect the other members thereof. All other committees shall be appointed by ballot, unless otherwise ordered, and a plurality of votes shall appoint.
At the second or any subsequent session of a Congress, the legislative busi- ness which remained undetermined at the close of the next preceding session of that Congress shall be resumed and proceeded with in the same manner as if no adjournment of the Senate had taken place.
On a motion made and seconded to close the doors of the Senate, on the discussion of any business which may, in the opinion of a senator, require secrecy, the presiding officer shall direct the galleries to be cleared ; and during the discussion of such motion the doors shall remain closed,
When the President of the United States shall meet the Senate in the Senate chamber for the consideration of executive business, he shall have a seat on the right of the presiding officer. When the Senate shall be convened by the President of the United States to any other place, the presiding officer of the Senate and the senators shall attend at the place appointed, with the necessary officers of the Senate.
When acting upon confidential or executive business the Senate chamber shall be cleared of all persons except the secretary, the chief clerk, the prin- cipal legislative clerk, the executive clerk, the minute and journal clerk, the sergeant-at-arms, the assistant doorkeeper, and such other officers as the pre- siding officer shall think necessary, and all such officers shall be sworn to secrecy.
All confidential communications made by the President of the United States to the Senate shall be by the senators and the officers of the Senate kept secret ; and all treaties which may be laid before the Senate, and all remarks, votes, and proceedings thereon, shall also be kept secret until the Senate shall, by their resolution, take off the injunction of secrecy.
Any senator or officer of the Senate who shall disclose the secret or confi- dential business or proceedings of the Senate shall be liable, if a senator, to suffer expulsion from the body ; and if an officer, to dismissal from the service of the Senate, and to punishment for contempt.
On the final question to advise and consent to the ratification of a treaty in the form agreed to, the concurrence of two-thirds of the senators present shall be necessary to determine it in the affirmative; but all other motions and questions upon a treaty shall be decided by a majority vote, except a motion to postpone indefinitely, which shall be decided by a vote of two-thirds.
When nominations shall be made by the President of the United States to the Senate, they shall, unless otherwise ordered, be referred to appropriate committees ; and the final question on every nomination shall be, “‘ Will the Senate advise and consent to this nomination?” Which question shall not be put on the same day on which the nomination is received, nor on the day on which it may be reported by a committee, unless by unanimous consent.
All information communicated or remarks made by a senator, when acting upon nominations, concerning the character or qualifications of the person nominated, also all votes upon any nomination, shall be kept secret. If, however, charges shall be made against a person nominated, the committee
PRIVATE BILLS 671
may, in its discretion, notify such nominee thereof, but the name of the person making such charges shall not be disclosed. The fact that a nomination has been made, or that it has been confirmed or rejected, shall not be regarded as a secret.
NOTE (A) TO CHAPTER XVI PRIVATE BILLS
In England a broad distinction is drawn between public bills and local or private bills. The former class includes measures of general application, altering or adding to the general law of the land. The latter includes measures intended to apply only to some particular place or person, as for instance, bills incorporating railway or gas or water companies or extending the powers of such bodies, bills authorizing municipalities to execute public improvements, as well as estate bills, bills relating to charitable foundations, and (for Ireland) divorce bills. Bills of the local and personal class have for many years past been treated differently from public bills. They are brought in, as it is expressed, on petition, and not on motion. Notice is required to be given of such a bill by advertisement nearly three months before the usual date of the meeting of Parliament, and copies must be deposited some weeks before the opening of the session. The second reading is usually granted as a matter of course; and after second reading, instead of being, like a public bill, considered in committee of the whole House, it goes (if opposed) to a private bill committee consisting (usually) of four members, who take evidence regarding it from the promoters and opponents, and hear counsel argue for and against its preamble and its clauses. In fact, the proceedings on private bills are to some extent of a judicial nature, although of course the committee must have regard to considerations of policy.
Pecuniary claims against the Government are in England not vehed by way of private bill. They are presented in the courts by a proceeding called a petition of right, the Crown allowing itself to be sued by one of its subjects.
In America no such difference of treatment as the above exists between public and private bills ; all are dealt with in substantially the same way by the usual legislative methods. A bill of a purely local or personal nature gets its second reading as a matter of course, like a bill of general application, is similarly referred to the appropriate committee (which may hear evidence re- garding it, but does not hear counsel), is considered and if necessary amended by the committee, is, if time permits, reported back to the House, and there takes its chance among the jostling crowd of other bills, Fridays, however, being specially set apart for the consideration of private business. There is a
1 The official distinction in the yearly editions of the Statutes is into Public General Acts, Public Acts of a local character (which include Provisional Order Acts), and Local Acts, and Private Acts. But in ordinary speech, those measures which are brought in at the instance of particular persons for a local purpose are
called private.
672 APPENDIX
calendar of private bills, and those which get a place early upon it have a chance of passing. A great many are unopposed, and can be hurried through by “unanimous consent.”
Private bills are in America even more multifarious in their contents, as well as incomparably more numerous, than in England, although they do not include the vast mass of bills for the creation or regulation of various public undertakings within a particular State, since these would fall within the pro- vince of the State legislature. They include three classes practically unknown in England, pension bills, which propose to grant a pension to some person (usually a soldier or his widow), bills for satisfying some claim of an individual against the Federal Government, and bills for dispensing in particular cases with a variety of administrative statutes. Matters which would in England be naturally left to be dealt with at the discretion of the executive are thus assumed by the legislature, which is (for reasons that will appear in later chapters) more anxious to narrow the sphere of the executive than are the ruling legislatures of European countries. I subjoin from the private bills of the session of 1880-81 some instances showing how wide is the range of con- gressional interference.
In THE HovusEt oF REPRESENTATIVES. Read twice, referred to the Committee on Invalid Pensions, and ordered to be printed. Mr. Murch introduced the following bill :—
A BIL For the relief of James E. Gott.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of tive
United States of America in Congress Assembled. That the Secretary of the Interior be, and he is hereby, - Authorized and directed to increase the pension of James H, Gott, late a member of Company A, Fourteenth Regiment, Maine Volunteers, to twenty-four dollars per month.
Amr wWNDH
Read twice, referred to the Committee on War Claims, and ordered to be
printed. A BILL For the relief of the heirs of George W. Hayes.
Be it enacted, ete.
That the proper accounting officer of the Treasury be, and he is hereby, directed to pay to the heirs of George W. Hayes, of North Carolina, the sum of four hundred and fifty dollars, for three mules furnished the United States Army in eighteen hundred and sixty-four, for which they hold proper vouchers.
Read twice, referred to the Committee on Commerce, and ordered to be printed.
THE LOBBY 673
A Brn . To establish a fog-bell or fog-bell buoy on Graham Shoals, in the Straits of Mackinaw, and State of Michigan. Be it enacted, etc. That the Secretary of War be authorized and directed to establish and maintain a fog-bell or fog-bell buoy on Graham Shoals, so called, in the Straits of Mackinaw, in the State of Michigan.
Read twice, and referred to the Committee on Naval Affairs.
A BIL For the relief of Thomas G. Corbin.
Be tt enacted, ete. :
That the President of the United States be, and is hereby, authorized to restore Thomas G. Corbin, now a captain on the retired list of the Navy, to the active list, and to take rank next after Commodore J. W. A. Nicholson, with restitution, from December twelfth, eighteen hundred and seventy-three, of the difference of pay between that of a commodore on the active list, on “waiting orders” pay, and that of a captain retired on half-pay, to be paid out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated.
Read twice, referred to the Committee on Ways and Means, and ordered to be printed.
Mr. Robinson introduced the following joint resolution :—
JOINT RESOLUTION Authorizing the remission or refunding of duty on a painted-glass window from London, England, for All Souls’ Church, in Washington, District of Columbia. Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress Assembled.
That the Secretary of the Treasury be, and he is hereby, authorized and directed to remit or refund, as thé case may be, the duties paid or accruing upon a painted-glass window from London, England, for All Souls’ Church, in Washington, District of Columbia, imported, or to be imported into Baltimore, Maryland, or other port.
NOTE (B) ro CHAPTER XVI THE LOBBY
‘‘The Lobby” is the name given in America to persons, not being members of a legislature, who undertake to influence its members, and thereby to secure the passing of bills. ‘The term includes both those who, since they hang about the chamber, and make a regular profession of working upon
VOL. I 2X
674 APPENDIX
members, are called ‘‘ lobbyists,” and those persons who on any particular occasion may come up to advocate, by argument or solicitation, any particular measure in which they happen to be interested. The name, therefore, does not necessarily impute any improper motive or conduct, though it is commonly used in what Bentham calls a dyslogistic sense.
The causes which have produced lobbying are easily explained. Every legislative body has wide powers of affecting the interests and fortunes of pri- vate individuals, both for good and for evil. It entertains in every session some public bills, and of course many more private (7.e. local or personal) bills, which individuals are interested in supporting or resisting. Such, for instance, are public bills imposing customs duties or regulating the manufac- ture or sale of particular articles (e.g. intoxicants, explosives), and private bills establishing railroad or other companies, or granting public franchises, or (in State legislatures) altering the areas of local government, or varying the taxing or borrowing powers of municipalities. When such bills are before a legislature, the promoters and the opponents naturally seek to represent their respective views, and to enforce them upon the members with whom the deci. sion rests. So far there is nothing wrong, for advocacy of this kind is needed in order to bring the facts fairly before the legislature.
Now both in America and in England it has been found necessary, owing to the multitude of bills and the difficulty of discussing them in a large body, to refer private bills to committees for investigation ; and the legislature has in both countries formed the habit of accepting generally, though not invari- ably, the decisions of a committee upon the bills it has dealt with. America has, however, gone farther than England, for Congress refers all public bills as well as private bills to committees. And whereas in England private bills are dealt with by a semi-judicial procedure, the promoters and opponents appear- ing by professional agents and barristers, in America no such procedure has been created, either in Congress or in the State legislatures, and private bills are handled much like public ones. Moreover, the range of private bills is wider in America than in England, in respect that they are used to obtain the satisfaction of claims by private persons against the Government, whereas in England such claims would either be brought before a law-court in the form of a Petition of Right, or, though this rarely happens, be urged upon the executive by a motion made in Parliament.
We see, therefore, thatin the United States—
All business goes before committees, not only private bills but pub bills, often involving great pecuniary interests.
To give a bill a fair chance of passing, the committee must be induced to report in favour of it.
The committees have no quasi-judicial rules of procedure, but inquire ae and amend bills in their uncontrolled discretion, upon such evidence or other statements as they choose to admit or use.
Bills are advocated before committees by persons not belonging to any re- cognized and legally regulated body.
The committees, both in the State legislatures and in the Federal House of
THE LOBBY 675
Representatives, are largely composed of new men, unused to the exercise of the powers entrusted to them. :
It results from the foregoing state of facts that the efforts of the promoters and opponents of a bill will be concentrated upon the committee to which the bill has been referred ; and that when the interests affected are large it will be worth while to employ every possible engine of influence. Such influence can be better applied by those who have skill and a tact matured by experience ; for it is no easy matter to know how to handle a committee collectively and its members individually. Accordingly, a class of persons springs up whose profession it is to influence committees for or against bills. There is nothing necessarily illegitimate in doing so. As Mr. Spofford remarks :—
“What is known as lobbying by no means implies in all cases the use of money to affect legislation. This corruption is frequently wholly absent in eases where the lobby is most industrious, numerous, persistent, and successful. A measure which it is desired to pass into law, for the benefit of certain inter- ests represented, may be urged upon members of the legislative body in every form of influence except the pecuniary one. By casual interviews, by informal conversation, by formal presentation of facts and arguments, by printed appeals in pamphlet form, by newspaper communications and leading articles, by per- sonal introductions from or through men of supposed influence, by dinners, receptions, and other entertainments, by the arts of social life and the charms of feminine attraction, the public man is beset to look favourably upon the measure which interested parties seek to have enacted. It continually happens that new measures or modifications of old ones are agitated in which vast pecuniary interests are involved. The power of the law, which when faith- fully administered is supreme, may make or unmake the fortunes of innumer- able corporations, business firms, or individuals. Changes in the tariff duties, in the internal revenue taxes, in the banking system, in the mining statutes, in the land laws, in the extension of patents, in the increase of pensions, in the regulation of mail contracts, in the currency of the country, or proposed appropriations for steamship subsidies, for railway legislation, for war damages, and for experiments in multitudes of other fields of legislation equally or more important, come before Congress. It is inevitable that each class of interests liable to be affected should seek its own advantage in the result. When this is done legitimately, by presentation and proof of facts, by testimony, by argu- ments, by printed or personal appeals to the reason and sense of justice of members, there can be no objection to it.’?
Just as a plaintiff in a lawsuit may properly employ an attorney and bar- rister, $o a promoter may properly employ a lobbyist. But there is plainly a risk of abuse. In legal proceedings, the judge and jury are bound to take nothing into account except the law and the facts proved in evidence. It would he an obvious breach of duty should a judge decide in favour of a plain- tiff because he had dined with or been importuned by him (as in the parable),
1 Mr. A. R. Spofford (Librarian of Congress) in American Cyclopedia of Politi- cal Science, Article “‘ Lobby.”
676 APPENDIX
a
or received £50 from him. The judge is surrounded by the safeguards, not only of habit but of opinion, which would condemn his conduct and cut short his career were he to yield to any private motive. The attorney and barrister are each of them also members of a recognized profession, and would forfeit its privileges were they to be detected in the attempt to employ underhand in- fluence. No such safeguards surround either the member of a committee or the lobbyist. . The former usually comes out of obscurity, and returns to it ; the latter does not belong to any disciplined profession. Moreover, the ques- tions which the committee has to decide are not questions of law, nor always questions of. fact, but largely questions of policy, on which reasonable men need not agree, and as to which it is often impossible to say that there is a palpably right view or wrong view, because the determining considerations will be estimated differently by different minds.
These dangers in the system of private bill legislation made themselves so manifest in England, especially during the great era of railway construction some fifty years ago, as to have Jed to the adoption of the quasi-judicial pro- cedure described in the Note on Private Bills, and to the erection of parlia- mentary agents into a regularly constituted profession, bound by professional rules. Public opinion has fortunately established the doctrine that each member of a private bill committee is to be considered as a semi- judicial person, whose vote neither a brother member nor any outsider must attempt to influence,. but who is bound to decide, as far as he can, in a judicial spirit on the footing of the evidence tendered. Of course practice is not up to the level of theory in Parliament any more than elsewhere ; still there is little solicitation to members of committees, and an almost complete absence of even the suspicion of corruption.
“In the United States,” says an experienced American publicist, whose opinion I have inquired, “‘ though lobbying is perfectly legitimate in theory, yet the secrecy and want of personal responsibility, the confusion and want of system in the committees, make it rapidly degenerate into a process of intrigue, and fall into the hands of the worst men. It is so disagreeable and humiliating that all men shrink from it, unless those who are stimulated by direct personal interest ; and these soon throw away all scruples. The most dangerous men are ex-members, who know how things are to be managed.”
That this unfavourable view is the prevailing one, appears not merely from what one hears in society or reads in the newspapers, though in America one must discount a great deal of what rumour asserts regarding illicit influence, but from the constitutions and statutes of some States, which endeavour to repress it.
What has been said above applies equally to Congress and to the State legislatures, and to some extent also to the municipal councils of the great cities. All legislative bodies which control important pecuniary interests are as sure to have a lobby as an army to have its camp-followers. Where the body is, there will the vultures be gathered together. Great and wealthy States, like New York and Pennsylvania, support the largest and most active lobbies. It must, however, be remembered that although no man of good
THE LOBBY 677
position would like to be called a lobbyist, still such men are often obliged to do the work of lobbying—i.e. they must dance attendance on a committee, ‘and endeavour to influence its members for the sake of getting their measure through. They may have to do this in the interests of the good government of a city, or the reform of a charity, no less than for some private end.
The permanent professional staff of lobbyists at Washington is of course from time to time recruited by persons interested in some particular enter- prise, who combine with one, two, or more professionals in trying to push it through, Thus there are at Washington, says Mr. Spofford, ‘‘ pension lobbyists, tariff lobbyists, steamship subsidy lobbyists, railway lobbyists, Indian ring lobbyists, patent lobbyists, river and harbour lobbyists, mining lobbyists, bank lobbyists, mail-contract lobbyists, war damages lobbyists, back- pay and bounty lobbyists, Isthmus canal lobbyists, public building lobbyists, State claims lobbyists, cotton-tax lobbyists, and French spoliations lobbyists, Of the office-seeking lobbyists at Washington it may be said that their name is legion. There are even artist lobbyists, bent upon wheedling Congress into buying bad paintings and worse sculptures ; and too frequently with success. At times in our history there has been a British lobby, with the most genteel accompaniments, devoted to watching legislation affecting the great importing and shipping interests.”
A committee whose action can affect the tariff is of course an important one, and employs a large lobby.1_ I remember to have heard an anecdote of a quinine manufacturer, who had kept a lawyer as his agent to ‘‘look after” a committee during a whole session, and prevent them from touching the duty on that drug. On the last day of sitting the agent went home, thinking the danger past, As soon as he had gone, the committee suddenly recommended an alteration of the duty, on the impulse of some one who had been watching all the time for his opportunity.
Women are said to be among the most active and successful lobbyists at Washington.
Efforts have been made to check the practice of lobbying, both in Congress and in State legislatures, Statutes have been passed severely punishing any person who offers any money or value to any member with a view to influence his vote.? It has been repeatedly held by the courts that ‘‘ contracts which have for their object to influence legislation in any other manner than by such open and public presentation of facts, arguments, and appeals to reason, as are recognized as proper and legitimate with all public bodies, must be held void.”? It has also been suggested that a regular body of attorneys, author-
‘1 he phrase one often hears ‘‘there was a strong lobby”? (7.¢, for or against such and such a bill) denotes that the interests and influences represented were numerous and powerful.
2 As to Congress, see § 5450 of Revised Statutes of the United States. The provisions of State Statutes are too numerous to mention. The Constitution of California declares lobbying to be a felony ; Georgia calls it a crime.
3 Cooley, Constit. Limit., p. 166. He adds, ‘ While counsel may be properly employed to present the reasons in favour of any public measure to the body
678 APPENDIX
ized to act as agents before committees of Congress, should be created. A bill for this purpose was laid before the Senate in January 1875.7
In many States an attempt has been made to check the evils consequent on lobbying, by restraining the legislature from passing special laws in a great variety of cases. See post, Chapter XL.
NOTE ro CHAPTER XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM OF THE ENGLISH UNIVERSITIES
Tue structure of the American Federation may be illustrated by a federal system familiar to many Englishmen from its existence in the two ancient universities of Oxford and Cambridge, as they stood constituted twenty years ago. ‘The analogy, which recent legislation has rendered less perfect to-day than it was then, appears in four points.
I. Each of these universities was then for some purposes a federation of colleges. Every member of it was also a member of some college or hall ;? as
authorized to pass upon it, or to any of its committees empowered to collect facts and hear arguments, and parties interested may lawfully contract to pay for this service, yet secretly to approach the members of such a body with a view to influence their action at a time and in a manner that do not allow the presentation of opposite views, is improper and unfair to the opposing interest, and a contract to pay for this irregular and improper service would not be enforced by the law.” He quotes abundant judicial authority in support of this doctrine ; among others, the following observations of Justice Chapman, in Frost v. Belmont, 6 Allen, 152 :—
‘‘ Though Committees properly dispense with many of the rules which regulate hearings before judicial tribunals, yet common fairness requires that neither party shall be permitted to have secret consultations and exercise secret influences that are kept from the knowledge of the other party. The business of ‘lobby members’ is not to go fairly and openly before the committees and present statements, proofs, and arguments, that the other side has an opportunity to meet and refute if they are wrong, but to go secretly to the members and ply them with statements and arguments that the other side cannot openly meet, however erroneous they may be, and to bring illegitimate influences to bear upon them. If the ‘lobby member’ is selected because of his political or personal influence, it aggravates the wrong. If his business is to unite various interests by means of projects that are called ‘ log- rolling,’ it is still worse. The practice of procuring members of the legislature to act under the influence of what they have eaten and drunk at houses of entertain- ment tends to render those who yield to such influences wholly unfit to act in such cases. They are disqualified from acting fairly towards interested parties or towards the public.”
1 See an article in the Century Magazine for April 1886, p. 963.
2 By a recent statute of the University of Oxford (which I take for the sake of simplicity), reverting to its earlier constitution before the college monopoly had been established, persons have been admitted to be members who are not members of any college or hall; they are, however, treated for some purposes as collec- tively constituting a community similar to a college. They might be compared to United States citizens resident in the Territories, were it not that the citizen in a Territory enjoys no share in the national government, whereas the Oxford non-
1
CONSTITUTION OF CONFEDERATE STATES 67%
no one can be an active citizen of the United States who is not a citizen of some State. The colleges made up the university as the States make up the _ Union. But the university was and is something distinct from the colleges taken together. It has a sphere of its own, laws of its own, a government of its own, a revenue and budget of its own. So has each of the colleges. Each member has two patriotisms, that of his college, that of the university ; just as each American citizen has his State patriotism as well as his national patriotism.
II. The university has a direct and immediate jurisdiction over every one of its members, distinct from the jurisdiction exercised by the colleges over the same persons. An offender may be punished for certain offences by a university tribunal, for certain others by a college tribunal, for some by both tribunals. So every citizen lives under the jurisdiction of the Union as well as under that of his State.
III. The governing authorities of the university are created partly by the direct action of its members as graduates, partly by that of the colleges as communities. So in America Congress is created partly by the citizens as citizens, partly by the States as communities. Before the reforms of 1854 the part played by the colleges was much greater than it is now, because the Council, which is a sort of Upper House of the university legislature, con- sisted entirely of heads of colleges.
IV. The university has very little authority over the colleges as corpora- tions, and indeed scarcely comes in contact with them all. Under a recent statute they are obliged to make certain contributions to the university, and to send a copy of their accounts to a university office. But they are self- governing ; the university cannot interfere with their internal management, nor with the exercise of their jurisdiction over their members, which is their own and not delegated by it. So the States exercise an original and not a delegated authority over their citizens, and cannot be controlled by the national government in respect of all those numerous matters as to which the Constitution leaves them free.
NOTE (A) ro CHAPTER XXX CONSTITUTION OF THE CONFEDERATE STATES, 1861-65
Tue Constitution adopted 11th March 1861 by the Slave States which seceded from the Union and formed the short-lived Southern Confederacy, was a re- production of the Federal Constitution of 1788-89, with certain variations,
collegiate graduate can vote in Convocation and Congregation and for the election of members of Council.
There is of course this remarkable difference between the two cases I am com- paring, that in the English universities the university is older than the colleges, whereas in America the States are older than the nation. The federal character of Oxford dates only from the time of Archbishop Laud,
680 APPENDIX
It
interesting because they show the points in which the States’ Rights party thought the Federal Constitution defective as inadequately safeguarding the rights of the several States, and because they embody certain other changes which have often been advocated as likely to improve the working of that instrument.
The most important of these variations are the following :—
Art. i. § 2. A provision is inserted permitting the impeachment of a Federal officer acting within the limits of any State by a vote of two-thirds of the legis- lature thereof. .
Art. i. § 6. There is added: “Congress may by law grant to the principal officer in each of the executive departments, a seat upon the floor of either House, with the privilege of discussing any measure appertaining to his department.”
Art. i. § 7. The President is permitted to veto any particular item or items in an appropriation bill.
Art. i. § 8. The imposition of protective duties and the granting of bounties on industry are forbidden, and the granting of money for internal improvements is strictly limited.
Art. i. § 9. Congress is forbidden to appropriate money from the Treasury, except by a vote of two-thirds of both:Houses, unless it be asked by the head of a department and submitted by the President, or be for the payment of its own expenses, or of claims against the Confederacy declared by a judicial tribunal to be just.
Art. ii. § 1. The President and Vice-President are to be elected for six years, and the President is not to be re-eligible.
Art. ii. § 2. The President is given power to remove the highest officials at his pleasure, and others for good cause, reporting the removals to the Senate.
Art. v. The ‘process for amending the Constitution is to be by a Convention of all the States, followed by the ratification of two-thirds of the States.
Of these changes, the third and fifth were obvious improvements; and much may be said in favour of the second and eighth. The second was a slight approximation towards the Cabinet system of England.+
I omit the important changes relating to slavery, which was fully pro- tected, because these have only a historical interest.
The working of the Constitution of the Confederate States cannot be fairly judged, because it was conducted under the exigencies of a war, which neces- sarily gave it a despotic turn. The executive practically got its way. Con- gress usually sat in secret and “did little beyond register laws prepared by the executive, and debate resolutions for the vigorous conduct of the war. Outside of the ordinary powers conferred by the legislature, the war powers
1 A singular combination of the Presidential with the Cabinet system may be found in the present Constitution of the Hawaiian kingdom, promulgated 7th July 1887. Framed under the influence of American traditions, it keeps the Cabinet, which consists of four ministers, out of the legislature, but having an irresponsible hereditary monarch, it is obliged to give the legislature the power of dismissing them by a vote of want of confidence. The legislature consists of two sets of elective members, Nobles (unpaid), and Representatives (paid), who sit and vote together. Two successive legislatures can alter the Constitution by certain pre- scribed majorities : the Constitution is therefore a Rigid one.
THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 681
openly or practically exercised by the executive were more sweeping and general than those assumed by President Lincoln.”—Alexander Johnston in American Cyclopedia of Political Science, Art, ‘* Confederate States.”
NOTE (B) tro CHAPTER XXX THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION OF CANADA
Tuer Federal Constitution of the Dominion of Canada is contained in the British North America Act 1867, a statute of the British Parliament (30 Vict. c. 3).1 I note a few of the many points in which it deserves to be com- pared with that of the United States.
The Federal or Dominion Government is conducted on the so-called ‘*Cabinet system ” of England, 7.e. the Ministry sit in Parliament, and hold office at the pleasure of the House of Commons. The Governor-General is in the position of an irresponsible and permanent executive similar to that of the Crown in Great Britain, acting on the advice of responsible ministers, He can dissolve Parliament. The Upper House or Senate is composed of 78 persons, nominated for life by the Governor-General, 7.¢. the Ministry. The House of Commons has at present 210 members, who are elected for five years. Both senators and members receive salaries. The Senate has very little power or’influence. The Governor-General has a veto but rarely exercises it, and may reserve a bill for the Queen’s pleasure. The judges, not only of the Federal or Dominion Courts, but also of the Provinces, are appointed by the Crown, 7.e. by the Dominion Ministry, and hold for good behaviour.
Each of the Provinces, at present seven in number, has a legislature of its own, which, however, consists in Ontario, British Columbia, and Manitoba, of one House only, and a Lieutenant-Governor, with a right of veto on the acts of the legislature, which he seldom exercises. Members of the Dominion Parliament cannot sit in a Provincial legislature.
The Governor-General has a right of disallowing acts of a Provincial legis- lature, and sometimes exerts it, especially when a legislature is deemed to have exceeded its constitutional competence.
_ In each of the Provinces there is a responsible Ministry, working on the Cabinet system of England.
The distribution of matters within the competence of the Dominion Parlia. ment and of the Provincial legislatures respectively, bears a general resem- blance to that existing in the United States; but there is this remarkable distinction, that whereas in the United States, Congress has only the powers actually granted to it, the State legislatures retaining all such powers as have not been taken from them, the Dominion Parliament has a general power of legislation, restricted only by the grant of certain specific and exclusive powers to the Provincial legislatures (§§ 91-95). Criminal law is reserved for the
1 See also 34 & 85 Vict. c. 28, and 49 and 50 Vict. c. 35,
682 APPENDIX
Dominion Parliament ; and no province has the right to maintain a military force. Questions as to the constitutionality of a statute, whether of the Dominion Parliament or of a Provincial legislature, come before the courts in the ordinary way, and if appealed, before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in England.
The Constitution of the Dominion was never submitted to popular vote, and can be altered only by the British Parliament, except as regards certain points left to its own legislature. It was drafted by a sort of convention in Canada, and enacted en bloc by the British Parliament. There exists no power of amending the Provincial constitutions by popular vote similar to that which the peoples of the several States exercise in the United States.
NOTE to CHAPTER XXXIII THE DARTMOUTH COLLEGE CASE
Tur famous case of Dartmouth College v. Woodward ( 4 Wheat. 518) decided in 1818, has been so often brought up in English discussions, that it seems proper to give a short account of it, taken from an authoritative source, an address by Mr. Justice Miller (senior justice, and one of the most eminent members, of the Supreme court), delivered hefore the University of Michigan, June 1887.
‘*It may well be doubted whether any decision ever delivered by any court has had such a pervading operation and influence in controlling legislation as this. It is founded upon the clause of the Constitution (Art. i. § 10) which declares that no State shall make any law impairing the obligation of contracts.
“Dartmouth College existed as a corporation under a charter granted by the British crown to its trustees in New Hampshire, in the year 1769. This charter conferred upon them the entire governing power of the college, and among other powers that of filling up all vacancies occurring in their own body, and of removing and appointing tutors. It also declared that the number of trustees should for ever consist of twelve and no more.
‘* After the Revolution, the legislature of New Hampshire passed a law to amend the charter, to improve and enlarge the corporation. It increased the number of trustees to twenty-one, gave the appointment of the additional members to the executive of the State, and created a board of overseers to consist of twenty-five persons, of whom twenty-one were also to be appointed by the executive of New Hampshire. These overseers had power to inspect and control the most important acts of the trustees.
‘‘The Supreme court, reversing the decision of the Superior court of New Hampshire, held that the original charter constituted a contract between the crown, in whom the power was then vested and the trustees of the college, which was impaired by the act of the legislature above referred to. The
Pigears <e
AN AMERICAN VIEW OF PARLIAMENT 683
opinion, to which there was but one dissent, establishes the doctrine that the act of a government, whether it be by a charter of the legislature or of the crown, which creates a corporation, is a contract between the state and the corporation, and that all the essential franchises, powers, and benefits con- ferred upon the corporation by the charter become, when accepted by it, con- tracts within the meaning of the clause of the Constitution referred to.
“The opinion has been of late years much criticized, as including with the class of contracts whose foundation is in the legislative action of the States, many which were not properly intended to be so included by the framers of the Constitution, and it is undoubtedly true that the Supreme court itself has been compelled of late years to insist in this class of cases upon the existence of an actual contract by the State with the corporation, when relief is sought against subsequent legislation.
“The main feature of the case, namely that a State can make a contract by legislation, as well as in any other way, and that in no such case shall a subsequent act of the legislature interpose any effectual barrier to its enforce- ment, where it is enforceable in the ordinary courts of justice, has remained. The result of this principle has been to make void innumerable acts of State legislatures, intended in times of disastrous financial depression and suffering to protect the people from the hardships of a rigid and prompt enforcement of the law in regard to their contracts, and to prevent the States from repeal- ing, abrogating, or avoiding by legislation contracts fairly entered into with other parties.
‘This decision has stood from the day it was made to the present hour as a great bulwark against popular effort through State legislation to evade the payment of just debts, the performance of obligatory contracts, and the general repudiation of the rights of creditors.”
As here intimated, the broad doctrine laid down in this case has been of late years considerably qualified and restricted. It has also become the prac- tice for States making contracts by grants to which the principle of this decision could apply, to reserve power to vary or annul them, so as to leave the hands of the State free.
NOTE ro CHAPTER XXXV
Tux following remarks, with which I am favoured by an eminent American publicist, Mr. Seth Low, ex-mayor of Brooklyn, indicate a view which is beginning to be largely held beyond the Atlantic, and may be found interest- ing by English readers :—
‘England, for the whole of this century, has constantly been modifying her system of government, which was largely feudal in its character, and which still retains in great part the forms of arbitrary power, in order to make it suitable for operation in conformity with modern democratic ideas. While this process has produced remarkable results, there yet remains a great deal of
684 APPENDIX
work of the same sort to be done before the problem of government in England will be what it is in the United States, the simple effort on the part of society as a whole to learn and to apply to itself the art of government.
‘*So long as England’s problem continues to be largely of this character, her omnipotent Parliament will continue to prove of service to her. When, however, this process is substantially completed, so that all men in England are politically equal, and all men equally enjoy the right to take part in the government of the country, the experience of the United States would indicate that an omnipotent parliament would then be full of peril. The United States have enjoyed the measure of prosperity which they have had by trust- ing completely the whole of society. But written constitutions, in the nation and in each of the states, protect at once the individual, the state, and the nation, from hasty and ill-considered action on the part of majorities as to matters fundamental. Laws may be passed by majorities, and may be removed by majorities, but majorities cannot change, in a moment, the fundamental relations of government to the people. In other words, written constitutions interpose effectual bars of delay to the passions and the prejudices of the people. The people have it in their power in the United States, as surely as in Eng- land, to change even the fundamental features of government. But they cannot do this under the impulse of a mere whim. They can do it only by prolonged and intelligent effort directed to this end through a series of years. How far those who have been the governing classes in England, with her more homogeneous population, can modify and control the passions and prejudices of the people when all come to have a vote, so that hasty action on vital matters shall never be had, is a matter upon which no American can form a judgment. To the American mind, it seems as though England’s omnipotent Parliament, which has been to her so invaluable during this period of change from the feudal to the democratic ideal, may before long become an instrument full of danger to the state, unless, in some way, checks producing the same effect as those which have been found necessary in the United States, are placed upon the exercise of its omnipotence.”
NOTE to CHAPTER XLIX
Specimens of Provisions in State Constitutions limiting the taxing and borrowing povrers of State Legislatures and local authoritics 1
ARKANSAS: ConstituTION oF 1874
ArriotE XVI. Section 1. Neither the State nor any city, county, town, or other municipality in this State shall ever loan its credit for any purpose whatever. Nor shall any county, city, town, or other municipality ever issue any interest bearing evidences of indebtedness, except such bonds as may be
1 See also Constitution of California, post, Art. xi. § 18, and Art. xvi,
EXTRACTS FROM CONSTITUTIONS 685 a ee authorized by law to provide for and secure the payment of the present exist- ing indebtedness, and the State shall never issue any interest-bearing treasury warrants or scrip.
Section 7. No city, town, or other municipal corporation other than pro- vided for in this article, shall levy or collect a larger rate of taxation in any one year on the property thereof than one-half of one per centum of the value of such property as assessed for State taxation during the preceding year.
COLORADO: ConstituTIon oF 1876
ArTicLE XI. Section 6. No county shall contract any debt by loan in any form, except for the purpose of erecting necessary public buildings, making or repairing public roads and bridges; and such indebtedness contracted in any one year shall not exceed the rates upon the taxable property in such county following, to wit: counties in which the assessed valuation of taxable property shall exceed five millions of dollars, one dollar and fifty cents on each thousand dollars thereof; counties in which such valuation shall be less than five millions of dollars, three dollars on each thousand dollars thereof ; and the aggregate amount of indebtedness of any county, for all purposes, exclusive of debts contracted before the adoption of this Constitution, shall not at any time exceed twice the amount above herein limited, unless when, in manner provided by law, the question of incurring such debt shall, at a general election, be submitted to such of the qualified electors of such county as in the year last preceding such election shall have paid a tax upon property assessed to them in such county, and a majority of those voting thereon shall vote in favour of incurring the debt ; but the bonds, if any be issued therefor, shall not run less than ten years; and the aggregate amount of debt so con- tracted shall not at any time exceed twice the rate upon the valuation last herein mentioned: Provided, that this section shall not apply to counties having a valuation of less than one million of dollars.
Section 7. No debt by loan in any form shall be contracted by any school district for the purpose of erecting and furnishing school buildings or pur- chasing grounds, unless the proposition to create such debt shall first be sub- mitted to such qualified electors of the districts as shall have paid a school tax therein in the year next preceding such election, and a majority of those voting thereon shall vote in favour of incurring such debt.
Section 8. No city or town shall contract any debt by loan in any form, except by means of an ordinance, which shall be irrepealable until the in- debtedness therein provided for shall have been fully paid or discharged, specifying the purposes to which the funds to be raised shall be applied, and providing for the levy of a tax, not exceeding twelve mills on each dollar of valuation of taxable property within such city or town, sufficient to pay the annual interest and extinguish the principal of such debt within fifteen, but not less than ten years from the creation thereof; and such tax, when collected, shall be applied only to the purposes in such ordinance specified until the indebtedness shall be paid or discharged ; but no such debt shall be created
686 APPENDIX
unless the question of incurring the same shall, at a regular election for councilmen, aldermen, or officers of such city or town, be submitted to a vote of such qualified electors thereof as shall, in the year next preceding, have paid a property-tax therein, and a majority of those voting on the question, by ballot deposited in a separate ballot box, shall vote in favour of creating such debt ; but the aggregate amount of debt so created, together with the debt existing at the time of such election, shall not at any time exceed three per cent of the valuation last aforesaid. Debts contracted for supplying water to such city or town are excepted from the operation of this section,
ILLINOIS: ConstrruTIon oF 1870
ArticLE IX. Section 8. County authorities shall never assess taxes, the aggregates of which shall exceed seventy-five cents per one hundred dollars valuation, except for the payment of indebtedness existing at the adoption of this Constitution, unless authorized by a vote of the people of the county.
Section 12. No county, city, township, school district, or other municipal corporation shall be allowed to become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an amount, including existing indebtedness, in the aggregate exceeding five per centum on the value of the taxable property therein, to be ascertained by the last assessment for the State and county taxes previous to the incurring cf such indebtedness.
Any county, city, school district, or other municipal corporation incurring any indebtedness as aforesaid, shall, before or at the time of doing so, provide for the collection of a direct annual tax sufficient to pay the interest‘on such debt as it falls due, and also to pay and discharge the principal thereof within twenty years from the time of contracting the same.
PENNSYLVANIA: ConstTiTuTION oF 1873
ArTIcLE IX. Section 8.—The debt of any county, city, borough, township, school district or other municipality or other incorporated district, except as herein provided, shall never exceed seven per centum upon the assessed value of the taxable property therein, nor shall any such municipality or district incur any new debt or increase its indebtedness to an amount exceeding two
per centum upon such assessed valuation of property without the assent of the electors thereof at a public election.
NEW YORK: ConstituTionAL AMENDMENT oF 1884 (to Art. viii. § 11 of Constitution of 1846)
No county containing a city of over one hundred thousand iuhabitan ts, or any such city, shall be allowed to become indebted for any purpose or in any manner to an amount which, including existing indebtedness, shall exceed ten
EXTRACTS FROM CONSTITUTIONS 687 SE ee eee ee a
per centum of the assessed valuation of the real estate of such county or city subject to taxation.
The amount hereafter to be raised by tax for county or city purposes in any county containing a city of over one hundred thousand inhabitants, or any such city of this State, in addition to providing for the principal and interest of existing debt, shall not in the aggregate exceed in any one year two per centum of the assessed valuation of the real personal estate of such county or city.
ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION, 1781-1788
Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union between the States of New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.
ArrIcLE I. The style of this confederacy shall be, ‘‘ The United States of America.”
Arr. II. Each State retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and every power, jurisdiction, and right, which is not by this confederation expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled.
Art. III. The said States hereby severally enter into a firm league of friendship with each other, for their common defence, the security of their liberties, and their mutual and general welfare, binding themselves to assist each other against all force offered to, or attacks made upon them, or any of them, on account of religion, sovereignty, trade, or any other pretence what- ever.
Art. IV. The better to secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and inter- course among the people of the different States in this Union, the free inhabitants of each of these States, paupers, vagabonds, and fugitives from justice excepted, shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of free citizens in the several States; and the people of each State shall have free ingress and regress to and from any other State, and shall enjoy therein all the privileges of trade and commerce, subject to the same duties, impositions, and restrictions, as the inhabitants thereof respectively ; provided that such restrictions shall not extend so far as to prevent the removal of property im- ported into any State, to any other State of which the owner is an inhabitant; provided, also, that no imposition, duties, or restriction, shall be laid by any State on the property of the United States, or either of them.
If any person guilty of, or charged with, treason, felony, or other high misdemeanour in any State, shall flee from justice, and be found in any of the United States, ne shall, upon demand of the governor or executive power of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, and removed to the State having jurisdiction of his offence.
Full faith and credit shall be given, in each of these States, to the records,
ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION 689
acts, and judicial proceedings of the courts and magistrates of every other State.
Art. V. For the more convenient management of the general interests of the United States, delegates shall be annually appointed in such manner as the legislature of each State shall direct, to meet in Congress on the first Monday in November, in every year, with a power reserved to each State to recall its delegates, or any of them, at any time within the year, and to send others in their stead for the remainder of the year.
No State shall be represented in Congress by less than two, nor by more than seven members; and no person shall be capable of being a delegate for more than three years, in any term of six years ; nor shall any person, being a delegate, be capable of holding any office under the United States, for which he, or another for his benefit, receives any salary, fees, or emolument of any ‘kind.
Each State shall maintain its own delegates in any meeting of the States, and while they act as members of the committee of the States.
In determining questions in the United States, in Congress assembled, each State shall have one vote.
Freedom of speech and debate in Congress shall not be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Congress ; and the members of Con- gress shall be protected in their persons from arrests and imprisonments during the time of their going to and from, and attendance on Congress, ex- cept for treason, felony, or breach of the peace.
Art. VI. No State, without the consent of the United States, in Congress assembled, shall send any embassy to, or receive any embassy from, or enter into any conference, agreement, alliance, or treaty, with any king, prince, or state ; nor shall any person holding any office of profit or trust under the United States, or any of them, accept of any present, emolument, office, or title of any kind whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign state; nor shall the United States, in Congress assembled, or any of them, grant any title of nobility.
No two or more States shall enter into any treaty, confederation, or alliance whatever between them, without the consent of the United States, in Congress assembled, specifying accurately the purposes for which the same is to be entered into, and how long it shall continue.
No States shall lay any imposts or duties which may interfere with any stipulations in treaties entered into by the United States, in Congress as- sembled, with any king, prince, or state, in pursuance of any treaties already proposed by Congress to the courts of France and Spain.
No vessels of war shall be kept up in time of peace by any State, except such number only as shall be deemed necessary by the United States, in Con- gress assembled, for the defence of such State or its trade ; nor shall any body of forces be kept up by any State, in time of peace, except such number only as, inthe judgment of the United States, in Congress assembled, shall be deemed requisite to garrison the forts necessary for the defence of such State ; but every State shall always keep up a well-regulated and disciplined militia,
VOL. I 2Y
690 - APPENDIX
sufficiently armed and accoutred, and shall provide and constantly have ready for use, in public stores, a due number of field-pieces and tents, and a proper quantity of arms, ammunition, and camp equipage.
No State shall engage in any war without the consent of the United States, in Congress assembled, unless such State be actually invaded by enemies, or shall have received certain advice of a resolution being formed by some nation of Indians to invade such State, and the danger is so imminent as not to admit of a delay till the United States, in Congress assembled, can be consulted ; nor shall any State grant commissions to any ships or vessels of war, nor letters of marque or reprisal, except it be after a declaration of war by the United States, in Congress assembled, and then only against the king- dom or state, and the subjects thereof against which war has been so declared, and under such regulations as shall be established by the United States, in Congress assembled, unless such State be infested by pirates, in which case vessels of war may be fitted out for that occasion, and kept so long as the danger shall continue, or until the United States, in Congress assembled, shall determine otherwise.
Arr. VII. When land forces are raised by any State for the common defence, all officers of or under the rank of colonel shall be appointed by the legislature of each State respectively by whom such forces shall be raised, or in such manner as such State shall direct, and all vacancies shall be filled up by the State which first made the appointment.
Arr. VIII. All charges of war, and all other expenses that shall be in- curred for the common defence or general welfare, and allowed by the United States, in Congress assembled, shall be defrayed out of a common treasury, which shall be supplied by the several States, in proportion to the value of all land within each State, granted to, or surveyed for, any person, as such land and the buildings and improvements thereon shall be estimated accord- ing to such mode as the United States, in Congress assembled, shall, from time to time, direct and appoint. The taxes for paying that proportion shall be laid and levied by the authority and direction of the legislatures of the several States, within the time agreed upon ‘by the United States, in Congress assembled.
Art. IX. The United States, in Congress assembled, shall have the sole and exclusive right and power of determining on peace and war, except in the cases mentioned in the sixth Article; of sending and receiving ambassadors : entering into treaties and alliances, provided that no treaty of commerce shall be made whereby the legislative power of the respective States shall be re- strained from imposing such imposts and duties on foreigners, as their own people are subjected to, or from prohibiting the exportation or importation of any species of goods or commodities whatsoever; of establishing rules for deciding, in all cases, what captures on land or water shall be legal, and in what manner prizes taken by land or naval forces in the service of the United States shall be divided or appropriated ; of granting letters of marque and reprisal in times of peace; appointing courts for the trial of piracies and felonies committed on the high seas; and establishing courts for receiving
Figs wee Ny a
ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION 691
and determining finally appeals in all cases of captures; provided that no member of Congress shall be appointed as judge of any of the said courts.
The United States, in Congress assembled, shall also be the last resort on appeal, in all disputes and differences now subsisting, or that hereafter may arise between two or more States concerning boundary, jurisdiction, or any other cause whatever; which authority shall always be exercised in the manner following: Whenever the legislative or executive authority, or lawful agent of any State in controversy with another, shall present a petition to Congress, stating the matter in question, and praying for a hearing, notice thereof shall be given by order of Congress to the legislative or executive authority of the other State in controversy, and a day assigned for the appear- ance of the parties by their lawful agents, who shall then be directed to appoint, by joint consent, commissioners or judges to constitute a court for hearing and determining the matter in question ; but if they cannot agree, Congress shall name three persons out of each of the United States, and from the list of such persons each party shall alternately strike out one, the petitioners beginning, until the number shall be reduced to thirteen; and from that number not less than seven nor more than nine names, as Congress shall direct, shall, in the presence of Congress, be drawn out by lot ; and the persons whose names shall be so drawn, or any five of them, shall be com- missioners or judges, to hear and finally determine the controversy, so always as a major part of the judges who shall hear the cause shall agree in the determina- tion ; and if either party shall neglect to attend at the day appointed, without showing reasons which Congress shall judge sufficient, or being present, shall refuse to strike, the Congress shall proceed to nominate three persons out of each State, and the secretary of Congress shall strike in behalf of such party absent or refusing; and the judgment and sentence of the court, to be appointed in the manner before prescribed, shall be final and conclusive; and if any of the parties shall refuse to submit to the authority of such court, or to appear or defend their claim or cause, the court shall nevertheless pro- ceed to pronounce sentence or judgment, which shall in like manner be final and decisive ; the judgment or sentence and other proceedings being in either ease transmitted to Congress, and lodged among the acts of Congress for the security of the parties concerned ; provided, that every commissioner, before he sits in judgment, shall take an oath, to be administered by one of the judges of the supreme or superior court of the State where the cause shall be tried, ‘‘ well and truly to hear and determine the matter in question, accord- ing to the best of his judgment, without favour, affection, or hope of reward.” Provided, also, that no State shall be deprived of territory for the benefit of the United States.
All controversies concerning the private right of soil claimed under differ- ent grants of two or more States, whose jurisdictions, as they may respect such lands, and the States which passed such grants, are adjusted, the said grants or either of them being at the same time claimed to have originated ante- cedent to such settlement of jurisdiction, shall, on the petition of either party to the Congress of the United States, be finally determined, as near as may
692 APPENDIX
be, in the same manner as is before prescribed for deciding disputes respecting territorial jurisdiction between different States.
The United States, in Congress assembled, shall also have the sole and exclusive right and power of regulating the alloy and value of coin struck by their own authority, or by that of the respective States ; fixing the standard of weights and measures throughout the United States ; regulating the trade and managing all affairs with the Indians not members of any of the States; provided that the legislative right of any State, within its own limits, be not infringed or violated ; establishing and regulating post-offices from one State to another throughout all the United States, and exacting such postage on the papers passing through the same as may be requisite to defray the ex- penses of the said office ; appointing all officers of the land forces in the service of the United States, excepting regimentai officers; appointing all the officers of the naval forces, and commissioning all officers whatever in the service of the United States ; making rules for the government and regulation of the said land and naval forces, and directing their operations.
The United States, in Congress assembled, shall have authority to ap- point a committee, to sit in the recess of Congress, to be denominated “A Committee of the States,” and to consist of one delegate from each State ; and to appoint. such other committees and civil officers as may be necessary for managing the general affairs of the United States under their direction ; to appoint one of their number to preside, provided that no person be allowed to serve in the office of president more than one year in any term of three years ; to ascertain the necessary sums of money to be raised for the service of the United States, and to appropriate and apply the same for defraying the public expenses; to borrow money or emit bills on the credit of the United States, transmitting every half year to the respective States an account of the sums of money so borrowed or emitted ; to build and equip a navy ; to agree upon the number of land forces, and to make requisitions from each State for its quota, in proportion to the number of white inhabitants in such State which requisition shall be binding; and thereupon the legislature of each State shall appoint the regimental officers, raise the men, and clothe, arm, and equip them in a soldier-like manner at the expense of the United States ; and the officers and men so clothed, armed, and equipped shall march to the place appointed, and within the time agreed on by the United States, in Congress assembled ; but if the United States, in Congress assembled, shall, on consideration of circumstances, judge proper that any State should not raise men, or should raise a smaller number than its quota, and that any other State should raise a greater number of men than the quota thereof, such extra number shall be raised, officered, clothed, armed, and equipped in the same manner as the quota of such State, unless the legislature of such State shall judge that such extra number can not be safely spared out of the same, in which case they shall raise, officer, clothe, arm, and equip as many of such extra number as they judge can be safely spared, and the officers and men so
clothed, armed, and equipped shall march to the place appointed, and within»
the time agreed on by the United States, in Congress assembled.
ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION 698
The United States, in Congress assembled, shall never engage in a war, nor grant letters of marque and reprisal in time of peace, nor enter into any treaties or alliances, nor coin money, nor regulate the value thereof, nor ascertain the sums and expenses necessary for the defence and welfare of the United States, or any of them, nor emit bills, nor borrow money on the credit of the United States, nor appropriate money, nor agree upon the number of vessels of war to be built or purchased, or the number of land or sea forces to be raised, nor appoint a commander-in-chief of the army or navy, unless nine States assent to the same, nor shall a question on any other point, except for adjourning from day to day, be determined, unless by the votes of a majority of the United States, in Congress assembled.
The Congress of the United States shall have power to adjourn to any time within the year, and to any place within the United States, so that no period of adjournment be for a longer duration than the space of six months, and shall publish the journal of their proceedings monthly, except such parts thereof relating to treaties, alliances, or military operations as in their judg- ment require secrecy ; and the yeas and nays of the delegates of each State on any question, shall be entered on the journal, when it is desired by any delegate ; and the delegates of a State, or any of them, at his or their request, shall be furnished with a transcript of the said journal, except such parts as are above excepted, to lay before the legislatures of the several States.
Art. X. The committee of the States, or any nine of them, shall be authorized to execute, in the recess of Congress, such of the powers of Congress as the United States, in Congress assembled, by the consent of nine States, shall, from time to time, think expedient to vest them with; pro- vided that no power be delegated to the said committee, for the exercise of which, by the Articles of Confederation, the voice of nine States, in the Congress of the United States assembled, is requisite.
Art. XI. Canada acceding to this Confederation, and joining in the measures of the United States, shall be admitted into, and entitled to all the advantages of this Union ; but no other colony shall be admitted into the same unless such admission be agreed to by nine States.
Art. XII. All bills of credit emitted, moneys borrowed, and debts con- tracted by or under the authority of Congress, before the assembling of the United States, in pursuance of the present Confederation, shall be deemed and considered as a charge against the United States, for payment and satisfaction whereof the said United States and the public faith are hereby solemnly pledged.
Arr. XIII. Every State shall abide by the determinations of the United States, in Congress assembled, on all questions which by this Confederation are submitted to them. And the Articles of this Confederation shall be inviolably observed by every State, and the Union shall be perpetual ; nor shall any alteration at any time hereafter be made in any of them, unless such alteration be agreed to in a Congress of the United States, and be afterwards confirmed by the legislatures of every State.
And whereas it hath pleased the great Governor of the world to incline the
694 APPENDIX
hearts of the legislatures we respectively represent in Congress to approve of,
and to authorize us to ratify the said Articles of Confederation and perpetual Union, Know ye, that we, the undersigned delegates, by virtue of the power and authority to us given for that purpose, do, by these presents, in the name and in behalf of our respective constituents, fully and entirely ratify and confirm each and every of the said Articles of Confederation and perpetual Union, and all and singular the matters and things therein contained. And we do further solemnly plight and engage the faith of our respective constituents, that they shall abide by the determinations of the United States, in Congress assembled, on all questions which by the said Confederation are submitted to them ; and that the Articles thereof shall be inviolably observed - by the States we respectively represent, and that the Union shall be per- petual. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands in Congress, Done at Philadelphia, in the State of Pennsylvania, the ninth day of July, in the year of our Lord 1778, and in the third year of the Independence of America.
[These Articles were not ratified by all the States until 1st March 1781, when the delegates of Maryland, the latest in ratifying, signed for her. ]
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES
We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
ARTICLE I
Srction 1. All legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and a House of Representatives.
Src. 2. The House of Representatives shall be composed of members chosen every second year by the people of the several States, and the electors in each State shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch ofthe State legislature.
No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained the age of twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that State in which he shall be chosen.
[Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several States which may be included within this Union, according to their respective numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole number of free persons, including those bound to service for a term of years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all other persons.]1_ The actual enumeration shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent term of ten years, in such manner as they shall by law direct. The number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand, but each State shall have at least one Repre- sentative ; and until such enumeration shall be made, the State of New Hampshire shall be entitled to choose three, Massachusetts eight, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations one, Connecticut five, New York six, New Jersey four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten, North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and Georgia three.
1 The clause included in brackets is amended by the XIVth Amendment, 2d section.
696 APPENDIX
a
When vacancies happen in the representation from any State, the executive authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.
The House of Representatives shall choose their speaker and other officers ; and shall have the sole power of impeachment.
Sxc. 3. The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each State, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one vote.
Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes. The seats of the Senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the second year, of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year, and of the third class at the expiration of the sixth year, so that one-third may be chosen every second year; and if vacancies happen by resignation, or other- wise, during the recess of the legislature of any State, the executive thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the legislature, which shall then fill such vacancies.
No person shall be a Senator who shal] not have attained to the age of thirty years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that State for which he shall -be chosen.
The Vice-President of the United States shall be President of the Senate, but shall have no vote, unless they be equally divided.
The Senate shall choose their other officers, and also a President pro tempore, in the absence of the Vice-President, or when he shall exercise the office of President of the United States.
The Senate shall have sole power to try all impeachments. When sitting for that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside; and no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.
Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honour, trust, or profit under the United States; but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment, and punishment, according to law.
Src. 4. The times, places, and manner of holding elections for Senators and Representatives shall be prescribed in each State by the legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations, except as to the places of choosing Senators.
The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by law appoint different day.
Src. 5. Each house shall be the judge of the elections, returns, and qualifications of its own members, and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do business ; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner, and under such penalties as each house may provide.
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 697
Each house may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its members for disorderly behaviour, and, with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a member.
Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time publish the same, excepting such parts as may in their judgment require secrecy ; and the yeas and nays of the members of either house on any question shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present, be entered on the journal.
Neither house, during the session of Congress, shall, without the consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that in which the two houses shall be sitting.
Sxc. 6. The Senators and Representatives shall receive a compensation for their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the Treasury of the United States. They shall in all cases, except treason, felony, and breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session of their respective houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and for any speech or debate in either house they shall not be questioned in any other place.
' No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the United States, which shall have been created, or the emoluments whereof shall have been increased during such time ; and no person holding any office under the United States shall be a member of either house during his continuance in
office. Src. 7. All bills for raising revenues shall originate in the House of
' Representatives ; but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments as
on other bills. Every bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the
Senate shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the President of the United States ; if he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his objections; to that house in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If after such reconsideration two-thirds of that house shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other house, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two-thirds of that house, it shall become a law. But in all cases the votes of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the President within ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their adjourn- ment prevents its return, in which case it shall not be a law.
Every order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of the Senate and the House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the same shall take effect shall be approved by him, or being dis-
698 APPENDIX
as
approved by him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.
Src. 8. The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the United States; but all duties, imposts, and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States ;
To borrow money on the credit of the United States ;
To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian tribes ;
To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States ;
To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin, and fix the standard of weights and measures ;
To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the United States ; ;
To establish post-offices and post-roads.
To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries ;
To constitute tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court ;
To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offences against the law of nations.
To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make rules con- cerning captures on land and water ;
To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years ;
To provide and maintain a navy ;
To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces;
To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections, and repel invasions ; :
To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia, and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the United States, reserving to the States respectively the appointment of the officers and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress ;
To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such district (not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular States, and the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the Government of the United States, and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the State in which the same shall be, for the erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards, and other needful buildings ; and
To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this Con-
stitution in the Government of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof.
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 699
Sec. 9. The migration or importation of such persons as any of the States now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a tax or duty may be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.
The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.
No bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.
No capitation, or other direct tax, shall be laid, unless in proportion to the census or enumeration hereinbefore directed to be taken.
No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any State.
No preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports of one State over those of another; nor shall vessels bound to, or from, one State be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.
No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of appro- priations made by law ; and a regular statement and account of the receipts and the expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.
No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States ; and no person holding any office of profit or trust under them shall, without the consent of the Congress, accept of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign state.
Src. 10. No State shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation ; grant letters of marque or reprisal ; coin money; emit bills of credit; make any thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of con- tracts, or grant any title of nobility.
No State shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any imposts or duties on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection laws ; and the net produce of all duties and imposts, laid by any State on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the Treasury of the United States; and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the Congress.
No State shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any duty of ton- nage, keep troops or ships of war in time of peace, enter into any agreement or compact with another State, or with a foreign power, or engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay.
ARTICLE II
Section 1. The executive power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and, together with the Vice-President, chosen for the same term, be elected as follows :
Each State shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct, a number of directors, equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress; but
700 APPENDIX
no Senator or Representative, or person holding an office of trust or profit under the United States, shall be appointed an elector.
[The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by ballot for two persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same State with themselves, And they shall make a list of all the persons voted for, and of the number of votes for each ; which list they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the Government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate. The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and the House of Representatives, open all the certificates, and the votes shall then be counted. The person having the greatest number of votes shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed ; and if there be more than one who have such majority and have an equal number of votes, then the House of Representatives shall immediately choose by ballot one of them for President ; and if no person have a majority, then from the five highest on the list the said House shall in like manner choose the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States, the representation from each State having one vote ; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to a choice. In every case, after the choice of the President, the person having the greatest number of votes of the electors shall be the Vice- President ; but if there should remain two or more who have equal votes, the Senate shall choose from them, by ballot, the Vice-President. ]?
The Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day on which they shall give their votes ; which day shall be the same throughout the United States.
No person except a natural-born citizen, or a citizen of the United States at the time of the adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to the office of President ; neither shall any person be eligible to that office who shall not have attained the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a resident within the United States.
In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resig- nation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice-President, and the Congress may by law pro- vide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of the President or Vice-President, declaring what officer shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services a compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the United States, or any of them.
Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following .
oath or affirmation :
1 This clause in brackets has been superseded by the XIIth Amendment.
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 701 i Sete ie
“‘I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of President of the United States, and will, to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States.”
Sxo. 2. The President shall be commander-in-chief of the army and navy of the United States, and of the militia of the several States, when called into the actual service of the United States ; he may require the opinion, in writ- ing, of the principal officer in each of the executive departments, upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices, and he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offences against the United States, except in cases of impeachment.
He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to
_ make treaties, provided two-thirds of the Senators present concur; and he
shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the Su- preme Court, and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law ; but the Congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the courts of laws, or in the heads of departments.
The President shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next session.
Src. 3. He shall from time to time give to the Congress information of the state of the Union, and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient ; he may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both houses, or either of them, and in case of disagreement between them, with respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper ; he shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers ; he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed, and shall commission all the officers of the United States.
Src. 4. The President, Vice-President, and all civil officers of the United States, shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, trvason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanours.
ARTICLE III
Sxcrion 1. The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one Supreme Court, and in such inferior courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish. The judges, both of the Supreme and inferior courts, shall hold their offices during good behaviour, and shall, at stated times, receive for their services a compensation, which shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.
Sxo. 2. The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity, arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made, or which shall be made, under their authority; to all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls; to all cases of admiralty
702 APPENDIX
and maritime jurisdiction ; to controversies to which the United States shall be a party; to controversies between two or more States; between a State and citizens of another State; between citizens of different States—between citizens of the same State claiming lands under grants of different States, and between a State, or the citizens thereof, and foreign states, citizens, or subjects.
In‘all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and those in which a State shall be a party, the Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction. In all .the other cases before mentioned, the Supreme Courts shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such exception, and under such regulations as the Congress shall make.
The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury ; and such trial shall be held in the State where the said crimes shall have been committed ; but when not committed within any State, the trial shall be at such place or places as the Congress may by law have directed.
Sxc. 3. Treason against the United States shall consist only in levying war against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two wit- nesses to the same overt act, or on confession in open court.
The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason, but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture except during the life of the person attainted.
ARTICLE IV
SxcTron 1. Full faith and credit shall be given in each State to the public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other State. And the Congress may by general laws prescribe the manner in which such acts, records, and proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.
Src. 2. The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all privileges’ and immunities of citizens in the several States.
A person charged in any State with treason, felony, or other crime, who shall flee from justice and be found in another State, shall, on demand of the executive authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the State having jurisdiction of the crime.
No person held to service or labour in any State, under the laws thereof, escaping into another, shall,in consequence of any law or regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labour, but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or labour may be due.
Src. 3. New States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union ; but no new State shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other State ; nor any State be formed by the junction of two or more States, or parts of States, without the consent of the legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congress.
The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 703
—=
United States ; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United States, or of any particular State.
Src. 4. The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a republican form of government, and shall protect each of them against invasion ; and on application of the legislature, or of the executive (when the legislature cannot be convened), against domestic violence.
ARTICLE V
The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or on the application of the legislatures of two-thirds of the several States, shall call a convention for pro- posing amendments, which, in either case, shall be valid, to all intents and purposes, as part of this Constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States, or by conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the Congress ; provided that no amendments which may be made prior to the year one
‘thousand eight hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the first and fourth clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that no State, without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate.
ARTICLE VI
All debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this Con- stitution as under the Confederation.
This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land ; and the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any thing in the constitu- tion or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.
The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the members of the several State legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of the United States and-of the several States, shall be bound by oath or aftirma- tion to support this Constitution ; but no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States.
ARTICLE VII
The ratification of the conventions of nine States shall be sufficient for the establishment of this Constitution between the States so ratifying the same.
Done in Convention by the unanimous consent of the States present,’ the
1 Rhode Island was not represented. Several of the delegates had left the Convention before it concluded its labours, and some others who remained refused to sign. In all, 65 delegates had been appointed, 55 attended, 39 signed.
The first ratification was that of Delaware, Dec. 7, 1787 ; the ninth (bringing
704 APPENDIX
Seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord 1787, and of the In- dependence of the United States of America the Twelfth. In Witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names. Go WASHINGTON, Presidt. and Deputy from Virginia.
New Hampshire —John Langdon, Nicholas Gilman.  Massachusetis— Nathaniel Gorham, Rufus King. Connecticuwt—Wm. Saml. Johnson, Roger Sherman. New York—Alexander Hamilton. New Jersey—Wil. Livingston, Wm. Patterson, David Brearley, Jona. Dayton. Pennsylvania—B. Franklin, Thos. Fitzsimons, Thomas Mifflin, Jared Ingersoll, Robt. Morris, James Wilson, Geo. Clymer, Gouv. Morris. Delaware—Geo. Read, Richard Bassett, Gunning Bedford, Jun., Jaco. Brown, John Dickinson. Maryland—James M‘Henry, Dan. Carroll, Dan. Jenifer, of St. Thomas. Virginta—John Blair, James Madison, Jun. North Carolina—Wm. Blount, Hugh Williamson, Rich’d. Dobbs Speight. South Carolina—J. Rutledge, Charles Pinckney, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Pierce Butler. Georgia—Williain Few, Abr. Baldwin.
Attest: WILLIAM JACKSON, Secretary.
Articles in addition to, and amendment of, the Constitution of the United States of America, proposed by Congress, and ratified by the Legislatures of the several States, pursuant to the fifth Article of the original Con- stitution.
ARTICLE I}
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof ; or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press ; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
ARTICLE II
A well-regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state, the vight of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
ARTICLE III
No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house, without the consent of the owner, nor in the time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.
the Constitution into force) that of New Hampshire, June 21, 1788 ; the last, that of Rhode Island, May 29, 1790.
1 Amendments I- x inclusive were proposed by Congress to the Legislatures of the States, Sept. 25, 1789, and ratified 1789-91.
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 705
ARTICLE IV
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affir- mation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the person or things to be seized.
ARTICLE V
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in actual service in time of war or public danger ; nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb ; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.
ARTICLE VI
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right toa speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the erime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusa- tion ; to be confronted with the witnesses against him ; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favour, and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.
ARTICLE VII
In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise re-examined in any court of the United States than according to the rules of the common law.
ARTICLE VIII
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
ARTICLE IX The enumeration of the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be con- strued to deny or disparage others retained by the people. ARTICLE X
The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are veserved tu the States respectively, or to the people.
VOL, I 22
706 APPENDIX
ARTICLE XI?
The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by citizens of another State, or by citizens or subjects of any foreign State.
ARTICLE XII”
The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by ballot for President and Vice-President, one of whom at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same State with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as - Vice-President, and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice-President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the Government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate ;—The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates, and the votes shall then be counted ;—The person having the greatest number of votes for President shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed ; and if no person have such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States, the representation from each State having one vote ; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to achoice. Andif the House of Representatives shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth day of March next following, then the Vice-President shall act as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the President.
The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice-President shall be the Vice-President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed, and if no person have a majority, then from the two highest num- bers on the list the Senate shall choose the Vice-President ; a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States.
1 Amendt. XI was proposed by Congress Sept. 5, 1794, and declared to have been ratified by the legislatures of the three-fourths of the States, Jan. 8, 1798.
2 Amendt. XII was proposed by Congress Dec. 12, 1808, and declared to have been ratified Sept. 25, 1804.
‘CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 707
ARTICLE XIII}
Srcrion 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punish- ment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
Src. 2. Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
ARTICLE XIV?
Suction 1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and sub- ject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States ;
nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law ; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws,
Sno. 2. Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and Vice-President of the United States, Representatives in Congress, the executive and judicial officers of the State, or the members of the legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in re- bellion, or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.
Suc. 8. No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector of President and Vice-President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of the Congress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have en- gaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may, by a vote of two-thirds of each House, remove such disability.
Sxc. 4. The validity of the public debt of the United States, authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and bounties for ser- vices in suppressing insurrection or rébellion, shall not be questioned. But neither the United States nor any State shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the United
1 Amendt. XIII was proposed by Congress Feb. 1, 1865, and declared to ave been ratified by 27 of the 36 States, Dec. 18, 1865.
2 Amendt. XIV was proposed by Congress June 16, 1866, and declared to tere been ratified by 80 of the 36 States, July 28, 1868.
APPENDIX
<< : States, or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any “iste: but all su C debts, obligations, and claims shall be held illegal and void. =
Suc. 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legis tion, the provisions of this article.
ARTICLE XV?
Sxcrion 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any State on account of race, — colour, or previous condition of servitude. 4
Sxc. 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate a legislation.
1 Amendt. XV was proposed by Congress Feb. 26, 1869, and declared to have been ratified by 29 of the 37 States, March 30, 1870.
,
CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA?
Adopted in Convention at Sacramento, March 8, A.p. 1879; submitted to and. ratified by the People, May 7, 1879.
PREAMBLE AND DECLARATION OF RIGHTS PREAMBLE
We, the people of the State of California, grateful to Almighty God for our freedom, in order to secure and perpetuate its blessings, do establish this Con. stitution.
ARTICLE I DECLARATION OF RIGHTS
Srcrion 1. All men are by nature free and independent, and have certain inalienable rights, among which are those of enjoying and defending life and liberty ; acquiring, possessing, and protecting property; and pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness. :
Src. 2. All political power is inherent in the people. Government is in- stituted for the protection, security, and benefit of the people, and they have the right to alter or reform the same whenever the public good may require it.
Src. 8. The State of California is an inseparable part of the American Union, and the Constitution of the United States is the supreme law of the land.
Src. 4. The free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and wor- ship, without discrimination or preference, shall for ever be guaranteed in this State ; and no person shall be rendered incompetent to be a witness or juror on account of his opinions on matters of religious belief ; but the liberty of conscience hereby secured shall not be so construed as to excuse acts of licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace or the safety of
the State. So. 5. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended
1 [| take this from an official edition published in 1887, and containing a few
amendments made since 1879. For a reference to some of the more remarkable provisions, see note at end.
710 APPENDIX
unless when, in case of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require the suspension. ; ’
Suc. 6. All persons shall be bailable by sufficient sureties unless for capital offences when the proof is evident or the presumption great. Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed; nor shall cruel or unusual punishment be inflicted. Witnesses shall not be unreasonably detained, nor confined in any room where criminals are actually imprisoned.
Szc. 7. The right of trial by jury shall be secured to all, and remain in- violate ; but in civil actions three-fourths of the jury may render a verdict. A trial by jury may be waived in all criminal cases, not amounting to felony, by the consent of both parties, expressed in open Court, and in civil actions by the consent of the parties, signified in such manner as may be prescribed by law. In civil actions, and cases of misdemeanour, the jury may consist of twelve, or of any number less than twelve upon which the parties may agree in open Court.
‘Sx. 8. Offences heretofore required to be prosecuted by indictment shall be prosecuted by information, after examination and commitment by a magis- trate, or by indictment, with or without such examination and commitment, as may be prescribed by law. A grand jury shall be drawn and summoned at least once a year in each county.
Src. 9. Every citizen may freely speak, write, and publish his sentiments on all subjects, being responsible for the abuse of that right ; and no law shall be passed to restrain or abridge the liberty of speech or of the press. In all criminai prosecutions for libels, the truth may be given in evidence to the jury ; and if it shall appear to the jury that the matter charged as libellous is true, and was published with good motives, and for justifiable ends, the party shall be acquitted ; and the jury shall have the right to determine the law and the fact. Indictments found, or informations laid, for publication in newspapers, shall be tried in the county where such newspapers have their publication office, or in the county where the party alleged to be libelled resided at the time of the alleged publication, unless the place of trial shall be changed for good cause.
Sxc. 10. The people shall have the right to freely assemble together to con- sult for the common good, to instruct their representatives, and to petition the Legislature for redress of grievances.
Szc. 11. All laws of a general nature shall have a uniform operation.
Szc. 12. The military shall be subordinate to the civil power. No standing army shall be kept up by this State in time of peace, and no soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner ; nor in time of war, except in the manner prescribed by law.
Sec. 13. In criminal prosecutions, in any court whatever, the party accused shall have the right to a speedy and public trial ; to have the process of the Court to compel the attendance of witnesses in his behalf, and to appear and defend, in person and with counsel. No person shall be twice put in jeopardy for the same offence ; nor be compelled, in any criminal case, to be a witness against himself ; nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due pro-
: THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 711
cess of law. The Legislature shall have power to provide for the taking, in the presence of the party accused and his counsel, of depositions of witnesses in criminal cases, other than cases of homicide, when there is reason to be- lieve that the witness, from inability or other causes, will not attend at the trial.
Src. 14. Private property shall not be taken or damaged for public use without just compensation having been first made to, or paid into Court for, the owner, and no right of way shall be appropriated to the use of any cor- poration other than municipal until full compensation therefor be first made in money or ascertained and paid into Court for the owner, irrespective of any benefit from any improvement proposed by such corporation, which compensa- tion shall be ascertained by a jury, unless a jury be waived, as in other civil cases in a Court of record, as shall be prescribed by law.
Src. 15. No person shall be imprisoned for debt in any civil action, or mesne or final process, unless in case of fraud, nor in civil actions for torts, except in cases of wilful injury to person or property ; and no person shall be imprisoned for a militia fine in time of peace.
Suc. 16. No bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obliga- ‘tions of contracts, shall ever be passed.
Src. 17. Foreigners of the white race or of African descent, eligible to be- come citizens of the United States under the naturalization laws thereof, while bona fide residents of this State, shall have the same rights in respect to the acquisition, possession, enjoyment, transmission, and inheritance of property as native born citizens.
Src. 18. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, unless for the punish- ment of crime, shall ever be tolerated in this State.
Suo. 19. The right of the people to be secured in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable seizures and searches, shall not be violated ; and no warrant shall issue, but on probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons and things to be seized.
Src. 20. Treason against the State shall consist only in levying war against it, adhering to its enemies, or giving them aid and comfort. No person shall be convicted of treason unless on the evidence of two witnesses to the same overt act, or confession in open Court.
Sno. 21. No special privileges or immunities shall ever be granted which may not be altered, revoked, or repealed by the Legislature, nor shall any citizen, or class of citizens, be granted privileges or immunities which, upon the same terms, shall not be epaited to all citizens.
Src. 22. The provisions of this Constitution are mandatory and prohibitory, unless by express words they are declared to be otherwise.
Sno. 23. This enumeration of rights shall not be, construed to impair or deny others retained by the people.
Sno. 24. No property qualification shall ever be required for any person to vote or hold office.
\
712 APPENDIX
ARTICLE II RIGHT OF SUFFRAGE
Section 1. Every native male citizen of the United States, every male person who shall have acquired the rights of citizenship under or by virtue of the treaty of Queretaro, and every male naturalized citizen thereof, who shall have become such ninety days prior to any election, of the age of twenty-one years, who shall have been a resident of the State one year next preceding the election, and of the county in which he claims his vote ninety days, and in the election precinct thirty days, shall be entitled to vote at all elections which are now or may hereafter be authorized by law ; provided, no native of China, no idiot, insane person, or person convicted of any infamous crime, and no person hereafter convicted of the embezzlement or misappropriation of public money, shall ever exercise the privilege of an elector in this State.
Src. 2. Electors shall in all cases, except treason, felony, or breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest on the days of election, during their attend- ance at such election, going to and returning therefrom.
Sxc. 3. No elector shall be obliged to perform militia duty on the day of election, except in time of war or public danger.
Src. 4. For the purpose of voting, no person shall be deemed to have gained or lost a residence by reason of his presence or absence while employed in the service of the United States, nor while engaged in the navigation of the waters of this State or of the United States, or of the high seas; nor while a student at any seminary of learning ; nor while kept in any almshouse or other asylum, at public expense ; nor while confined in any public prison.
Src. 5. All elections by the people shall be by ballot.
ARTICLE III DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS
SrcTion 1, The powers of the Government of the State of California shall be divided into three separate departments—the legislative, executive, and judicial ; and no person charged with the exercise of powers properly belonging to one of these departments shall exercise any functions appertaining to either of the others, except as in this Constitution expressly directed or permitted.
ARTICLE IV LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
Section 1. The legislative power of this State shall be vested in a Senate and Assembly, which shall be designated the Legislature of the State of Cali- fornia, and the enacting clause of every law shall be as follows :—“ The People
of the State of California, represented in Senate and Assembly, do enact as follows.” ;
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 713
Sco. 2. The sessions of the Legislature shall commence at twelve o’clock
__M. on the first Monday after the first day of January next succeeding the elec-
‘tion of its members, and, after the election held in the year eighteen hundred
and eighty, shall be biennial, unless the Governor shall, in the interim, con- vene the Legislature by proclamation. No pay shall be allowed to members for a longer time than sixty days,! except for the first session after the adop- tion of this Constitution, for which they may be allowed pay for one hundred days. And no bill shall be introduced in either house after the expiration of
‘ninety days from the commencement of the first session, nor after fifty days
after the commencement of each succeeding session, without the consent of two-thirds of the members thereof.
" Src. 3. Members of the Assembly shall be elected in the year eighteen hundred and seventy-nine, at the time and in the manner now provided by law. ‘The second election of members of the Assembly, after the adoption of this Constitution, shall be on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, eighteen hundred and eighty. Thereafter members of the Assembly shall be chosen biennially, and their term of office shall be two years ; and each election shall be on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, unless otherwise ordered by the Legislature.
Src. 4. Senators shall be chosen for the term of four years, at the same
time and places as members of the Assembly, and no person shall be a member
of the Senate or Assembly who has not been a citizen and inhabitant of the State three years, and of the district for which he shall be chosen one year, next before his election.
Src. 5. The Senate shall consist of forty members, and the Assembly of eighty members, to be elected by districts, numbered as hereinafter provided. The seats of the twenty Senators elected in the year eighteen hundred and eighty-two from the odd numbered districts shall be vacated at the expiration of the second year, so that one-half of the Senators shall be elected every two years ; provided, that all the Senators elected at the first election under this Constitution shall hold office for the term of three years.
Src. 6. For the purpose of choosing members of the Legislature, the State shall be divided into forty senatorial and eighty assembly districts, as nearly equal in population as may be, and composed of contiguous territory, to be called senatorial and assembly districts. Each senatorial district shall choose one Senator, and each assembly district shall choose one member of Assembly. The senatorial districts shall be numbered from one to forty, inclusive, in numerical order, and the assembly districts shall be numbered from one to eighty, in the same order, commencing at the northern boundary of the State, and ending at the southern boundary thereof. In the formation of such dis- tricts no county, or city and county, shall be divided, unless it contains suffi- cient population within itself to form two or more districts, nor shall a part of any county, or of any city and county, be united with any other county, or
1] am informed that this period has by a very recent amendment been extended to 100 days.
714 APPENDIX ie
city and county, in forming any district. The census taken under the direc- | tion of the Congress of the United States in the year one thousand eight hundred and eighty, and every ten years thereafter, shall be the basis of fixing and adjusting the legislative districts; and the Legislature shall, at its first session after each census, adjust such districts and reapportion the representa- tion so as to preserve them as near equal in population as may be. But in making such adjustment no persons who are not eligible to become citizens of the United States, under the naturalization laws, shall be counted as forming a part of the population of any district. Until such districting as herein pro- vided for shall be made, Senators and Assemblymen shall be elected by the districts according to the apportionment now provided for by law.
Src. 7. Each house shall choose its officers, and judge of the qualifications, elections, and returns of its members.
Sxo. 8. A majority of each house shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as each house may provide.
Ssc. 9. Each house shall determine the rule of its proceeding, and may, with the concurrence of two-thirds of all its members elected, expel a member.
Src. 10. Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and publish the same, and the yeas and nays of the members of either house, on any ques- tion, shall, at the desire of any three members present, be entered on the Journal.
Src. 11. Members of the Legislature shall, in all cases, except treason, felony, and breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest, and shall not be subject to any civil process during the session of the Legislature, nor for fifteen days next before the commencement and after the termination of each session.
Suc. 12. When vacancies occur in either house, the Governor, or the person exercising the functions of the Governor, shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.
Sxc. 13. The doors of each house shall be open, except on such occasion as, in the opinion of the house, may require secrecy.
Sxo. 14. Neither house shall, without the consent of the other, aiajoaees for more than three days, nor to any place other than that in which they may be sitting. Nor shall the members of either house draw pay for any recess or adjournment for a longer time-than three days.
Src. 15. No law shall be passed except by bill. Nor shall any bill be put upon its final passage until the same, with the amendments thereto, shall have been printed for the use of the members; nor shall any bill become a law unless the same be read on three several days in each house, unless, in a case of urgency, two-thirds of the house where such bill may be pending shall, by a vote of yeas and nays, dispense with this provision. Any bill may originate in either house, but may be amended or rejected by the other; and on the final passage of all bills they shall be read at length, and the vote slew be by yeas and nays upon each bill separately, and shall be entered on the
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA Sey (alss
_ Journal, and no bill shall become a law without the concurrence of a majority _ of the members elected to each house.
Suc. 16. Every bill which may have passed the Legislature shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the Governor. If he approve it, he shall sign it ; but if not, he shall return it, with his objections, to the house in which it originated, which shall enter such objections upon the Journal and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such reconsideration, it again pass both houses, by yeas and nays, two-thirds of the members elected to each house voting there- for, it shall become a law, notwithstanding the Governor’s objections. If any bill shall not be returned within ten days after it shall have been presented to him (Sundays excepted), the same shall become a law in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Legislature, by adjournment, prevents such return, in which case it shall not become a law, unless the Governor, within ten days after such adjournment (Sundays excepted), shall sign and deposit the same in the office of the Secretary of State, in which case it shall become a law in like manner as if it had been signed by him before adjournment. If any bill presented to the Governor contains several items of appropriation of money, he may object to one or more items, while approving other portions of the bill. In such case he shall append to the bill, at the time of signing it, a statement of the items to which he objects, and the reasons therefor, and the appropriations so objected to shall not take effect unless passed over the Governor’s veto, as hereinbefore provided. If the Legislature be in session, the Governor shall transmit to the house in which the bill originated, a copy of such statement, and the items so objected to shall be separately recon- sidered in the same manner as bills which have been disapproved by the Governor.
Snc. 17. The Assembly shall have the sole power of impeachment, and all impeachments shall be tried by the Senate When sitting for that purpose, the Senators shall be upon oath or affirmation, and no person shall be con- victed without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members elected.
Src. 18. The Governor, Lieutenant-Governor, Secretary of State, Con- troller, Treasurer, Attorney-General, Surveyor-General, Chief Justice and Associate Justices of the Supreme Court, and Judges of the Superior Courts, shall be liable to impeachment for any misdemeanour in office ; but judgment in such cases shall extend only to removal from office, and disqualification to hold any office of honour, trust, or profit under the State; but the party convicted or acquitted shall nevertheless be liable to indictment, trial, and punishment, according to law. All other civil officers shall be tried for mis- demeanour in office in such manner as the Legislature may provide.
Sno. 19. No Senator or member of Assembly shall, during the term for which he shall have been erected, be appointed to any civil office of profit under this State which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which have been increased, during such term, except such offices as may be filled by election by the people.
Sno. 20. No person holding any lucrative office under the United States, or any other power, shall be eligible to any civil office of profit under this
716 APPENDIX
State ; provided, that officers in the militia, who receive no annual salary, local officers, or Postmasters whose compensation does not exceed five hundred dollars per annum, shall not be deemed to hold lucrative offices.
Sxc. 21. No person convicted of the embezzlement or defalcation of the public funds of the United States, or of any State, or of any county or munici- pality therein, shall ever be eligible to any office of honour, trust, or profit under this State, and the Legislature shall provide, by law, for the punish- ment of embezzlement or defalcation as a felony.
Sxzc. 22. No money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law, and upon warrants duly drawn thereon by the Controller ; and no money shall ever be appropriated or drawn from the State Treasury for the use and benefit of any corporation, association, asylum, hospital, or any other institution not under the exclusive management and control of the State as a State institution, nor shall any grant or donation of property ever be made thereto by the State; provided, that notwithstanding anything contained in this or any other section of this Constitution, the Legislature shall have the power to grant aid to institutions conducted for the support and maintenance of minor orphans or half orphans, or abandoned children, or aged persons in indigent circumstances—such aid to be granted by a uniform rule, and proportioned to the number of inmates of such re- spective institutions ; provided further, that the State shall have, at any time, the right to inquire into the management of such institution ; provided further, that whenever any county, or city and county, or city, or town, shall provide for the support of minor orphans, or half orphans, or abandoned children, or aged persons in indigent circumstances, such county, city and county, city, or town, shall be entitled to receive the same pro rata appro- priations as may be granted to such institutions under church or other control. An accurate statement of the receipts and expenditures of public moneys shall be attached and published with the laws at every regular session of the Legislature.
Src. 23. The members of the Legislature shall receive for their services a per diem and mileage, to be fixed by law and paid out of the public treasury ; such per diem shall not exceed eight dollars, and such mileage shall not exceed ten cents per mile, and for contingent expenses not exceeding twenty- five dollars for each session. No increase in compensation or mileage shall take effect during the term for which the members of either house shall have been elected, and the pay of no attaché shall be increased after he is elected or appointed.
Sno. 24. Every Act shall embrace but one subject, which subject shall be expressed in its title. But if any subject shall be embraced in an Act which shall not be expressed in its title, such Act shall be void only as to so much thereof as shall not be expressed in its title. No law shall be revised or amended by reference to its title ; but in such case the Act revised or section amended shall be re-enacted and published at length as revised or amended : and all laws of the State of California, and all official writings, and ihe executive, legislative, and judicial proceedings shall be conducted piers and published in no other than the English language.
vA ’
Ye
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 71
~“
Suc. 25. The Legislature shall not pass local or special laws in any of the _ following enumerated cases, that is to say :—
First—Regulating the jurisdiction and duties of Justices of the Peace, Police Judges, and of Constables.
Second—For the punishment of crimes and misdemeanours.
Third—Regulating the practice of courts of justice.
Fourth—Providing for changing the venue in civil or criminal actions.
Fifth—Granting divorces.
Staxth—Changing the nanies of persons or places.
Seventh—Authorizing the laying out, opening, altering, maintaining, or vacating roads, highways, streets, alleys, town plots, parks, cemeteries, grave- yards, or public grounds not owned by the State.
Eighth—Summoning and impaneling grand and petit juries, aud providing for their compensation.
Ninth—Regulating county and township business, or the election of county or township officers.
Tenth—For the assessment or collection of taxes.
Eleventh—Providing for conducting elections, or designating the places of
-voting, except on the organization of new counties.
Twelfth—Affecting estates of deceased persons, minors, or other persons under legal disabilities. ,
Thirteenth—Extending the time for the collection of taxes.
Fourteenth—Giving effect to invalid deeds, wills, or other instruments.
Fifteenth—Refunding money paid into the State Treasury.
Sixteenth—Releasing, or extinguishing, in whole or in part, the indebted- ness, liability, or obligation of any corporation or person to this State, or to any municipal corporation therein.
Seventeenth—Declaring any person of age, or authorizing any minor to sell, lease, or encumber his or her property.
Eighteenth—Legalizing, except as against the State, the unauthorized or invalid act of any officer.
Nineteenth—Granting to any corporation, association, or individual any special or exclusive right, privilege, or immunity.
Twentieth—Exempting property from taxation.
Twenty-first—Changing county seats.
Twenty-second—Restoring to citizenship persons convicted of infamous crimes.
Twenty-third—Regulating the rate of interest on money.
Twenty-fourth—Authorizing the creation, extension, or impairing of liens,
Twenty-fifth—Chartering or licensing ferries, bridges, or roads.
Twenty-siath—Remitting fines, penalties, or forfeitures.
Twenty-seventh—Providing for the management of common schools.
Twenty-cighth—Creating offices, or prescribing the powers and duties of officers in counties, cities, cities and counties, township, election, or school districts.
Twenty-ninth—Affecting the fees or salary of any officer.
718 APPENDIX
Thirtieth—Changing the law of descent or succession. Thirty-first—Authorizing the adoption or legitimation of children. Thirty-second—For limitation of civil or criminal actions.
Thirty-third—In all other cases where a general law can be made applic- able.
Sno. 26. The Legislature shall have no power to authorize lotteries or gift enterprises for any purpose, and shall pass laws to prohibit the sale in this State of lottery or gift enterprise tickets, or tickets in any scheme in the nature of a lottery. The Legislature shall pass laws to regulate or prohibit the buying and selling of the shares of the capital stock of corporations in any stock board, stock exchange, or stock market under the control of any association. All contracts for the sale of shares of the capital stock of any corporation or association, on margin, or to be delivered at a future day, shall be void, and any money paid on such contracts may be recovered by the party paying it by suit in any Court of competent jurisdiction.
Suc. 27. When a congressional district shall be composed of two or more counties, it shall not be separated by any county belonging to another district. No county, or city and county, shall be divided in forming a congressional district so as to attach one portion of a county, or city and county, to another county, or city and county, except in cases where one county, or city and county, has more population than the ratio required for one or more Congress- men ; but the Legislature may divide any county, or city and county, into as many congressional districts as it may be entitled to by law. Any county, or city and county, containing a population greater than the number required for one congressional district, shall be formed into one or more congressional districts, according to the population thereof, and any residue, after forming such district or districts, shall be attached by compact adjoining assembly districts, to a contiguous county or counties, and form a congressional district. In dividing a county, or city and county, into congressional districts, no assembly district shall be divided so as to form a part of more than one con- gressional district, and every such congressional district shall be composed of compact contiguous assembly districts.
Src. 28. In all elections by the Legislature the members thereof shall vote viva voce, and the votes shall be entered on the Journal.
Src. 29. The general appropriation bill shall contain no item or items of appropriation other than such as are required to pay the salaries of the State officers, and expenses of the government, and of the institutions under the exclusive control and management of the State.
Suc. 30. Neither the Legislature, nor any county, city and county, town- ship, school district, or other municipal corporation, shall ever make an appropriation, or pay from any public fund whatever, or grant anything to or in aid of any religious sect, church, creed, or sectarian purpose, or help to support or sustain any school, college, university, hospital, or other institu- tion controlled by any religious creed, church, or sectarian denomination whatever; nor shall any grant or donation of personal property or real estate ever be made by the State, or any city, city and county, town, or other
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 719
_ municipal corporation, for any religious creed, church, or sectarian purpose _ whatever ; provided, that nothing in this section shall prevent the Legislature granting aid pursuant to section twenty-two of this article.
Src. 31. The Legislature shall have no power to give or to lend, or to authorize the giving or lending of the credit of the State, or of any county, city and county, city, township, or other political corporation or subdivision of the State now existing, or that may be hereafter established, in aid of or to any person, association, or sorporation, whether municipal or otherwise, or to pledge the credit thereof, in any manner whatever, for the payment of the liabilities of any individual, association, municipal or other corporation what- ever; nor shall it have power to make any gift, or authorize the making of any gift, or any public money or thing of value, to any individual, municipal or other corporation whatever ; provided, that nothing in this section shall prevent the Legislature granting aid pursuant to section twenty-two of this article ; and it shall not have power to authorize the State, or any political subdivision thereof, to subscribe for stock, or to become a stockholder in any corporation. whatever.
Src. 32. The Legislature shall have no power to grant, or authorize any county or municipal authority to grant, any extra compensation or allowance to any public officer, agent, servant, or contractor, after service has been rendered, or a contract has been entered into and performed, in whole or in part, nor to pay, or to authorize the payment of, any claim hereafter created against the State, or any county or municipality of the State, under any agreement or contract made without express authority of law ; and all such unauthorized agreements or contracts shall be null and void.
Sno. 33. The Legislature shall pass laws for the regulation and limitation of the charges for services performed and commodities furnished by telegraph and gas corporations, and the charges by corporations or individuals for storage and wharfage, in which there is a public use ; and where Jaws shall provide for the selection of any person or oflicer to regulate or limit such - rates, no person or officer shall be selected by any corporation or individual interested in the business to be regulated, and no person shall be selected who is an officer or stockholder in any such corporation.
Src. 34. No bill making an appropriation for money, except the general appropriation bill, shall contain more than one item of appropriation, and that for one single and certain purpose to be therein expressed.
Suc. 35. Any person who seeks to influence the vote of a member of the Legislature by bribery, promise of reward, intimidation, or any other dis- honest means, shall be guilty of lobbying, which is hereby declared a felony ; and it shall be the duty of the Legislature to provide, by law, for the punish- ment of this crime. Any member of the Legislature, who shall be influenced in his vote or action upon any matter pending before the Legislature by any reward, or promise of future reward, shall be deemed guilty of a felony, and upon conviction thereof, in addition to such punishment as may be provided by law, shall be disfranchised and for ever disqualified from holding any office of public trust. Any person may be compelled to testify in any lawful ih-
720 APPENDIX
vestigation or judicial proceeding against any person who may be charged with having committed the offence of bribery or corrupt solicitation, or with having been influenced in his vote or action, as a member of the Legislature, by reward, or promise of future reward, and shall not be permitted to with- hold his testimony upon the ground that it may criminate himself, or subject him to public infamy; but such testimony shall not afterwards be used against him in any judicial proceeding, except for perjury in giving such testimony.
ARTICLE V EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT
SEcTION 1. The supreme executive power of this State shall be vested in a Chief Magistrate, who shall be styled the Governor of the State of California.
Src. 2. The Governor shall be elected by the qualified electors at the time and place of voting for members of the Assembly, and shall hold his office four years from and after the first Monday after the first day of January subsequent to his election, and until his successor is elected and qualified.
Src. 8. No person shall be eligible to the office of Governor who has not been a citizen of the United States and a resident of this State five years next preceding his election, and attained the age of twenty-five years at the time of such election.
Sxo. 4, The returns of every election for Governor shall be sealed up and transmitted to the seat of government, directed to the Speaker of the Assembly, who shall, during the first week of the session, open and publish them in the
presence of both Houses of the Legislature. The person having the highest ~
number of votes shall be Governor; but, in case any two or more have an equal and the highest number of votes, the Legislature shall, by joint vote of . both houses, choose one of such persons having an equal and the highest number of votes for Governor.
Src. 5. The Governor shall be Commander-in-Chief of the militia, the army, and navy of this State.
Sxc. 6. He shall transact all executive business with the officers of govern- ment, civil and military, and may require information, in writing, from the officers of the executive department, upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices.
Src. 7. He shall see that all the laws are faithfully executed.
Sxo. 8. When any office shall, from any cause, become vacant, and no mode is provided by the Constitution and law for filling such vacancy, the Governor shall have power to fill such vacancy by granting a commission, which shall expire at the end of the next session of the Legislature, or at the next election by the people.
Src. 9. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene the Legislature by proclamation, stating the purposes for which he has convened it, and when so convened it shall have no power to legislate on any subjects other than those
_
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 721
_ specified in the proclamation, but may provide for the expenses of the session and other matters incidental thereto.
_ ‘Sno. 10. He shall communicate by message to the Legislature, at every
session, the condition of the State, and recommend such matters as he shall
deem expedient.
Suc. 11. In ease of disagreement between the two houses with respect to the time of adjournment, the Governor shall have power to adjourn the Legis- lature to such time as he may think proper ; provided, it be not beyond the time fixed for the meeting of the next Legislature.
Src. 12. No person shall, while holding any office under the United States or this State, exercise the office of Governor except as hereinafter expressly provided
Src. 18. There shall be a seal of this State, which shall be kept by the Governor, and used by him officially, and shall be called ‘‘ The Great Seal of the State of California.”
Src. 14. All grants and commissions shall be in the name and by the authority of The People of the State of California, sealed with the great seal of the State, signed by the Governor, and countersigned by the Secretary of State.
Sno. 15. A Lieutenant-Governor shall be elected at the same time and places, and in the same manner, as the Governor, and his term of office and his qualifications of eligibility shall also be the same. He shall be the President of the Senate, but shall have only a casting vote therein. If, during a vacancy of the office of Governor, the Lieutenant-Governor shall be im- peached, displaced, resign, die, or become incapable of performing the duties of his office, or be absent from the State, the President pro tempore of the Senate shall act as Governor until the vacancy be filled or the disability shall cease. ‘The Lieutenant-Governor shall be disqualified from holding any other office, except as specially provided in this Constitution, during the term for which he shall have been elected.
Src. 16. In case of the impeachment of the Governor, or his removal from office, death, inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, ‘resignation, or absence from the State, the powers and duties of the office shall devolve upon the Lieutenant-Governor for the residue of the term, or until the disability shall cease. But when the Governor shall, with the con- sent of the Legislature, be out of the State in time of war, at the head of any military force thereof, he shall continue Commander-in-Chief of all the military force of the State.
Sec. 17. A Secretary of State, a Controller, a Treasurer, an Attorney- General, and a Surveyor-General shall be elected at the same time and places, and in the same manner as the Governor and Lieutenant-Governor, and their terms of office shall be the same as that of the Governor.
Src. 18. The Secretary of State shall keep a correct record of the official acts of the legislative and executive departments of the government, and shall, when required, lay the same, and all matters relative thereto, before either branch of the Legislature, and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned him by law.
VOL. I 3A
722 APPENDIX
Sc. 19. The Governor, Lieutenant-Governor, Secretary of State, Controller, Treasurer, Attorney-General, and Surveyor-General shall, at stated times during their continuance in office, receive for their services a compensation which shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which they shall have been elected, which compensation is hereby fixed for the following officers for the two terms next ensuing the adoption of this Constitution, as follows :—Governor, six thousand dollars per annum ; Lieutenant-Governor, the same per diem as may be provided by law for the Speaker of the Assembly, to be allowed only during the session of the Legislature ; the Secretary of State, Controller, Treasurer, Attorney-General, and Surveyor-General, three thousand dollars each per annum, such compensation to be in full for all services by them respectively rendered in any official capacity or employment whatsoever during their respective terms of office; provided, however, that the Legislature, after the expiration of the terms hereinbefore mentioned, may by law diminish the compensation of any or all such officers, but in no case shall have the power to increase the same above the sums hereby fixed by this Constitution. No salary shall be authorized by law for clerical service, in any office provided for in this article, exceeding sixteen hundred dollars per annum for each clerk employed. The Legislature may, in its discretion, abolish the office of Surveyor-General, and none of the officers hereinbefore named shall receive for their own use any fees or perquisites for the per- formance of any official duty.
Src. 20. The Governor shall not, during his term of office, be elected a senator to the Senate of the United States.
ARTICLE VI JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Srcrion 1. The judicial power of the State shall be vested in the Senate sitting as a Court of Impeachment, in a Supreme Court, Superior Courts, Justices of the Peace, and such inferior courts as the Legislature may establish in any incorporated city, or town, or city and county.
Sxc. 2, The Supreme Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and six Associate Justices. The Court may sit in departments and in bank, and shall always be open for the transaction of business. There shall be two departments, denominated, respectively, Department One and Department Two. The Chief Justice shall assign three of the Associate Justices to each department, and such assignment may be changed: by him from time to time. The Associate Justices shall be competent to sit in either department, and may ° interchange with each other by agreement among themselves or as ordered by the Chief Justice. Each of the departments shall have the power to hear and determine causes and all questions arising therein, subject to the provisions hereinafter contained in relation to the Court in bank. The presence of three Justices shall be necessary to transact any business in either of the departments, except such as may be done at chambers, and the concurrence of
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 723
three Justices shall be necessary to pronounce a judgment. The Chief Justice shall apportion the business to the departments, and may, in his discretion, order any cause pending before the Court to be heard and decided by the Court in bank. The order may be made before or after judgment pronounced by a department ; but where a cause has been allotted to one of the depart- ments, and a judgment pronounced thereon, the order must be made within thirty days after such judgment and concurred in by two Associate Justices, and if so made it shall have the effect to vacate and set aside the judgment. Any four Justices may, either before or after judgment by a department, order a case to be heard in bank. If the order be not made within the time above limited, the judgment shall be final. No judgment by a department shall become final until the expiration of the period of thirty days aforesaid, unless approved by the Chief Justice, in writing, with the concurrence of two Associate Justices. The Chief Justice may convene the Court in bank at any time, and shall be the presiding Justice of the Court when so convened. The concurrence of four Justices present at the argument shall be necessary to pronounce a judgment in bank ; but if four Justices, so present, do not concur in a judgment, then all the Justices qualified to sit in the cause shall hear the argument ; but to render a judgment a concurrence of four Judges shall be necessary. In the determination of causes, all decisions of the Court in bank or in departments shall be given in writing, and the grounds of the decision
shall be. stated. The Chief Justice may sit in either department, and shall " preside when so sitting, but the Justices assigned to each department shall select one of their number as presiding Justice. In case of the absence of the Chief Justice from the place at which the Court is held, or his inability to ~ act, the Associate Justices shall select one of their own number to perform the duties and exercise the powers of the Chief Justice during such absence or inability to act.
Src. 3. The Chief Justice and the Associate Justices shall be elected by the qualified electors of the State at large at the general State elections, at the times and places at which the State officers are elected ; and the term of office shall be twelve years, from and after the first Monday after the first day of January next succeeding their election ; provided, that the six Associate Justices elected at the first election shall, at their first meeting, so classify themselves, by lot, that two of them shall go out of office at the end of four years, two of them at the end of eight years, and two of them at the end of twelve years, and an entry of such classification shall be made in the minutes of the Court in bank, signed by them, and a duplicate thereof shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of State. If a vacancy occur in the office of a Justice, the Governor shall appoint a person to hold the office until the election and qualification of a Justice to fill the vacancy, which election shall take place at the next succeeding general election, and the Justice so elected shall hold the office for the remainder of the unexpired term. The first election of the Justices shall be at the first general election after oe adoption and ratification of this Constitution.
Sec. 4. The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction in all cases in
724 APPENDIX
equity, except such as arise in Justices’ Courts; also, in all cases at law which involve the title or possession of real estate, or the legality of any tax, impost, assessment, toll, or municipal fine, or in which the demand, exclusive of interest, or the value of the property in controversy, amounts to three hundred dollars ; also, in cases of forcible entry and detainer, and in proceed- ings in insolvency, and in actions to prevent or abate a nuisance, and in all such probate matters as may be provided by law; also, in all criminal cases prosecuted by indictment or information in a Court of record on questions of law alone. The Court shall also have power to issue writs of mandamus, certiorari, prohibition, and habeas corpus, and all other writs necessary or proper to the complete exercise of its appellate jurisdiction. Each of the - Justices shall have power to issue writs of habeas corpus to any part of the State, upon petition by or on behalf of any person held in actual custody, and may make such writs returnable before himself, or the Supreme Court, or before any Superior Court in the State, or before any Judge thereof.
Suc. 5. The Superior Court shall have original jurisdiction in all cases in equity, and in all cases at law which involve the title or possession of rea] property, or the legality of any tax, impost, assessment, toll, or municipal fine, and in all other cases in which the demand, exclusive of interest or the value of the property in controversy, amounts to three hundred dollars, and in all criminal cases amounting to felony, and cases of misdemeanour not otherwise provided for; of actions of forcible entry and detainer ; of proceedings in insolvency; of actions to prevent or abate a nuisance; of all matters of probate ; of divorce and for annulment of marriage, and of all such special cases of proceedings as are not otherwise provided for. And said Court shall have the power of naturalization, and to issue papers therefor. They shall - have appellate jurisdiction in such cases arising in Justices’ and other inferior Courts in their respective counties as may be prescribed by law. They shall always be open (legal holidays and non-judicial days excepted), and their process shall extend to all parts of the State ; provided, that all actions for the recovery of the possession of, quieting the title to, or for the enforcement of liens upon real estate, shall be commenced in the county in which the real estate, or any part thereof affected by such action or actions, is situated. Said Courts, and their Judges, shall have power to issue writs of mandamus, certiorari, prohibition, quo warranto, and habeas corpus, on petition by or on behalf of any person in actual custody in their respective counties. In- junctions and writs of prohibition may be issued and served on legal holidays and non-judicial days.
Sxc. 6. There shall be in each of the organized counties, or cities and counties, of the State, a Superior Court, for each of which at least one J udge shall be elected by the qualified electors of the county, or city and county, at the general State election ; provided, that until otherwise ordered by the Legislature, only one Judge shall be elected for the Counties of Yuba and Sutter, and that in the City and County of San Francisco there shall be elected twelve Judges of the Superior Court, any one or more of whom may hold Court. There may be as many sessions of said Court, at the same time,
Bight e THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 725
as there are Judges thereof. The said Judges shall choose from their own number a presiding Judge, who may be removed at their pleasure. He shall distribute the business of the Court among the Judges thereof, and prescribe the order of business. The judgments, orders, and proceedings of any session of the Superior Court, held by any one or more of the Judges of said Courts, respectively, shall be equally effectual, as if all the Judges of said respective Courts presided at such session. In each of the Counties of Sacramento, San Joaquin, Los Angeles, Sonoma, Santa Clara, and Alameda there shall be elected two such Judges. The term of office of Judges of the Superior Courts shall be six years from and after the first Monday of January next succeeding their election ; provided, that the twelve Judges of the Superior Court elected in the City and County of San Francisco, at the first election held under this ° Constitution, shall at their first meeting so classify themselves, by lot, that four of them shall go out of office at the end of two years, and four of them shall go out of office at the end of four years, and four of them shall go out of office at the end of six years, and an entry of such classification shall be made In the minutes of the Court, signed by them, and a duplicate thereof filed in the office of the Secretary of State. The first election of Judges of the Superior Courts shall take place at the first general election held after the adoption and ratification of this Constitution. If a vacancy occur in the office of Judge of a Superior Court, the Governor shall appoint a person to hold the office until the election and qualification of a Judge to fill the vacancy, which election shall take place at the next succeeding general election, and the Judge so elected shall hold office for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Src. 7. In any county, or city and county, other than the City and County of San Francisco, in which there shall be more than one Judge of the Superior Court, the Judges of such Court may hold as many sessions of said Court at the same time as there are Judges thereof, and shall apportion the business among themselves as equally as may be. ,
Sxo. 8. A Judge of any Superior Court may hold a Superior Court in any county, at the request of a Judge of the Superior Court thereof, and upon request of the Governor it shall be his duty so to do. But a cause in a Superior Court may be tried by a Judge pro tempore, who must be a member of the bar, agreed upon in writing by the parties litigant or their attorneys of record, approved by the Court, and sworn to try the cause.
Src. 9. The Legislature shall have no power to grant leave of absence to any judicial officer ; and any such officer who shall absent himself from the State for more than sixty consecutive days shall be deemed to have forfeited his office. The Legislature of the State may, at any time, two-thirds of the members of the Senate and two-thirds of the members of the Assembly voting therefor, increase or diminish the number of Judges of the Superior Court in any county, or city and county, in the State; provided, that no such re- duction shall affect any Judge who has been elected.
Src. 10. Justices of the Supreme Court and Judges of the Superior Courts may be removed by concurrent resolution of both Houses of the Legislature, adopted by a two-thirds vote of each house. All other judicial officers, except
726 APPENDIX
Justices of the Peace, may be removed by the Senate on the recommendation of the Governor, but no removal shall be made by virtue of this section, un- less the cause thereof be entered on the Journal, nor unless the party com- plained of has been served with a copy of the complaint against him, and shall have had an opportunity of being heard in his defence. On the question of removal, the ayes and noes shall be entered on the Journal.
Src. 11. The Legislature shall determine the number of Justices of the Peace to be elected in townships, incorporated cities and towns, or cities and counties, and shall fix by law the powers, duties, and responsibilities of Justices of the Peace; provided, such powers shall not in any case trench upon the jurisdiction of the several Courts of record, except that said Justices shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Superior Courts in cases of forcible entry and detainer, where the rental value does not exceed twenty-five dollars per month, and where the whole amount of damages claimed does not exceed two hundred dollars, and in cases to enforce and foreclose liens on personal property when neither the amount of the liens nor the value of the property amounts to three hundred dollars.
Src. 12. The Supreme Court, the Superior Courts, and such other Courts as the Legislature may prescribe, shall be Courts of record.
Src. 13. The Legislature shall fix by law the jurisdiction of any inferior Courts which may be established in pursuance of section one of this article, and shall fix by law the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Judges thereof.
Src. 14. The Legislature shall provide for the election of a Clerk of the Supreme Court, and shall fix by law his duties and compensation, which com- pensation shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he shall have been elected. The County Clerks shall be ex officio Clerks of the Courts of record in and for their respective counties, or cities and counties, The Legislature may also provide for the appointment, by the several Superior Courts, of one or more Commissioners in their respective counties, or cities and counties, with authority to perform chamber business of the Judges of the Superior Courts, to take depositions and perform such other business connected with the administration of justice as may be prescribed by law.
Src. 15. No judicial officer, except Justices of the Peace and Court Com- missioners, shall receive to his own use any fees or perquisites of office.
Src. 16. The Legislature shall provide for the speedy publication of such opinions of the Supreme Court as it may deem expedient, and all opinions shall be free for publication by any person.
Src. 17. The Justices of the Supreme Court and Judges of the Superior Courts shall severally, at stated times during their continuance in office, receive for their services a compensation which shall not be increased or diminished after their election, nor during the term for which they shall have. been elected. The salaries of the Justices of the Supreme Court shall be paid by the State. One-half ofthe salary of each Superior Court Judge shall be paid by the State ; the other half thereof shall be paid by the county for which he is elected. During the term of the first Judges elected under this Con--
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 727
stitution, the annual salaries of the Justices of the Supreme Court shall be
six thousand dollars each. Until otherwise changed by the Legislature, the
Superior Court Judges shall receive an annual salary of three thousand dollars each, payable monthly, except the Judges of the City and County of San Francisco, and the Counties of Alameda, San Joaquin, Los Angeles, Santa Clara, Yuba and Sutter combined, Sacramento, Butte, Nevada, and Sonoma, who shall receive four thousand dollars each.
Src. 18. The Justices of the Supreme Court and Judges of the Superior Courts shall be ineligible to any other office or public employment than a judicial office or employment during the term for which they shall have been elected.
Src. 19. Judges shall not charge juries with respect to matters of fact, but inay state the testimony and declare the law.
Sxo. 20. The style of all process shall be, ‘‘The People of the State of California,” and all prosecutions shall be conducted in their name and by their authority.
Src. 21. The Justices shall appoint a Reporter of the decisions of the Supreme Court, who shall hold his office and be removable at their pleasure. He shall receive an annual salary not to exceed twenty-five hundred dollars, payable monthly.
Suc. 22. No Judge of a Court of record shall practise law in any Court of this State during his continuance in office.
Src. 23. No one shall be eligible to the office of Justice of the Supreme Court, or to the office of Judge of a Superior Court, unless he shall have been admitted to practise before the Supreme Court of the State.
Src. 24. No Judge of a Superior Court, nor of the Supreme Court, shall, after the first day of July one thousand eight hundred and eighty, be allowed to draw or receive any monthly salary unless he shall take and subscribe to an affidavit before an officer entitled to administer oaths, that no cause in his Court remains undecided that has been submitted for decision for the period of ninety days.
ARTICLE VII PARDONING POWER
Srcrion 1. The Governor shall have the power to grant reprieves, pardons, and commutations of sentence, after conviction, for all offences except treason and cases of impeachment, upon such conditions, and with such restrictions and limitations, as he may think proper, subject to such regulations as may be provided by law relative to the mauner of applying for pardons. Upon conviction for treason, the Governor shall have power to suspend the execu- tion of the sentence until the case shall be reported to the Legislature at its next meeting, when the Legislature shall either pardon, direct the execution of the sentéuce, or grant a further reprieve. The Governor shall communicate to the Legislature, at the beginning of every session, every case of reprieve or pardon granted, stating the name of the convict, the crime for which he was
728 APPENDIX
convicted, the sentence, its date, the date of the pardon or reprieve, and the reasons for granting the same. Neither the Governor nor the Legislature shall have power to grant pardons, or commutations of sentence, in any case where the convict has been twice convicted of felony, unless upon the written recommendation of a majority of the Judges of the Supreme Court.
ARTICLE VIII MILITIA
Srctron 1. The Legislature shall provide, by law, for organizing and disciplining the militia, in such manner as it may deem expedient, not in- compatible with the Constitution and laws of the United States. Officers of the militia shall be elected or appointed in such manner as the Legislature shall, from time to time, direct, and shall be commissioned by the Governor. The Governor shall have power to call forth the militia to execute the laws of the State, to suppress insurrections, and repel invasions.
Src. 2. All military organizations provided for by this Constitution, or any law of this State, and receiving State support, shall, while under arms, either for ceremony or duty, carry no device, banner, or flag of any State or nation, except that of the United States or the State of California.
ARTICLE Ix EDUCATION
SEcTION 1. A general diffusion of knowledge and intelligence being essential to the preservation of the rights and liberties of the people, the Legislature shall encourage by all suitable means the promotion of intellectual, scientific, moral, and agricultural improvement.
Sec. 2. A Superintendent of Public Instruction shall, at each gubernatorial election after the adoption of this Constitution, be elected by the qualified electors of the State. He shall receive a salary equal to that of the Secretary of State, and shall enter upon the duties of his office on the first Monday after the first day of January next succeeding his election.
Src. 3. A Superintendent of Schools for each county shall. be elected by the qualified electors thereof at each gubernatorial election ; provided, that the Legislature may authorize two or more counties to unite and elect one Superintendent for the counties so uniting.
Src. 4. The proceeds of all lands that have been or may be granted by the United States to this State for the support of common schools, which may be, or may have been, sold or disposed of, and the five hundred thousand acres of land granted to the new States under an Act of Congress distributing the proceeds of the public lands among the several States of the Union, approved a.D. one thousand eight hundred and forty-one, and all estates of deceased persons who may have died without leaving a will or heir, and also such per cent as may be granted, or may have been granted, by Congress
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 729
on the sale of lands in this State, shall be and remain a perpetual fund, the
interest of which, together with all the rents of the unsold lands and such
other means as the Legislature may provide, shall be inviolably appropriated to the support of common schools throughout the State.
Sxc. 5. The Legislature shall provide for a system of common schools by which a free school shall be kept up and supported in each district at least six months in every year, after the first year in which a school has been established.
Src. 6. The public school system shall include primary and grammar schools, and such high schools, evening schools, normal schools, and tech- nical schools, as may be established by the Legislature, or by municipal or district authority ; but the entire revenue derived from -the State School Fund, and, the State school tax, shall be applied exclusively to the support of primary and grammar schools.
Src. 7. The Governor, Superintendent of Public Instruction, and the Principals of the State Normal Schools, shall constitute the State Board of Education, and shall compile, or cause to be compiled, and adopt a uniform series of text-books for use in the common schools throughout the State. The State Board may cause such text-books, when adopted, to be printed and published by the Superintendent of State Printing, at the State Printing Office, and when so printed and published, to be distributed and sold at the cost price of printing, publishing, and distributing the same. The text-books so adopted shall continue in use not Jess than four years ; and said State Board shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law. The Legislature shall provide for a Board of Education in each county in the State. The County Superintendents and the County Boards of Education shall have control of the examination of teachers and the granting of teachers’ certificates within their respective jurisdictions. [Amendment adopted November 4, 1884. ]
Src. 8. No public money shall ever be appropriated for the support of any sectarian or denominational school, or any school not under the exclusive control of the officers of the public schools; nor shall any sectarian or de- nominational doctrine be taught, or instruction thereon be permitted, directly or indirectly, in any of the common schools of this State.
Suc. 9. The University of California shall constitute a public trust, and its organization and government shall be perpetually continued in the form and character nisiodbed by the organic Act creating the same, passed March twenty-third, eighteen hundred and sixty-eight (and the Al Acts amen- datory thereof), subject only to such lerudacine control as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of its endowments and the proper in- yestment and security of its funds. It shall be entirely independent of all political or sectarian influence, and kept free therefrom in the appointment of its Regents, and in the administration of its affairs; provided, that all the moneys derived from the sale of the public lands donated to this State by Act of Congress, approved July second, eighteen hundred and sixty-two (and the several Acts amendatory thereof), shall be invested as provided by
730 APPENDIX
said Acts of Congress, and the interest of said moneys shall be inviolably appropriated to the endowment, support, and maintenance of at least one College of Agriculture, where the leading objects shall be (without excluding other scientific and classical studies, and including military tactics) to teach such branches of learning as are related to scientific and practical agriculture and the mechanic arts, in accordance with the requirements and conditions of said Acts of Congress; and the Legislature shall provide that if, through neglect, misappropriation, or any other contingency, any portion of the funds so set apart shall be diminished or lost, the State shall replace such portion so lost or misappropriated, so that the principal thereof shall remain for ever undiminished. No person shall be debarred admission to any of the collegiate departments of the University on account of sex.
ARTICLE X STATE INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS
Srcrion 1. There shall be a State Board of Prison Directors, to consist of five persons, to be appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate, who shall hold office for ten years, except that the first appointed shall, in such manner as the Legislature may direct, be so classified that the term of one person so appointed shall expire at the end of each two years during the first ten years, and vacancies occurring shall be filled in like manner. The appointee to a vacancy, occurring before the expiration of a term, shall hold office only for the unexpired term of his predecessor. The Governor shall have the power to remove either of the Directors for mis- conduct, incompetency, or neglect of duty, after an opportunity to be heard upon written charges.
Src. 2. The Board of Directors shall have the charge and superintendence of the State Prisons, and shall possess such powers and perform such duties, in respect to other penal and reformatory institutions of the State, as the Legislature may prescribe.
Sc. 8. The Board shall appoint the Warden and Clerk, and determine the other necessary officers of the prisons. The Board shall have power to remove the Wardens and Clerks for misconduct, incompetency, or neglect of duty. All other officers and employés of the prisons shall be appointed by the ‘Warden thereof, and be removed at his pleasure.
Src. 4. The members of the Board shall receive no compensation, other than reasonable travelling and other expenses incurred while engaged in the performance of official duties, to be audited as the Legislature may direct,
Src. 5. The Legislature shall pass such laws as may be necessary to further define and regulate the powers and duties of the Board, Wardens, and Clerks, and to carry into effect the provisions of this article.
Src. 6. After the first day of January, eighteen hundred and eighty-two, the labour of convicts shall not be let out by contract to any person, co- partnership, company, or corporation, and the Legislature shall, by law, provide for the working of convicts for the benefit of the State.
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 734
ARTICLE XI CITIES, COUNTIES, AND TOWNS
Srorion 1. The several counties, as they now exist, are hereby recognized as legal subdivisions of this State.
Src. 2. No county seat shall be removed unless two-thirds of the qualified electors of the county, voting on the proposition at a general election, shall vote in favour of such removal. A proposition of removal shall not be sub- mitted in the same county more than once in four years.
Src. 8. No new county shall be established which shall reduce any county to a population of less than eight thousand ; nor shall a new county be formed containing a less population than five thousand, nor shall any line thereof pass within five miles of the county seat of any county proposed to be divided. Every county which shall be enlarged or created from territory taken from any other county or counties, shall be liable for a just proportion of the existing debts and liabilities of the county or counties from which such territory shall be taken.
Sno. 4. The Legislature shall establish a system of county governments which shall be uniform throughout the State, and by general laws shall pro- vide for township organization, under which any county may organize when- ever a majority of the qualified electors of such county, voting at a general election, shall so determine ; and whenever a county shall adopt township organization, the assessment and collection of the revenue shall be made and the business of such county and the local affairs of the several townships therein shall be managed and transacted in the manner prescribed by such general laws.
Suc. 5. The Legislature, by general and uniform laws, shall-provide for the election or appointment, in the several counties, of Boards of Supervisors, Sheriffs, County Clerks, District Attorneys, and such other county, township, and municipal officers as public convenience may require, and shall prescribe their duties, and fix their term of office. It shall regulate the compensation of all such officers in proportion to duties, and for this purpose may classify the counties by population ; and it shall provide for the strict accountability of county and township officers for all fees which may be collected by them, and for all public and municipal money which may be paid to them, or officially come into their possession.
Src. 6. Corporations for municipal purposes shall not be created by special laws ; but the Legislature, by general laws, shall provide for the incorporation, organization, and classification, in proportion to population, of cities and towns, which laws may be altered, amended, or repealed. Cities and towns heretofore organized or incorporated may become organized under such general laws whenever a majority of the electors voting at a general election shall so determine, and shall organize in conformity therewith ; and cities or towns heretofore or hereafter organized, and all charters thereof framed or
732 APPENDIX
adopted by authority of this Constitution, shall be subject to and controlled by general laws.
Sxc, 7. City and county governments may be merged and consolidated into one municipal government, with one set of officers, and may be incor- porated under general laws providing for the incorporation and organization of corporations for municipal purposes. The provisions of this Constitution applicable to cities, and also those applicable to counties, so far as not incon- sistent or not prohibited to cities, shall be applicable to such consolidated government. In consolidated city and county governments, of more than one hundred thousand population, there shall be two Boards of Supervisors or houses of legislation—one of which, to consist of twelve persons, shall be elected by general ticket from the city and county at large, and shall hold office for the term of four years, but shall be so classified that after the first election only six shall be elected every two years; the other, to consist of twelve persons, shall be elected every two years, and shall hold office for the term of two years. Any vacancy occurring in the office of Supervisor, in either Board, shall be filled by the Mayor or other chief executive officer.
Src. 8. Any city containing a population of more than one hundred thou- sand inhabitants may frame a charter for its own government, consistent with and subject to the Constitution and laws of this State, by causing a Board -of fifteen freeholders, who shall have been for at least five years qualified electors thereof, to be elected by the qualified voters of such city, at any general or special election, whose duty it shall be, within ninety days after such election, to prepare and propose a charter for such city, which shall be signed in duplicate by the members of such Board, or a majority of them, and re- turned, one copy thereof to the Mayor, or other chief executive officer of such city, and the other to the Recorder of deeds of the county. Such proposed charter shall then be published in two daily papers of general circulation in such city for at least twenty days, and within not less than thirty days after such publication it shall be submitted to the qualified electors of such city at a general or special election, and if a majority of such qualified electors voting thereat shall ratify the same, it shall thereafter be submitted to the Legis- lature for its approval or rejection as a whole, without power of alteration or amendment, and if approved by a majority vote of the members elected to each house, it shall become the charter of such city, or if such city be con- solidated with a county, then of such city and county, and shall become the organic law thereof, and supersede any existing charter and all amendments thereof, and all special laws inconsistent with such charter. A copy of such charter, certified by the Mayor or chief executive officer, and authenticated by the seal of such city, setting forth the submission of such charter to the electors and its ratification by them, shall be made in duplicate and deposited, one in the office of the Secretary of State, the other, after being recorded in the office of the Recorder of deeds of the county, among the archives of the city ; all Courts shall take judicial notice thereof. The charter so ratified may be amended at intervals of not less than two years, by proposals therefor, submitted by legislative authority of the city to the qualified Voters thereof,
_ ae
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 733
at a general or special election held at least sixty days after the publication of such proposals, and ratified by at least three-fifths of the qualified electors voting thereat, and approved by the Legislature as herein provided for the approval of the charter. In submitting any such charter, or amendment thereto, any alternative article or proposition may be presented for the choice of the voters, and may be voted on separately without prejudice to others. ‘Any city containing a population of more than ten thousand and not more than one hundred thousand inhabitants, may frame a charter for its own government, consistent with and subject to the Constitution and laws of this , State, by causing a Board of fifteen freeholders, who shall have been for at least five years qualified electors thereof, to be elected by the qualified voters of said city, at any general or special election, whose duty it shall be, within ninety days after such election, to prepare and propose a charter for such city, which shall be signed in duplicate by the members of such Board, or a majority of them, and returned, one copy thereof to the Mayor, or other chief executive of said city, and the other to the Recorder of the county. Such proposed charter shall then be published in two daily papers of general circulation in such city, for at least twenty days ; and the first publication shall be made within twenty days after the completion of the charter ; and within not less than thirty days after such publication it shall be submitted to the qualified electors of said city, at a general or special election, and if a majority of such qualified electors voting thereat shall ratify the same, it shall thereafter be submitted to the Legislature for its approval or rejection as a whole, without power of alteration or amendment; and if approved by a majority vote of the members elected to each house it shall become the charter of such city, and the organic law thereof, and shall supersede any existing charter, and any amendments thereof, and all special laws incon- sistent with such charter. A copy of such charter, certified by the Mayor or chief executive officer, and authenticated by the seal of such city, setting forth the submission of such charter to the electors, and its ratification by them, shall be made in duplicate, and deposited, one in the office of Secretary of State, and the other, after being recorded in said Recorder’s office, shall be deposited in the archives of the city; and thereafter all Courts shall take judicial notice of said charter. The charter so ratified may be amended, at intervals of not less than two years, by proposals therefor, submitted by the legislative authority of the city to the qualified electors thereof, at a gencral or special election held at least sixty days after the publication of such proposals, and ratified by at least three-fifths of the qualified electors voting thereat, and approved by the Legislature as herein provided for the approval of the charter. In submitting any such charter, or amendment thereto, any alternative article or proposition may be presented for the choice of the voters, and may be voted on separately without prejudice to others. [Amendment adopted April 12, 1887.]
Src. 9. The compensation of any county, city, town, or municipal officer shall not be increased after his election or during his term of office ; nor shall the term of any such officer be extended beyond the period for which he is
elected or appointed.
734 APPENDIX
Src. 10. No county, city, town, or other public or municipal corpora- tion, nor the inhabitants thereof, nor the property therein, shall be released or discharged from its or their proportionate share of taxes to be levied for State purposes, nor shall commutation for such taxes be authorized in any form whatsoever.
Src. 11. Any county, city, town, or township may make and enforce within its limits all such local, police, sanitary, and other regulations as are not in conflict with general laws.
Src. 12. The Legislature shall have no power to impose taxes upon counties, cities, towns, or other public or municipal corporations, or upon the inhabit- ants or property thereof, for county, city, town, or other municipal purposes, but may, by general laws, vest in the corporate authorities thereof the power to assess and collect taxes for such purposes.
Src. 18. The Legislature shall not delegate to any special commission, private corporation, company, association, or individual, any power to make, control, appropriate, supervise, or in any way interfere with, any county, city, town, or municipal improvement, money, property, or effects, whether held in trust or otherwise, or to levy taxes or assessments, or perform any municipal functions whatever.
Suc. 14. No State office shall be continued or created in any county, city, town, or other municipality, for the inspection, measurement, or graduation of any merchandise, manufacture, or commodity ; but such county, city, town, or municipality may, when authorized by general law, appoint such officers.
Src. 15. Private property shall not be taken or sold for the payment of the corporate debt of any political or municipal corporation.
Src. 16. All moneys, assessments, and taxes belonging to or collected for the use of any county, city, town, or other public or municipal corporation, coming into the hands of any officer thereof, shall immediately be deposited with the Treasurer, or other legal depositary, to the credit of such city, town, or other corporation respectively, for the benefit of the funds to which they respectively belong.
Src. 17. The making of profit out of county, city, town, or other public money, or using the same for any purpose not authorized by law, by any officer having the possession or control thereof, shall be a felony, and shall be prosecuted and punished as prescribed by law.
Src. 18. No county, city, town, township, Board of Education, or school district shall incur any indebtedness or liability in any manner, or for any purpose, exceeding in any year the income and revenue provided for it for such year, without the assent of two-thirds of the qualified electors thereof, voting at an election to be held for that purpose, nor unless, before or at the time of incurring such indebtedness, provision shall be made for the col- lection of an annual tax sufficient to pay the interest on such indebtedness as it falls due, and also to constitute a sinking fund for the payment of the principal thereof within twenty years from the time of contracting the same. Any indebtedness or liability incurred contrary to this provision shall be void.
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 735
Src. 19. In any city where there are no public works owned and controlled by the municipality for supplying the same with water or artificial light, any individual, or any company duly incorporated for such purpose under and by authority of the laws of this State, shall, under the direction of the Superin- tendent of Streets, or other officer in control thereof, and under such general regulations as the municipality may prescribe for damages and indemnity for damages, have the privilege of using the public streets and thoroughfares thereof, and of laying down pipes and conduits therein, and connections therewith, so far as may be necessary for introducing into and supplying such ' city and its inhabitants either with gaslight or other illuminating light, or with fresh water for domestic and all other purposes, upon the condition that the municipal government shall have the right to regulate the charges thereof. [Amendment adopted November 4, 1884. ]
ARTICLE XII CORPORATIONS
Srctrion 1. Corporations may be formed under general laws, but shall not be created by special Act. All laws now in force in this State concerning corporations, and all laws that may be hereafter passed pursuant to this section, may be altered from time to time or repealed.
Src. 2. Dues from corporations shall be secured by such individual liability of the corporators and other means as may be prescribed by law.
Src. 8. Each stockholder of a corporation, or joint-stock association, shall be individually and personally liable for such proportion of all its debts and liabilities contracted or incurred, during the time he was a stockholder, as the amount of stock or shares owned by him bears to the whole of the subscribed capital stock or shares of the corporation or association. The directors or trustees of corporations and joint-stock associations shall be jointly and severally liable to the creditors and stockholders for all moneys embezzled or misappropriated by the officers of such corporation or joint-stock association, during the term of such director or trustee.
Src. 4. The term corporations, as used in this article, shall be construed to include all associations and joint-stock companies having any of the powers or privileges of corporations not possessed by individuals or partnerships, and all corporations shall have the right to sue and shall be subject to be sued, in all Courts, in like cases as natural persons.
Src. 5. The Legislature shall have no power to pass any Act granting any charter for banking purposes, but corporations or associations may be formed for such purposes under general laws. No corporation, association, or indi- vidual shall issue or put into circulation, as money, anything but the lawful money of the United States.
Sxc. 6. All existing charters, grants, franchises, special or exclusive privi- leges, under which an actual and bona fide organization shall not have taken place, and business been commenced in good faith, at the time of the adop- tion of this Constitution, shall thereafter have no validity.
736 APPENDIX
Sxc. 7. The Legislature shall not extend any franchise or-charter, nor remit the forfeiture of any franchise or charter, of any corporation now existing, or which shall hereafter exist under the laws of this State.
Suc. 8. The exercise of the right of eminent domain shall never be so. abridged or construed as to prevent the Legislature from taking the property and franchises of incorporated companies and subjecting them to public use the same as the property of individuals, and the exercise of the police power of the State shall never be so abridged or construed as to permit corporations to conduct their business in such manner as to infringe the rights of individuals or the general well-being of the State.
Src. 9. No corporation shall engage in any business other than that expressly authorized in its charter, or, the law under which it may have been or may hereafter be organized ; nor shall it hold for a longer period than five years any real estate except such as may be necessary for carrying on its business.
Src. 10. The Legislature shall not pass any laws permitting the leasing or alienation of any franchise, so as to relieve the franchise or property held thereunder from the liabilities of the lessor or grantor, lessee or grantee, con- tracted or incurred in the operation, use, or enjoyment of such franchise, or any of its privileges.
Src. 11. No corporation shall issue stock or bonds, except for money paid, labour done, or property actually received, and all fictitious increase of stock or indebtedness shall be void. The stock and bonded indebtedness of corpora- tions shall not be increased except in pursuance of general law, nor without the consent of the persons holding the larger amount in value of the stock, at a meeting called for that purpose, giving sixty days public notice, as may be provided by law.
Suc. 12. In all elections for directors or managers of corporations every stockholder shall have the right to vote, in person or by proxy, the number of shares of stock owned by him, for as many persons as there are directors or managers to be elected, or to cumulate said shares and give one candidate as many votes as the number of directors multiplied by the number of his shares of stock shall equal, or to distribute them, on the same principle, among as many candidates as he may think fit; and such directors or managers shall not be elected in any other manner, except that members of co- operative societies formed for agricultural, mercantile, and manufacturing purposes may vote on all questions affecting such societies in manner pre- scribed by law.
Src. 138. The State shall not in any manner loan its credit, nor shall it subscribe to or be interested in the stock of any compan iati master y pany, association, or
Src. 14. Every corporation, other than religious, educational, or benevo- lent, organized or doing business in this State, shall have and maintain an office or place in this State for the transaction of its business, where transfers of stock shall be made, and in which shall be kept for inspection, by every person having an interest therein, and legislative committees, books in which _
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 737
shall be recorded the amount of capital stock subscribed, and by whom; the names of the owners of its stock, and the amounts owned by them respect- ively ; the amount of stock paid in, and by whom; the transfers of stock ; the amount of its assets and liabilities, and the names and place of residence
~ of its officers.
Suc. 15. No corporation organized outside the limits of this State shall be allowed to transact business within this State on more favourable conditions than are prescribed by law to similar corporations organized under the laws of this State.
Sxo. 16. A corporation or association may be sued in the county where the contract is made or is to be performed, or where the obligation or liability arises, or the breach occurs; or in the county where the principal place of business of such corporation is situated, subject to the power of the Court to
- change the place of trial as in other cases.
Sro. 17. All railroad, canal, and other transportation companies are declared. to be common carriers, and subject to legislative control. Any association or corporation, organized for the purpose, under the laws of this State, shall have the right to connect at the State line with railroads of other States. Every railroad company shall have the right with its road to intersect, connect with, or cross any other railroad, and shall receive and transport each the other’s passengers, tonnage, and cars, without delay or discrimination. ;
Src. 18. No president, director, officer, agent, or employé of any railroad or canal company shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the furnish- ing of material or supplies to such company, nor in the business of trans- portation as a common carrier of freight or passengers over the works owned, leased, controlled, or worked by such company, except such interest in the business of transportation as ey flows from the ownership of
- stock therein.
Src. 19. No railroad or other transportation company shall grant free passes, or passes or tickets at a discount, to any person holding any office of honour, trust, or profit in this State ; and the acceptance of any such pass or ticket by a member of the Legislature or any public officer, other than Rail- road Commissioner, shall work a forfeiture of his office.
Src. 20. No railroad company or other common carrier shall combine or make any contract with the owners of any vessel that leaves port or makes port in this State, or with any common carrier, by which combination or con- tract the earnings of one doing the carrying are to be shared by the other not doing the carrying. And whenever a railroad corporation shall, for the pur- pose of competing with any other common carrier, lower its rates for transport. ation of passengers or freight from one point to another, such reduced rates shall not be again raised or increased from such standard without the consent of the governmental authority in which shall be vested the power to regulate fares and freights.
Sno. 21. No discrimination in charges or facilities for transportation shall be made by any railroad or other transportation company between places or
VOL. I 3B
738 * APPENDIX
persons, or in the facilities for the transportation of the same classes of freight » or passengers within this State, or coming from or going to any other State.
Persons and property transported over any railroad, or by any other trans-
portation company or individual, shall be delivered at any station, landing,
or port, at charges not exceeding the charges for the transportation of persons
and property of the same class, in the same direction, to any more distant | station, port, or landing. Excursion and commutation tickets may be issued
at special rates.
Src. 22. The State will be divided into three districts as nearly equal in population as practicable, in each of which one Railroad Commissioner shall be elected by the qualified electors thereof at the regular gubernatorial elections, whose salary shall be fixed by law, and whose term of office shall be four years, commencing on the first Monday after the first day of January next succeeding their election. Said Commissioners shall be qualified electors of this State and of the district from which they are elected, and shall not be in- terested in any railroad corporation, or other transportation company, as stockholder, creditor, agent, attorney, or employé ; and the act of a majority of said Commissioners shall be deemed the act of said Commission. Said Commissioners shall have the power, and it shall be their duty, to establish rates of charges for the transportation of passengers and freight by railroad or other transportation companies, and publish the same from time to time, with such changes as they may make; to examine the books, records, and papers of all railroad and other transportation companies, and for this purpose they shall have power to issue subpoenas and all other necessary process ; to hear and determine complaints against railroad and other transportation’ com- panies, to send for persons and papers, to administer oaths, take testimony, and punish for contempt of their orders and processes, in the same manner and to the same extent as Courts of record, and enforce their decisions and correct abuses through the medium of the Courts. Said Commissioners shall prescribe a uniform system of accounts to be kept by all such corporations and companies. Any railroad corporation or transportation company which shall fail or refuse to conform to such rates as shall be established by such Commissioners, or shall charge rates in excess thereof, or shall fail to keep their accounts in accordance with the system prescribed by the Commission, shall be fined not exceeding twenty thousand dollars for each offence; and every officer, agent, or employé of any such corporation or company, who shall demand or receive rates in excess thereof, or who shall in any manner violate the provisions of this section, shall be fined not exceeding five thousand dollars, or be imprisoned in the county jail not exceeding one year. In all controversies, civil or criminal, the rates of fares and freights established by said Commission shall pe deemed conclusively just and reasonable, and in any action against such corporation or company for damages sustained by charg- ing excessive rates, the plaintiff, in addition to the actual damage, may, in the discretion of the Judge or jury, recover exemplary damages. Said Com- mission shall report to the Governor, annually, their proceedings, and such other facts as may be deemed important. Nothing in this section shall pre-
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 739
vent individuals from maintaining actions against any of such companies. The Legislature may, in addition to any penalties herein prescribed, enforce this article by forfeiture of charter or otherwise, and may confer such further powers on the Commissioners as shall be necessary to enable them to perform
_the duties enjoined on them in this and the foregoing section. The Legisla- lature shall have power, by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to each house, to remove any one or more of said Commissioners from office, for dereliction of duty, or corruption, or incompetency ; and whenever, from any cause, a vacancy in office shall oceur in said Commission, the Governor shall fill the same by the appointment of a qualified person thereto, who shall hold office for the residue of the unexpired term, and until his successor shall have been elected and qualified.
Sec. 28. Until the Legislature shall district the State, the following shall be the railroad districts:— The First District shall be composed of the Counties of Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, Colusa, Del Norte, El Dorado, Humboldt, Lake Lassen, Mendocino, Modoc, Napa, Nevada, Placer, Plumas, Sacramento, Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Solano, Sonoma, Sutter, Tehama, Trinity, Yolo, and Yuba, from which one Railroad Commissioner shall be elected. The Second District shall be composed of the Counties of Marin, San Francisco, and San Mateo, from which one Railroad Commissioner shall be elected. The Third District shall be composed of the Counties of Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Inyo, Kern, Los Angeles, Mariposa, Merced, Mono, Monterey, San Benito, San Bernardino, San Diego, San Joaquin, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, Stanislaus, Tulare, Tuolumne, and Ventura, from which one Railroad Commissioner shall be elected.
Suc. 24. The Legislature shall pass all laws necessary for the enforcement of the ptovisions of this article.
ARTICLE XIII REVENUE AND TAXATION
Srcrron 1. All property in the State, not exempt under the laws of the United States, shall be taxed in proportion to its value, to be ascertained as provided by law. The word ‘‘ property,” as used in this article and section, is hereby declared ‘to include moneys, credits, bonds, stocks, dues, franchises, and all other matters and things, real, personal, and mixed, capable of private ownership ; provided, that growing crops, property used exclusively for public schools, and such as may belong to the United States, this State, or to any county or municipal corporation within this State, shall be exempt from taxation. The Legislature may provide, except in case of credits secured by mortgage or trust deed, for a reduction from credits of debts due bona fide re- sidents of this State.
Suc. 2. Land, and the improvements thereon, shall be separately assessed. Cultivated and uncultivated land, of the same quality, and similarly situated,
shall be assessed at the same value.
740 APPENDIX
Suc. 3. Every tract of land containing more than six hundred and forty acres, and which has been sectionized by the United States Government, shall be assessed, for the purposes of taxation, by sections or fractions of sections. The Legislature shall provide by law for the assessment, in small tracts, of all lands not sectionized by the United States Government.
Suc. 4. A mortgage, deed of trust, contract, or other obligation by which a debt is secured, shall, for the purpose of assessment and taxation, be deemed and treated aS an interest in the property affected thereby. Except as to railroad and other quasi-public corporations, in case of debt so secured, the value of the property affected by such mortgage, deed of trust, contract, or obligation, less the value of such security, shall be assessed and taxed to the owner of the property, and the value of such security shall be assessed and taxed to the owner thereof, in the county, city, or district in which the pro- perty affected thereby is situate. The taxes so levied shall be a lien upon the property and security, and may be paid by either party to such security ; if - paid by the owner of the security, the tax so levied upon the property affected thereby shall become a part of the debt so secured ; if the owner of the pro- perty shall pay the tax so levied on such security, it shall constitute a pay- ment thereon, and to the extent of such payment, a full discharge thereof ; provided, that if any such security or indebtedness shall be paid by such debtor or debtors, after assessment and before the tax levy, the amount of such levy may likewise be retained by such debtor or debtors, and shall be computed according to the tax levy of the preceding year.
Sxo. 5. Every contract hereafter made, by which a debtor is obligated to pay any tax or assessment on money loaned, or on any mortgage, deed of trust, or other lien, shall, as to any interest Specified therein, and as to such tax or assessment, be null and void. :
Suc. 6. The power of taxation shall never be surrendered or suspended by any grant or contract to which the State shall be a party.
Suc. 7. The Legislature shall have the power to provide by law for the pay- ment of all taxes on real property by instalments.
Src. 8. The Legislature shall by law require each taxpayer in this State to make and deliver to the County Assessor, annually, a statement, under oath, setting forth specifically all the real and personal property owned by such taxpayer, or in his possession, or under his control, at twelve o’clock meridian on the first Monday of March.
Src. 9. A State Board of Equalization, consisting of one member from each Congressional District in this State, as the same existed in eighteen hundred and seventy-nine, shall be elected by the qualified electors of their respective districts, at the general election to be held in the year one thousand eight hundred and eighty-six, and at each gubernatorial election thereafter, whose term of office shall be for four years ; whose duty it shall be to equalize the valuation of the taxable property in the several counties of the State for the purposes of taxation. The Controller of State shall be ex officio a member of ~ the Board. The Boards of Supervisors of the several counties of the State . shall constitute Boards of Equalization for their respective counties, whose
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 741
duty it shall be to equalize the valuation of the taxable property in the county for the purpose of taxation ; provided, such State and County Boards of Equalization are hereby. authorized and empowered, under such rules of notice as the County Boards may prescribe as to the action of the State Board, to increase or lower the entire assessment roll, or any assessment contained therein, so as to equalize the assessment of the property contained in said assessment roll, and make the assessment conform to the true value in money of the property contained in said roll ; provided, that no Board of Equalization shall raise any mortgage, deed of trust, contract, or other obli- gation by which a‘debt is secured, money, or solvent credits, above its face value. The present State Board of Equalization shall continue in office until their successors, as herein provided for, shall be elected and shall qualify. The Legislature shall have power to redistrict the State into four districts, as nearly equal in population as practical, and to provide for the elections of members of said Board of Equalization. [Amendment, adopted November 4, 1884.]
Sxc. 10. All property, except as hereinafter in this section provided, shall be assessed in the county, city, city and county, town, township, or district in which it is situated, in the manner prescribed by law. The franchise, road- way, roadbed, rails, and rolling stock of all railroads operated in more than one county in this State shall be assessed by the State Board of Equalization at their actual value, and the same shall be apportioned to the counties, cities and counties, cities, towns, townships, and districts in which such railroads are located, in proportion to the number of miles of railway laid in such counties, cities and counties, cities, towns, townships, and districts.
So. 11. Income taxes may be assessed to and collected from persons, cor- porations, joint-stock associations, or companies resident or doing business in this State, or any one or more of them, in such cases and amounts and in such manner, as shall be prescribed by law.
Src. 12. The Legislature shall provide for the levy and collection of an annual poll tax of not less than two dollars, on every male inhabitant of this State over twenty-one and under sixty years of age, except paupers, idiots, insane persons, and Indians not taxed. Said tax shall be paid into the State School Fund.
Sro. 13. The Legislature shall pass all laws necessary to carry out the pro- visions of this recla
ARTICLE XIV WATER AND WATER RIGHTS
Srcrion 1. The use of all water now appropriated, or that may hereafter be appropriated, for sale, rental, or distribution, is, hereby declared to be a public use, and subject to the regulation and control of the State, in the manner to be prescribed by law ; provided, that the rates or compensation to be collected by any person, company, or corporation in this State, for the use of water supplied to any city and county, or city, or town, or the inhabitants
742 APPENDIX
thereof, shall be fixed, annually, by the Board of Supervisors, or City and ~ County, or City or Town Council, or other governing body of such city and county, or city or town, by ordinance or otherwise, in the manner that other ordinances or legislative acts or resolutions are passed by such body, and shall continue in force for one year and’no longer. Such ordinances or resolutions shall be passed in the month of February of each year, and take effect on the first day of July thereafter. Any Board or body failing to pass the necessary ordinances or resolutions fixing water rates, where necessary, within such time, shall be subject to peremptory process to compel action at the suit of any party interested, and shall be liable to such further processes and penalties as the Legislature may prescribe. Any person, company, or corporation col- lecting water rates in any city and county, or city or town in this State, other- wise than as so established, shall forfeit the franchises and waterworks of such person, company, or corporation to the city and county, or city or town, where the same are collected, for the public use.
Src. 2. The right to collect rates or compensate for the use of water supplied to any county, city and county, or town, or the inhabitants thereof, is a franchise, and cannot be exercised except by authority of and in the manner prescribed by law.
ARTICLE XV HARBOUR FRONTAGES, ETC.
Srcrion 1. The right of eminent domain is hereby declared to exist in the
State to all frontages on the navigable waters of this State. * Sec. 2. No individual, partnership, or corporation, claiming or possessing the frontage or tidal lands of a harbour, bay, inlet, estuary, or other navigable water in this State, shall be permitted to exclude the right of way to such water whenever it is required for any public purpose, nor to destroy or obstruct the free navigation of such water; and the Legislature shall enact such laws as will give the most liberal construction to this provision, so that access to the navigable waters of this State shall be always attainable for the people thereof.
Suc. 3, All tide lands within two miles of any incorporated city or town of this State and fronting on the waters of any harbour, estuary, bay, or inlet, used for the purposes of navigation, shall be withheld from grant or sale to private persons, partnerships, or corporations.
ARTICLE XVI STATE INDEBTEDNESS
Srcrron 1. The Legislature shall not, in any manner, create any debt or debts, liability or liabilities, which shall, singly or in the aggregate with any previous debts or liabilities, exceed the sum of three hundred thousand dollars, except in case of war to repel invasion or suppress insurrection, unless the same shall be authorized by law for some single object or work to be dis-
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 743
tinetly specified therein, which law shall provide ways and means, exclusive of
loans, for the payment of the interest of such debt or liability as it falls due,
and also to pay and discharge the principal of such debt or liability within twenty years of the time of the contracting thereof, and shall be irrepealable until the principal and interest thereon shall be paid and discharged ; but no such law shall take effect until, at a general election, it shall have been sub- mitted to the people and shall have received a majority of all the votes cast for and against it at such election ; and all moneys raised by authority of such.law shall be applied only to the specific object therein stated, or to the payment of the debt thereby created, and such law shall be published in at least one newspaper in each county, or city and county, if one be published therein, throughout the State, for three months next preceding the election at which it is submitted to the people. The Legislature may at any time after the approval of such law by the people, if no debt shall have been contracted in pursuance thereof, repeal the same.
ARTICLE XVII LAND AND HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION
Srcrion 1. The Legislature shall protect, by law, from forced sale, a certain portion of the homestead and other property of all heads of families.
Src. 2. The holding of large tracts of land, uncultivated and unimproved, by individuals or corporations, is against the public interest, and should be discouraged by all means not inconsistent with the rights of private property.
Suc. 3. Lands belonging to this State, which are suitable for cultivation, shall be granted only to actual settlers, and in quantities not exceeding three hundred and twenty acres to each settler, under such conditions as shall be prescribed by law.
ARTICLE XVIII AMENDING AND REVISING THE CONSTITUTION
Srcrion 1. Any amendment or amendments to this Constitution may be proposed in the Senate or Assembly, and if two-thirds of all the members - elected to each of the two houses shall vote in favour thereof, such proposed amendment or amendments shall be entered in their Journals, with the yeas and nays taken thereon ; andit shall_be the duty of the Legislature to submit such proposed amendment or amendments to the people in such manner, and at such time, and after such publication as may be deemed expedient. Should more amendments than one be submitted at the same election, they shall be so prepared and distinguished, by numbers or otherwise, that each can be voted on separately. If the people shall approve and ratify such amendment or amendments, or any of them, by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon, such amendment or amendments shall become a part of this Consti- tution.
Sno. 2. Whenever two-thirds of the members elected to each branch of the
744 APPENDIX
Legislature shall deem it necessary to revise this Constitution, they shall re- commend to the electors to vote at the next general election for or against a Convention for that purpose, and if a majority of the electors voting at such election on the proposition for a Convention shall vote in favour thereof, the Legislature shall, at its next session, provide by law for calling the same. The Convention shall consist of a number of delegates not to exceed that of both branches of the Legislature, who shall be chosen in the same manner, and have the same qualifications, as members of the Legislature. The delegates so _ elected shall meet within three months after their election, at such place as the Legislature may direct. At a special election to be provided for by law, the Constitution that may be agreed upon by such Convention shall be sub- mitted to the people for their ratification or rejection, in such manner as the Convention may determine. The returns of such elections shall, in such manner as the Convention shall direct, be certified to the Executive of the State, who shall call to his assistance the Controller, Treasurer, and Secretary of State, and compare the returns so certified to him ; and it:shall be the duty of the Executive to declare, by his proclamation, such Constitution as may have been ratified by a majority of all the votes cast at such special election, to be the Constitution of the State of California.
ARTICLE XIX CHINESE
Srcrion 1. The Legislature shall prescribe all necessary regulations for the protection of the State, and the counties, cities, and towns thereof, from the burdens and_ evils arising from the presence of aliens who are or may become vagrants, paupers, mendicants, criminals, or invalids afflicted with contagious or infectious diseases, and from aliens otherwise dangerous or detrimental to the well-being or peace of the State, and to impose conditions upon which such persons may reside in the State, and provide the means and mode of their removal from the State, upon failure and refusal to comply with such conditions ; provided, that nothing contained in this section shal] be construed to impair or limit the power of the Legislature to pass such police laws or other regulations as it may deem necessary.
Src. 2. No corporation now existing or hereafter formed under the laws of this State, shall, after the adoption of this Constitution, employ, directly or indirectly, in any capacity, any Chinese or Mongolian. The Legislature shall pass such laws as may be necessary to enforce this provision.
Szc. 3. No Chinese shall be employed on any State, county, municipal, or other public work, except in punishment for crime.
Src. 4. The presence of foreigners ineligible to become citizens of the United States is declared to be dangerous to the well-being of the State, and the Legislature shall discourage their immigration: by all the means within its power. Asiatic coolieism is a form of human slavery, and is for ever prohi- bited in this State, and all contracts for coolie labour shall be void. Al)
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 745
companies or corporations, whether formed in this country or any foreign _ country, for the importation of such labour, shall be subject to such penalties _ as the Legislature may prescribe. The Legislature shall delegate all necessary power to the incorporated cities and towns of this State for the removal of Chinese without the limits of such cities and towns, or for their location within prescribed portions of those limits, and it shall also provide the neces- sary legislation to prohibit the introduction into this State of Chinese after the adoption of the Constitution. This section shall be enforced by appro- priate legislation.
ARTICLE XX MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS
Srcotion 1. The City of Sacramento is hereby declared to be the seat of government of this State, and shall so remain until changed by law ; but no law changing the seat of government shall be valid or binding unless the same be approved and ratified by a majority of the qualified electors of the State voting therefor at a general State election, under such regulations and provisions as the Legislature, by a two-thirds vote of each house, may provide, submitting the question of change to the people.
Src. 2. Any citizen of this State who shall, after the adoption of this Con- stitution, fight a duel with deadly weapons, or send or accept a challenge to fight a duel with deadly weapons, either within this State or out of it, or who shall act as second, or knowingly aid or assist in any manner those thus offending, shall not be allowed to hold any office of profit, or to enjoy the right of suffrage under this Constitution.
Src. 8. Members of the Legislature, and all officers, executive and judicial, except such inferior officers as may be by law exempted, shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the following oath or affirmation : : Z
“‘T do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be), that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of California, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of ——— according to the best of my ability.”
And no other oath, declaration, or test shall be required as a qualification for any office of public trust. {
Suc. 4. All officers or Commissioners whose election or appointment is not provided for by this Constitution, and all officers or Commissioners whose offices or duties may hereafter be created by law,-shall be elected by the people, or appointed, as the Legislature may direct.
Src. 5. The fiscal year shall commence on the first day of July.
Src. 6. Suits may be brought against the State in such manner and in such Courts as shall be directed by law.
Src. 7. No contract of marriage, if otherwise duly made, shall be invali- dated for want of conformity to the requirements of any religious sect.
Sro. 8. All property, real and personal, owned by either husband or wife,
746 APPENDIX
before marriage, and that acquired by either of them afterward by gift, devise, or descent, shall be their separate property.
Suc. 9. No perpetuities shall be allowed except for eleemosynary pur-
oses. Suc. 10. Every person shall be disqualified from holding any office of profit in this State who shall have been convicted of having given or offered a bribe to procure his election or appointment.
Src. 11. Laws shall be made to exclude from office, serving on juries, and from the right of suffrage, persons convicted of bribery, perjury, forgery, mal- feasance in office, or other high crimes. The privilege of free suffrage shall be supported by laws regulating elections, and prohibiting, under adequate penalties, all undue influence thereon from power, bribery, tumult, or other improper practice.
Src. 12. Absence from the State, on business of the State, or of the United States, shall not affect the question of residence of any person.
Src. 13. A plurality of the votes given at any election shall constitute a choice, where otherwise not directed in this Constitution.
Src. 14. The Legislature shall provide, by law, for the maintenance and efficiency of a State Board of Health,
Szc. 15. Mechanics, material-men, artisans, and labourers of every class shall have a lien upon the property upon which they have bestowed labour or furnished material, for the value of such labour done and material furnished ; and the Legislature shall provide, by law, for the speedy and efficient enforce- ment of such liens.
Src. 16. When the term of any officer or Commissioner is not provided for in this Constitution, the term of such officer or Commissioner may be de- clared by law; and, if not so declared, such officer or Commissioner shall hold his position as euch officer or Commissioner during the pleasure of the authority making the appointment ; but in no case shall such term exceed four years.
Src. 17. Eight hours shall constitute a legal day’s work on all public work.
Src. 18. No person shall, on account of sex, be disqualified from entering upon or pursuing any lawful business, vocation, or profession.
Src. 19. Nothing in this Constitution shall prevent the Legislature from providing, by law, for the payment of the expenses of the Convention framing this Constitution, ineluding the per diem of the delegates for the full term thereof.
Src. 20. Elections of: the officers provided for by this Constitution, except at the election in the year eighteen hundred and seventy-nine, shall be held on the even numbered years next before the expiration of their respective terms. The terms.of such officers shall commence on the first Monday after the first day of January next following their election,
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA . 747
ARTICLE XXI BOUNDARY
Section 1. The boundary of the State of California shall be as follows: Commencing at the point of intersection of the forty-second degree of north latitude with the one hundred and twentieth degree of longitude west from Greenwich, and running south on the line of said one hundred and twentieth degree of west longitude until it intersects the thirty-ninth degree of north latitude ; thence running in a straight line, in a south-easterly direction, to the River Colorado, at a point where it intersects the thirty-fifth degree of north latitude ; thence down the middle of the channel of said river to the boundary line between the United States and Mexico, as established by the treaty of May thirtieth, one thousand eight hundred and forty-eight ; thence running west and along said boundary ihe to the Pacific Ocean, and extend- ing therein three English miles ; thence running in a north-westerly direc- tion, and following whe direction of the Pacific Coast to the forty-second degree of north latitude ; thence on the line of said forty-second degree of
north latitude to the place of beginning. Also including all the islands, harbours, and bays along and adjacent to the coast.
ARTICLE XXII SCHEDULE
That no inconvenience may arise from the alterations and amendments in the Constitution of this State, and to carry the same into complete effect, it is hereby ordered and declared :
Suction 1. That all laws in force at the adoption of this Constitution, not inconsistent therewith, shall remain in full force and effect until altered or repealed by the Legislature ; and all rights, actions, prosecutions, claims, and contracts of the State, counties, individuals, bodies corporate, not inconsistent
therewith, shall continue to be as valid as if this Constitution had not been adopted. The provisions of all laws which are inconsistent with this Consti- tution shall cease upon the adoption thereof, except that all laws which are inconsistent with such provisions of this Constitution as require legislation to ‘enforce them shall remain in full force until the first day of July, eighteen hundred and eighty, unless sooner altered or repealed by the Legislature.
Suc. 2. That all recognizances, obligations, and all other instruments entered into or executed before the adoption of this Constitution, to this State, or to any subdivision thereof, or any municipality therein, and all fines, taxes, penalties, and forfeitures due or owing to this State, or any subdivision or municipality thereof, and all writs, prosecutions, actions, and causes of action, except as herein otherwise provided, shall continue and remain un- affected by the adoption of this Constitution. All indictments or informa- tions which shall have been found, or may hereafter be found, for any crime
48 CO APPENDIX
or offence committed before this Constitution takes effect, may be proceeded upon as if no change had taken place, except as otherwise provided in this Constitution. : ;
Suc. 8. All Courts now existing, save Justices’ and Police Courts, are hereby abolished ; and all records, books, papers, and proceedings from such . Courts, as are abolished by this Constitution, shall be transferred, on the first day of January, eighteen hundred and eighty, to the Courts provided for in this Constitution ; and the Courts to which the same are thus transferred shall have the same power and jurisdiction over them as if they had been in the first instance commenced, filed, or lodged therein.
Sxo. 4. The Superintendent of Printing of the State of California shall, at least thirty days before the first Wednesday in May, A.D. eighteen hundred and seventy-nine, cause to be printed at the State Printing Office, in pamphlet form, simply stitched, as many copies of this Constitution as there are registered voters in this State, and mail one copy thereof to the Post-Office address of each registered voter ; provided, any copies not called for ten days after reaching their delivery office, shall be subject to general distribution by the several Postmasters of this State. The Governor shall issue his proclama- tion, giving notice of the election for the adoption or rejection of this Con- stitution, at least thirty days before the said first Wednesday of May, eighteen hundred and seventy-nine, and the Boards of Supervisors of the several counties shall cause said proclamation to be made public in their respective counties, and general notice of said election to be given at least fifteen days before said election.
Suc. 5. The Superintendent of Printing of the State of California shall, at least twenty days before said election, cause to be printed and delivered to the . Clerk of each county in this State five times the number of properly prepared ballots for said election that there are voters in said respective counties, with the words printed thereon, ‘‘For the New Constitution.” He shall likewise cause to be so printed and delivered to said Clerks five times the number of properly prepared ballots for said election that there are voters in said re- spective counties, with the words printed thereon, ‘‘ Against the New Constitution.” The Secretary of State is hereby authorized and required to furnish the Superintendent of State Printing a sufficient quantity of legal ballot paper, now on hand, to carry out the provisions of this section.
Sc. 6. The Clerks of the several counties in the State shall, at least five —
“days before said election, cause to be delivered to the Inspectors of Election, at each election precinct or polling place in their respective counties, suitable registers, poll-books, forms of return, and an equal number of the aforesaid ballots, which number, in the aggregate, must be ten times greater than the number of voters in the said election precincts or polling places. The return of the number of votes cast at the Presidential election in the year eighteen hundred and seventy-six shall serve as a basis of calculation for this and the preceding section ; provided, that the duties in this and the preceding section imposed upon the Clerks of the respective counties shall, in the City and
THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 749
eaney of San Francisco, be performed by the Registrar of voters for said city and county.
Src. 7. Every citizen of the United States, entitled by law to vote for members of the Assembly in this State, shall be entitled to vote for the adop- tion or rejection of this Constitution.
' Sec. 8. The officers of the several counties of this State, whose duty it is, under the law, to receive and canvass the returns from the several precincts of their respective counties, as well as of the City and County of San Francisco, shall meet at the usual place of meeting for such purposes on the first Monday after said election, If, at the time of meeting, the returns from each pre- cinct in the county in which the polls were opened have been received, the Board must then and there proceed to canvass the returns; but~if all the returns have not been received, the canvass must be péstpontd from time to time until all the returns are received, or until the second Monday after said election, when they shall proceed to make out returns of the votes cast for and against the new Constitution ; and the proceedings of said Boards shall be the same as those prescribed for like Boards in the case of an election for Governor. Upon the completion of said canvass and returns, the said Board shall imme- diately certify the same, in the usual form, to the Governor of the State of California.
Src. 9. The Governor of the State of California shall, as soon as the returns of said election shall be received by him, or within thirty days after said elec- tion, in the presence and with the assistance of the Controller, Treasurer, and Secretary of State, open and compute all the returns received of votes cast for and against the new Constitution. If, by such examination and computation, it is ascertained that a majority of the whole number of votes cast at such election is in favour of such new Constitution, the Executive of this State shall, by his proclamation, declare such new Constitution to be the Constitu- tion of the State of California, and that it shall take effect and be in force on the days hereinafter specified.
Src. 10. In order that future elections in this State shall conform to the requirements of the Constitution, the terms of all officers elected at the first election under the same, shall be, respectively, one year shorter than the terms as fixed by law or by this Constitution ; and the successors of all such officers shall be elected at the last election before the expiration of the terms as in this section provided. The first officers chosen, after the adoption of this Consti- tution, shall be elected at the time and in the manner now provided by law. Judicial officers and the Superintendent of Public Instruction shall be elected at the time and in the manner that State officers are elected.
Src. 11. All laws relative to the present judicial system of the State shall be applicable to the judicial system created by this Constitution until changed by legislation. j
Src. 12. This Constitution shall take effect and be in force on and after the fourth day of July, eighteen hundred and seventy-nine, at twelve o'clock meridian, so far as the same relates to the election of all officers, the com- mencement of their terms of office, and the mecting of the Legislature. In
‘on the first day a Fanuaty, eilaes hundred eee sight, at twelve o’clock meridian. 7
‘
Attest: Epwin F. Smiru, Secretary. —
The reader may be revommended, if he wants the patience’ to read thr ae Ei the whole of this Constitution, to look at the following parts of maa, Arts. i, iv. §$ 2, 15, 16, 24-26, 30-85 ; vi. §§ 10, 11, 19, 24; ix, ae ’ 8). 18%) xan, xill., -xVi,, XVI.) X1xe, KX SG 2. Oe Tose to] ee sy : % rr fi at rf 246 AY = Z i 1 . > / ‘ END OF VOL. I i my — . 4b $ ; oh i
Printed by R. & R. CLarK, Edinburgh.
WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
THE HOLY ROMAN EMPIRE. Eighth Edition, revised and enlarged. Crown 8vo. $1.50. The same, half calf, extra. $3.
The Saturday Review says :—“It exactly supplies a want. . . . We know of no writer who has so thoroughly grasped the real nature of the medizval empire, and its relations alike to earlier and later times.”
-TRANSCAUCASIA AND ARARAT: Being Notes of a Vacation Tour in the Autumn of 1876. With Map and View of Mount Ararat. Third Edition. Crown 8vo.
$2.50. The Times says :—“He has produced a very interesting volume, full of information, .. In Professor Bryce’s bold ascent of Ararat
alone, when Kurds and Cossacks alike deserted him, we have a feat of mountain climbing which in itself proves him to be no unworthy member of ,the Alpine Club. This alone would render the book well worth reading, quite apart from the store of information contained in it.”
The Atheneum says :—“ Mr. Bryce has written a lively, and at the same time instructive, description of the tour he made in and about the Caucasus. When so well informed a jurist travels into regions seldom visited, and even walks up a mountain so rarely scaled as Ararat, he is justified in thinking that the impressions he brings home are worthy of being communicated to the world at large.”
MACMILLAN & CO, NEW YORK.
scaeses <2 rite
< m
Sees
Syd
fie
ee 2,
SREP vate e
Rak
OEM ioe
ES. Paes
< eae
ste
IS on ease Seseerss i.
B58
, SEAS BS Py 43 ra ere fF esay. Sones :
a x
tn
. Sean)
See et
“
Rese
Se x
NS DES Se Re:
BGR?
% SRS
See
Astrheey Ge, Dey
3
oy MoS oke
e oe aS ass ee os oy
FHL 28 ESS.
LAE 5
Bae ia
Pr
=, So ee
Pe aeteesee dis
< Oe Scies4
Lee cae haseeas, oe es
“4%, ee
Cie skes Y Ke SOE 7 es
Se:
S, ‘e
i, Se
ot oteiear yes sek BEES oy ie 523 SSCs BEsSeees
MSE,
Se pees
site > > 228,
eae oases SE
es eect Seas AIRE
USS
SIE SESe eecese mS et Bp eatot ira Sone
Ss <
3 SeSaNe Nee Seesaaas BS }
ee aS TERK SOON as, SERS, <a =
y Regier
QO.
ASN RSG
ae Se SS,
Soe)
4S JOISTS YS eR aso eS
oe ered Sgaesexoanegend
Be
se80ke SoS saya aghe
x
2 t Messe er Pais Steaten 4% BS Ses SSX <S.
SE
28. SEE
2 . RSeres
SECTS SPRANG
<
sae Wee
MEME Gl he
LTA De
<
SSE
meta
nS
KY Te aN iy
Soh r , on
wary OS
A A>
Obes
<i SIE SeSe SPs
eeSeeecess Seeteeee seis
sy VEN, i Se
2 ESR ese ata
SWISS a Beans
ies AA ges
y.
*
