THE ART OF PRESERVING, &c. &e. &c.
sy M, APPERT.
Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2024
https://archive.org/details/artofpreservinga0000appe
THE ART
os
PRESERVING
ALL KINDS OF
Animal and Vegetable Substances FOR
SEVERAL YEARS. ieee
A WORK PUBLISHED BY ORDIR OF THE FRENCH WINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, On the Report of the Board of Arts and Manufactures,
M, APPERT.
——
oj
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRUNCIL,.
LONDON: PRINTED TOR BLACK, PARRY, AND KINGSBURY, ROOKSELLERS TO THF WON, EAST-INDIA COMs
PANY, LEADENHALL STREFT,
1812.
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Page
eeeaeenrse OFS BFGHRH OSH OT HFe Vilt
Explanation of the Plate Advertisement
ee ee ee oe eee ee i i Xx
Letter of the Minister of the Imtezior ..ccccecee. XX Cersiticate of the Board of Arts .....................XSiil Letier to Gencral Caffurelli from the Council of PICA EE reese exl¥ ume eed Pe fe Lereser bts, FC....:.2-cseeseeeee See GiM Of iny 1001S, XCas.,.:..-.05e-.6 11
ir Or Betties abd Vessels SPeoeeesee ee eos Cee re eeesee 18 +}, Of Corks TOTO OM CEE MH reer errors er FOr eneses negroes ece £0
EEE LSI1 50.5 34-vy00¢-caesyetusescepsiecesivees 29 0. Vhe Means of distinguishing defective Bottles, Ac. ....:....-ceee...c0s 37 Description of the Author's Process ... Spy -ciied Meat ......2 9
Ppertesereeece tI
Cee Ode os eG Hee FOF Hone eLOeL one |
» roth, or Jeliy RES nS) le. Round of Becf, Fillet of Mutton, Fowls, Per VAT tUPCS vie.ss. fase (eensetausnsces” O47
IRS Nev tard [CES Cee er NS a5, coi hs Sa
1 > so Miuik re ee ee eo eo er @reeeorseoe Ee, BC oe RE esos ecicevscssiesereccess 2
i4. Whiev see POR OFF OOR HOOF OH oneness FHF 800 wT reee Poerer roe eae) MN Cl CSM et a epee ved nccsesntemenaemes, 27
ao, (Oaee Than) Se ire. ana name,
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Page 37. ASparagus....ccccccecsees eeseeaet oeaee secant 1d) 18; Windsor. Beats....)20e..i-cscsscceseoeeeeees eam § 19. Peeled Windsor Beans .........c..s+seeees epee 6%: 20ueErenciebscans.s-.:- 0s tticsss sores: ceoy cov eceer sis OU ATUCHORCS tr ats ecs oe caves sot sce sceces-sceneend Oe 22. Cauliflowers ............ ve otntees sccciaesrmerese 66 23. SOrelee tet csea: ¢eseeesats senses smeene Ric ogienene 68 24. Spinage, Succory, atl other Herbs....... .. 69 25. A Soup called Julienne..........0-.0++ roc 7 26. Vegetable Soup ...cseeseceeevece osseseseven Ac 27. Love-Apples ..,....ccsccseseeresceescevsevensces 7 28. Herbs and Medicinal Pikes eecvsesscccee eens 29. The Juices of Herbs............... otros sacks iy 30. Fruits and their Juices ...,...0.sscessecosssece 78 31. White and Red Currants in Bunches ..... 79 32. White and Red Currants stripped ......... s0 23. Cherries, Raspberries, Mulberries ........ 80 34. Juice of Red Currants2.:.:.:ceueee esses... SE 35. Strawberries .....co.++0ssssceeteeeeae oss ara Oe 36. Apricots ......0:cc+.sse+seaer eenemeee Ste ee sae BB 37. Peaches and Nectarines.....0.-..cseceseseceees 85 38. Prunes from Green-Gages and Plumbs ... a6 39. Pearsiofeevery Kind (-2.00.-0)-) eee ans 88 40. Chesnuts, Truffles, and Mushrooms ,..... 89 41. The Juice of the Grape or Must...,......... 91 Of the Mode of making Use of the Substances which have been preserved ...........0ceees eee 93 Sete. Meat, Game, Poultry jm bisheeme ene 93
43. Jellies made of Meat and Poultry ..... eek
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Page
AGNI Kiand Cream vecesseccssceceesccoevtecesss., g8 45. Vegetables ........... mvattecster eres ts se encores 99 § 40. French Beans....... sarees Ser renctsrsets foctesae 100 CY Es CH 51-11 . <r PrErttee eee 101
48. Spinage and Succory ......cccceesessesceseeeees 106 Bem =2cta ble SoUpsteeye:.......0¢sses-casceroccese’ 107 59. Tomates and Herbs ......c..-ssscssessssecseee 108 51. Preserved Fruits, Marmelades,. &c...,..... 109 52. Currant-Jam .........
eccesecrtcsecceveseenes AIG
53. Syrup of Currants ....... Sosndticar a? soaeveenmemeel 14 BAreICES ...... 320 Meenas tise; ee cee co SRR iconic 116 55. Cordials ..... Pe Sas CeCe oe soem 56. Chesnuts, Truffles, Mushroom....... ae 120 57. Grape Juice, or Must ......... serebeeee tet cee 121 Preparation of Grape Syrup.............00.. 122 Syrups and Ratafies ....,255-0+....0ssesesass0s 125
58. General Observations.............c0csseecsee008 130 59. Practical Remarks ........... s.00-. oooCrae eo. 135
Letter from the Secretary of the Socicty for the
Encouragement of National Industry ......... 142
Report of the Society ..,........ Peeiest aia sesecesses 145
Lrwetors Peclifhut ni@ Feb ior. bv Bhi kh Yoruterbell M0,
EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE.
Fig.1. A reel with two iron bars, made use of to double the wire, and cut the doubled wire twice the length required for fixing the corks in the bottles.
Fig.2. A small machine for twisting the wire ones third of its length after having been doubled by fig. 1. |
Fig. 3. An instrument for compressing (and, as it were,
| biting) the corks three quarters of their length, be ginning at the smallest end.
Fig. 4. A stool stuffed with straw, furnished with a wooden stand on which the bottles may be placed to be tied. The same stool will serve to siton during the corking.
Fig. 5. A hollow bleck of wood, called a bottle-boot (Casse-Buuteille), within which the bottle is set when it is to. be corked. This bottle-boot is fur- nished with a strong bat for beating in the corks.
lig. 6. A front and side view -of pointed pincers, used for twisting the wire employed to keep on the corks, and for cutting, off the superfluous ends of the wire. I make use of flat pincers and scissars for this operation,
ADVERTISEMENT.
In an advertisement prefixed to the pamphlet, of which the fol- lowing sheets are a translation, the author publishes his address: © Quai Napoléon, au coin de la «¢ rue de la Colombe, No. 4, dans “la Cité, a Paris;’ and offers for sale there, an assortment of provisions, preserved by the pro- cess, of which an account is here
AO ~ commu-
x
communicated to the public. As the book itself is a recommenda- tion of the author’s own goods, it has been thought proper to add to his account of his process, a translation of the authorities and testimonies by which his own statements are authenticated; not- withstanding the repetitions which are in consequence admitted. The recommendation of the process by the French Minister immediately follows. The more elaborate Re-
port of the Paris Society for the
Encou-
xi Encouragement of National Indus- try, will be found at the end of the work.
It is needless to anticipate the author’s display of the advantages which must flow from a simple and unexpensive process of keeping fresh articles of animal and vege- table food. If this can be effected for only one year, that is, from the season of produce through the seasons of scarcity; if no other articles, for instance, than eggs, cream, and vegetables, can be
A 6 preserved
Xll
preserved in their full flavour and excellence during a long winter, there is not a ntistress of a family in the kingdom, rich enough to Jay by a stock of those articles, and not too rich to despise the economy of a family, who will not find herself benefitted by the perusal of the small work here put within her reach ; and there is no reason to suspect the correctness of this part of the author’s state- _ ments. This, however, is but one of the more obvious benefits of
his
a¢e
Xi
his process ; and if thus much be ascertained, then an interminable prospect of resources is opened, which the State, still more than the individual, will be called upon to employ.
The author, in his enumeration of the advantages to be derived from his process, places at the head, the saving it will occasion in the consumption of sugar. This process, added to recent improve- ment in the art of preparing grape syrup, holds forth, in his opinion,
a pros.
XIV a prospect of relief to the suffering proprietors of French vineyards. This statement will have been lis- tened to with great complacency by the French government, which so ostentatiously avows the deter- mination to compel the whole Continent to subsist on its own produce, and dispense with the more luxurious of transatlantic commodities. Our country, how- ever, from its soil and climate, can take little or no share in this
branch
a etal
XV branch of the application of the author’s process.
On the other hand it offers us
incalculable benefits in the equip-
ment and victualling of our fleets, and in providing for the health and comfort of the floating defence of the country, as well as of that numerous and meritorious class of men, to which the nation owes so much of its prosperity. Whatever promises an improvement in the condition of every order of men who subsist on the Ocean, must
be
xvl
be considered as an object of national concern: The French government, at least on the part of some of its members in the subordinate branches of its admi- nistration, has taken the lead in recommending the author’s process to the attention of public function- aries. From the superior activity, as well as more enlightened dis- cernment of the people of this country, we may expect that our author’s process will excite equally the notice of the government and
country
XVI
country at large; and we trust that government-contractors and commissioners, as well as the pur- sers of men of war, and the stewards of merchantmen, will not bethe last to examine for themselves the pro- ‘Inising statements of our author.
From the public papers we learn that a patent has been taken out for preserving provisions accord- ing to the process described in this book. We do not pretend to deter- mine how far this patent may in- terfere with the adoption by other
persons
XVIU persons of this same process as a manufactory and trade; hut, it is certain, that on the smali scale on which provisions would be preserv- ed for single families, every person will be at liberty to avail himself of the instructions he may meet with in this volume.
It was thought less objection- able to insert unnecessary matter, than to omit what to some readers might be useful or interesting. Every thing, therefcre, has been
translated, and we have even co-
pied
XIX pied the author’s plate of tbe ma-
chirery used in corking bottles,
though from our improved state of
mechanics, the greater part of our readers will stand in no need of its assistance, similar machines being in common use by the wine-
coopers, &c,
THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, COUNT OF THE EMPIRE, TO M. APPERT, &c.
Paris, 30th January 1810. Second Division.
BOARD OF ARTS AND MANUFACTURES.
My Board of Arts and Manufactures* has reported to me, Sir, the cxamina- tion it has made of your process for the preservation of fruits, vegetables, meat, soup, milk, &c. and from that report no doubt can be entertained of the suc- cess of such process. As the preserva- tion of animal and vegetable substances may be of the utmost utility in Sea- voyages, in hospitals and domestic economy, I deem your discovery worthy. an especial mark of the good will of the government. I have in consequence
acceded
® Mon Bureau consullatif des Arts et Blanifactures,
XXxil
acceded to the recommendation made me by my council to grant you a re- compence of 12,000 francs.* In so doing I had in view the assigning you the reward due to the inventors of use- ful processes, and also the indemnify- ing you for the expences you have been obliged to incur, either in the forming your establishment or in the experi- ments necessary to establish the success
your process. You shall be imme- diately informed when you may repair to the public treasury and receive the 12,000 francs.
It appears to me of importance, Sir, that you should spread the knowledge of your preserving process. I desire, therefore, that agreeably to your own proposal, you will digest a detailed and
exact
* About £500 sterling.
XX
exact description of your process. This description, which you will remit to my Board of Arts and Manufactures, shall be printed at your expence, after it shall have been examined. You will then transmit me 200 copies. The transmis- sion of these copies being the only con- dition I ympose on you for the payment of the 12,000 francs, I doubt not you will hasten to fulfil it. I desire, Sir, you will acknowledge the receipt of my letter. Accept assurances, &c. (Signed) MonTA.ivet.
BOARD OF ARTS AND MANUFACTURES.
The undersigned Members of the Board of Arts and Manufactures attach- ed to the Minister of the Interior, be- ing required by his Excellency to exa- mine the description of the process of
Mr.
XX1V
Mr. Appert for the preservation of alimentary substance, certify that the details it contains, as well on the mode of carrying on the process as on the results, are exactly conformable to the various experiments which Mr, Appert has made before them, by order of his Excellency.
(Signed) Boropet, Gay-Lussac, ScrPion-PeErrier, Movarp.
Paris, 19th April 1810,
Copy of a Letter written to General Caffarelli, Maritime Prefect at Brest, by the Council of Health, dated Brumaire, year 12. : The provisions prepared according to
the process of Citizen Appert and sent
to this port by the Minister of Marine, have,
XXV
have, after lying in the roads three months, been found in the following condition.
The broth or soup (bouillon) in bot- tles was good ; the bouillon with a bouillt in a vessel apart was also good, but weak; the bowilli itself was very eatable.
The beans and green peas, prepared both with meat and vegetable soup, had ‘all the freshness and flavour of recently cathered vegetables. |
(Signed) Dusrevit, BILLARD, DureET, PICHON, | THauMER.
True Copy.
J. Minter, Secretary.
—"*
oe - - satin ‘ysilial
THE
ART OF PRESERVING, &c. &e. Se.
yi. ALL the expedients hitherto made
use of for preserving alimentary and medicinal substances, may be reduced to two principal methods; that of des- sication; and that of mingling, in greater or less quantitics, a foreign substance for the purpose of impeding fermentation or putrefaction.
It is by the former of these methods that we are furnished with smoaked and hung meat, dried fish, fruits, and vegetables. By the latter, we ob-
B 2 tain
2
tain fruits and other vegetable sub- stances preserved in sugar, the juices and decoctions of plants reduced to syrups and essences, all kinds of pickles, salted meat and vegetables, But each of these modes has its peculiar inconveniences. Dessication takes away the odour, changes the taste of the juices, and hardens the fibrous or pulpy matter (the porenchyma).
Sugar, from the streneth of its own flavour, conceals and destroys in part other flavours, even that, the enjoyment of which we wish to preserve, such as the pleasant acidity of many fruits. A second inconvenience is this, that a sarge quantity: of sugar is required in order to preserve a small quantity of some other vegetable matter; and hence the use of it is not only very costly, but even in many cases per-
nicious,
3
nicious. Thus the juices of certain plants cannot be reduced toa syrup or essence, but by means of nearly double the quantity of sugar. It results from this, that those syrups or essences con- tain much more sugar than any medi- cinal substance, and that most freqnent- ly the sugar counteracts the operation of the medicine, and is hurtful to the patient.
Salt communicates an unpleasant acerbity to substances, hardens the animal fibre, and renders it dithcult of
digestion. It contracts the animal parenchyma.* On the other hand, as B 3 it
* “ The salt meat with which the crews of vessels are fed, appears to be one of the principal causes of the scurvy* It seems that the same causes which opeiste to prevent the fermentation of meat, renders it also difficult of digestion, Though a small quantity of salt may be an obstacle in the way of putrefaction, the too abundant and frequent use
. ) which
4
it is indispensable to remove, by means of water, the greater part of the salt employed; almost all the principles which are soluble in cold water, are lost when the salt is taken away: there remains nothing but the fibrous matter, or parenchyma ; and even that, as has been said, undergoes a change.
Vincgar can seldom be made use of, but in the preparation of certain articles for seasoning.
I shall not enter into any details con- cerning what has been said and publish-
ed
which is made of it, must cause great obstructions in the sm:iler vessels of the body, and these obstructions cannot fait to cverload the stomach of men who have to digest dry vegetables and biscuits, which sailors advanced in yeais are not always able to chew completely. Bad digestion aid obstruction in the smaller vessels may occas:onally give tise to ulcers in the mouth, and spots, which denote the scuss Vy Santé des Marins, ty Duhamel,
5
ed on the art of preserving alimentary substances. I shall only observe, that as far as my knowledge extends, no author, either ancient or modern, has ever pointed out, or even led to the suspicion, of the principle which is the basis of the methad I propose.
It is known, how much, within a certain period, the public attention, both at Paris and in the departments, has been directed towards the means of diminishing the consumption of su- gar, by supplvingats place by the use of various extracts, or cssenecs, of in- digenous substances. ‘The government, whose philanthropic .icws are turned towards all uscful objects, does not cease to invite all those who pursue the arts and sciences, to investigate the means of drawing the utmost advantage from the productions of our soil, in
BA order
6
order to develope, to the utmost, our agriculture and manufactures, and so diminish the consumption of foreign commodities.
In order to attain the same end, the Society for the Promotion of National Industry* stimulates, by the offer of flattering rewards, all those whose talents and labours are directed towards disco- veries, from which the nation and hu- manity may draw substantial benefits. Animated by this laudable zeal, the Agricultural Society, by its resolution of the 2lst of June 1809, and its official notification of it, the 15th of the July following, made an appeal to the whole nation, in order to collect all the information and documents which might contribute to the composition of
a work
* La Socién' d Encouragement pour U Industrie nationale,
fa ( a work on the art of preserving, by the
best possible means, every kind of ali- mentary substance.
It was after invitations of so great weight, that I resolved to make known a method of effecting this object, of great facility in the execution, and at the same time very cheap, and which, by the extension it admits of, may afford numerous advantages to socicty.
This method is not a vain theory. It is the fruit of reflection, investigation, long attention, and numerous experi- ments, the results of which, for more than ten years, havé been so surprising, that notwithstanding the proof acquired by repeated practice, that provisions may be preserved two, three, and S1X. years, there are many persons who still refuse to credit the fact.
B5 Brought
8
Brought up to the business of pre- serving alimentary substance by the received methods; having spent my days in the pantries, the breweries, store-houses, and cellars of Champagne, as well as jn the shops, manufactories, and warehouses of confectioners, dis- tillers, and grocers; accustomed to superintend establishments of this kind for forty-five years, I have been able to avail. myself, in my process, of a num- ber of advantages, which the greater number of those persons have not pos- sessed, who have devoted themselves to the art of preserving provisions.
I owe to my extensive practice, and more especially to my long perseverance, the conviction :
ist. That fire has the peculiar pro- perty, not only of changing the com- bination
9
bination of the constituent parts of. vegetable and animal productions, but also of retarding, for many years at. least, if not of destroying, the natural _ tendency of those same productions to. decomposition.
2d. That the application of fire ina - manner variously adapted to various sub- stances, after having with the utmostcare and as completely as possible, deprived them of all contact with the air, effects a perfect preservation of those same pro-.
ductions, with all their natural qualities,
Befcre JI state the details of my | | process, I ought to observe that it con- sists principally,
ist. In inclosing in bottles the sub- stances to be preserved, ree SU i oe od.
10
2d. In corking the bottles with the utinost care; for it is chiefly on the corking that the success of the process d2;.cnds,
3d. In submitting these inclosed sub- stances to the action of boiling water in a water-bath (BALNEUM MARIAE), for a greater or less length of time, according to their nature, and in the manner pointed out with respect to each several kind of substance.
Ath. In withdrawing the bottles from the water-bath at the period described.
-
il § Il.
Description of my Rooms set apart for carrying on the Process on a large Scale,*
My laboratory consists of four apart~- ments. The first of these is furnished with all kinds of kitchen utensils Stoves, and other apparatus, necessary for dressing the animal substances to be preserved, as well as with a kettle for broth, gravy, &c. containing 180 French pints, raised on brick work. This kettle is provided with a pot to be put within it, pierced with holes like a skimmer, with divisions for holding
various
* It is obvious, that for the use of private families, awd for carrying on the process on a small scale, nothing fuy- ther will be requisite, than such vesselg and other cone vemiences as are found in every house in the country, where provisions are-curcd for the consumption of the family during winter,
a
12
various kinds of meat and poultry. This pot can be put into and taken out of the kettle with ease. The kettle is provided with a wide cock, to which is fitted, within, alittle rose, like that of a watcring-pot, covered with a piece of boulting-cloth. In this way I can procure broth or gravy quite clear, and ready to be put into bottles.
The sccond apartment is appropri- ated to the preparing of milk, cream, and whey.
The third is used for corking and tying the bottles and vessels, and put- ting them into bags.
The fourth is furnished with three large copper boilers, placed upon stones raised on brick work. These boilers are all furnished with a <tout lid, fitted,
to
13
to rest upon the vessels within. Each boiler is furnished with a wide cock below, in order to let out the water at a proper time. These large boilers are destined to receive, generally, all ‘the objects intended to be preserved, in or-. der to apply the action of heat to them in a suitable manner; and thus they constitute so many water-baths.*
The
* The reason why it is necessary that large boilers should be furnished with wide cocks is, that it would take up too much time to let so large a body of water, always placed
over a heated stove, remain till it became cool ; 3; and that, on the other hand, it vould do great injury to those subs stances to let them remain too long exposed to the heat. Without inconvenience, therefore, in private families, any cauldron or earthen vessel may be taken for a water-bath, provided the watcr rises to the rim of the bottle. In case there should be no vessel sufficiently high, the bottles may be laid dowa in the water-bath, care being taken to pack them well together, lest they should be broken. Many operations have succeedcd-well with me this way. The corks are somewhat more liable to burst cutwards ; but if the botiles are well corked, therc is nothing to be feared. For instance, it would not be advisable to lay on their | sides?
14
The utensils which furnish the third apartment for the preparatory process consist of
1. Rows of bottle-racks round the room.
2. A reel for the iron wire, to be used for binding the necks of the bottles and other vessels. (Fig. 1.) —
3. Shears and pincers for tying on the corks. (Fig. 6.) 4. Machine
sides, bottles, or other vessels stopped up with stoppers con- sisting of different pieces of any substance, because the action of the fire upon this king of stopper is stronger s and however well the vessel might be corked, it would not be advisable to incur the risque,
Small water-baths are the more convenient, because they may be placed any where, and removed at will. They scon become cold. The bottles ase taken out when the water ié sufficiertly cool to allow of the finger being put in, and thus the operation is terminated,
15
4. Machine for twisting-the iron-wire after it has been divided and cut toa proper length. (Fig. 2.)
5. Two instruments forming a lever, and used for compressing, and as it. were biting the corks. (Fig. 3.)
6. A bottle-boot or block, standing on three legs, and provided with a strong bat for corking. (Fig. 5.)
7, A stool standing on five legs, for tying on the corks. (Fig. 4.)
g. A sufficient quantity of linen bags, for covering the bottles and other vessels.
9. Two stools covered with leather and stuffed with hay, in order to shake the bottles upon them, and in that way
force
16
force a greater number of peas and other small substances into the bottles.
10. A press for the juice of plants, fruits, and herbs; with pans, vessels, sieves, and every thing else that belongs to it. 3
Besides my laboratory, consisting of these articles, I. have fitted ee three periments. i
The first, for preparing vegetables : it is furnished with dressers all round.
The second, for storing up and BS paring all kinds of fruit.
The third is a ceilar, furnished with bottle racks, for rinsing and setting by the bottles and other vessels, as in a store-house.
I have
17
I have the precaution to keep the bottles and other vessels I may want, ready rinsed at hand. I am also sup- plied with an assortment of corks, com- pressed and bit in the instrument al- ready cescribed. When every prepa- ration is thus made, the process is half done.
The principle by which all alimentary substances are preserved and kept fresh, is invariable in its effects. The result in particular experiments, depends upon the fitness of each individual applica- tion of the principle to the substance which is to be preserved, according to its peculiar qualities ; but in every: case, the exclusion of air is a precaution of the utmost. im portance to the success of the operation : and in order to deprive alimentary substances of contact with the air, a perfect knowledge of bottles
anc
18
and the vessels to be used, of corks and corking, is requisite.
§ HI. Of Bottles and Vessels.
I chose glass, as being the matter most impenetrable by air, and have not ventured to make any experiment with a vessel made of any other sub- stance. The ordinary bottles have generally necks too small and ill made ; they are also too weak to resist the blows from the bat and the action of the fire: I, therefore, caused bottles tc be made for my especial use, with wider necks, and those necks made with a projecting rim, or ring, on the interior surface, placed below, and resembling, in form, the rim which is at the top
of
19
of the exterior surface of the neeks of bottles. My object was, that when the cork had been forced into the neck of the bottle, three-fourths of its length, in the manner already described, it should be compressed in the middle. In this manner the bottle is perfectly corked on the outside as well as within. It thus opposes an obstacle to the swelling, or expansion, which arises from the operation of heat upon the substance enclosed within the bottle. This mode of forming the neck of the bottle is so much the more indispens- able, as I have repeatedly known the swelling to be so strong, as to push
out corks of three or four lines in
length, though confined by two iron
wires crossed. The bottles and vessels
should be made of a tough substance [de matiére liante], the former having the weight of twenty-five or twenty-
SIX
20
six ounces for each litre* that the bot- tle contains. The glass ought to be of equal thickness in every part, or it is liable to break in the water-bath, The form of the Champage bottle is most convenient ;_ it is the handsomest as well as the strongest, and is of the best shape for packing up. |
§ IV. Of Corks.
Economy in corks is generally very unwise, as in order to save a very trifle in the price of cork, a risk is incurred of losing the valuable commodity it is intended to- preserve. As corking is
made
* The French’ litre, consists of nearly two wine pints and a half, English measure,
ies ial
=
Ol
made usc of in order to preserve and meliorate certain articles, by depriv- ing them of all contact with the air, too much attention cannot be given to the good quality of the. cork, which should be of eighteen or twenty lines. in length and of the finest quality. Experience has so tully satisfied me on this point, that I never make use of any but superfine corks: these are, in the end, the cheapest. I further take the precaution of compressing, and, as it were, biting the cork, three-fourths of its length, by means of the instru- ment already described (fig. 3), be- ginning at the small end. ‘The cork is
rendered more supple; the pores of
the cork are Lro:ght closer; it is some- what lengthened, and its thickness is so much diminished at the extremity which is put into the mouth of the bottle, that a large cork may be made
to
22
to enter a very moderate opening. The action of the heat within the vessel is such, that the cork swells within, and the corking is thus ren- dered perfect.
§ V. Of Corking.
After what has been just said, the absolute necessity will be apparent of having good bottles, with a projecting rim of equal thickness all round within the neck. Excellent superfine corks are also indispensable, which have been compressed in the instrument three quarters of their length.
Before I cork, I take care that the bottles containing liquor arc filled only up
23
up to within three inches of the outer rim, lest they should burst from the bubbling and swelling occasioned by the application of heat to the water. When the bottles contain vegetables, fruit, &c. they may: be filled up to within two inches of the rim.
I place the full bottle upon the bot- tle-boot already mentioned, before which I seat myself. This apparatus is to be supplied with a strong wooden bat, a small pot full of water, and a sharp knife, greased with a little suet or soap, for cutting off the tops of the corks, which ought never to be raised much above the head of the bottles. These arrangements being made, I place the bottle-boot between my legs, and taking a cork of fit size, I dip one half of it into the little pot of water, in order to facilitate its entrance;
aie : Cc and ax |
Pes
>f ees ee ed ee ‘ MS
24
and having wiped the end, I then put it to the mouth of the bottle, at the same time turning it round. I hold it in this position with my left hand, which I keep steady, that the bottle may stand upright. I take the bat in my right hand, in order to drive in the cork by force of blows.
When I find, at the first or second blow of the bat, that the cork has somewhat entered, I take my hand from the cork in order to hold with it the neck of the bottle, which I fix firmly and upright upon the bottle-boot; and by dint of repeated blows, I continue to drive in my cork three-fourths of its length. ‘The quarter of the cork which remains above the bottle, after having refused to yicld any further to the re- doubled blows of the bat, assures me, in the first place, that the bottle is
completely
— =
25
completely corked, and this same re- gidue serves also to hold the double crossed iron wire which is necess1:y to bind fast the cork, that it may be ab'c to resist the action of heat on the water-bath. I must repeat again, that too much attention cannot be given to the corking: no circumstance how- ever minute ought to be neglected, in order to effect. the rigorous exclusion of the air from the substance to be preserved ; air being a most destruciive agent, and the one which is m»s:t se- dulously to be counteracted in. the course of the process.*
CD The
® Many persons believe they have corked well, wren - they have forced the cork even with the mouth Of tus © Lottle; but this is a great misiake. On the contriry, whenever the whole of the cork, instead of withstanding the blows of the bat, is forced into the bottie, it is advises able to draw it outand substicute anucher in its piace, Thas the believing that @ botde corked very low is well
26
The bottles being well stopped up, I then fasten the cork down with a cou- ple of iron wires crossed: this is an
easy
corked, because no liquor escapes when the bottle is turned with its neck downwards, is an error, which, jeined to the use of bad corks, causes a number of losses He who corks with care and judgment is satisfied that the opera- tion has been performed well by the resistance of the cork to the blows of the bat, and never thinks of turning the neck of the bottle downwards. It.is besides sufficient to reflect on the punctures met with in cork, and on all the hidden defects which may subsist in the interior even of the finest cork, by means of which, the air may be intro- duced; in order to be convinced of the propriety of making use of none but the very best corks, and that, after having well compressed them in the machine for that Purpose ; and also of corking them so closely that they become very much compressed in the middle.
It is in this way only, that losses can be prevented from frequently taking place, which have often no other cause than bad corking; for, if a bottle does nct instantly run when carelessly corked, it proceeds from this circumstance, that the air has not had time to penetrate through the apertures which may be in the interior of the cork: and, in fact, how different is the quality of wine, drawn from the same cask! and how many bottles do we meet with, which have lost more or less of their contents!
27
easy operation, and any one can do it, who has once seen it done.
Ithen put each bottle in a bag of canvass or coarse linen cloth, made for the purpose, sufficiently large to wrap up the whole of the bottle up to the very cork. These bags are made in the shape of a muff, open alike at both ends: one of these ends is drawn with a string running in a gutter, leaving an opening of about the width of a crown piece; the other end is provided with a couple of small strings, in order to tye the bag round the neck of the bottle.
By means of these bags, I can dis- pense with the use of hay or straw in packing up the bottles in the water- bath ; and, whenever any one of them breaks, the fragments are preserved in _the bag. Jam spared a great deal of c 3 trouble
28
trouble and a number of inconyenien- ces which I had formerly to sustain, in picking up the pieces of the bottle out of the straw or hay I then made use of.
After having spoken of bottles, their form and quality ; of stoppers, and the length of the fine cork of which they ought to be composed ; of the corking and tying; of bags, their furm and utility ; I proeced to give an idea of vessels with large necks, that is, glass jars, which I make use of for preserving solid and bulky substances, such as poultry, game, meat, fish, &e.
These jars have necks of two, threc, or four inches diameter, and are of a larger or smaller size; like bottles, they are furnished with a projecting rim, not‘only in order to strengthen the neck, but also for receiving the
iron
29
iron wire destined to bind the corks. — I have not yet been able to procure from the glass-houses a ‘similar projecting rim in the interior of the neck of these jars, as I have in that of the bottles. The completely corking up these ves- sels, is, from this circumstance, ren- dered more difficult, and demands _es- pecial care.
I met with another obstacle in the cork itself, from its thinness (more es- pecially when the cork was very fine), and also from its ascending pores being against the grain. I was therefore obliged to form stoppers of three or four pieces of cork, from twenty to twenty-four lines in length, placed to- gether the way of the grain, the pores of the cork being placed horizontally, by means of isinglass prepared in the following manner.
c 4 I melted
30
T melted over the fire four drams of well beaten isinglass, in eight ounces of water: when melted, I caused it to run through fine linen; and then put it again over the fire im order to reduce it to one third of its volume. After which I added an ounce cf good full- proof brandy. I then left the whole on the fire till it became reduced io about three cunces. I then put the glue thus prepared in a little pot over live cuals, and tock care to warm my pieces of cork. I then slightly smeared over the pieces of cork with a brush, in order to glue them together. When the picccs composing the stopper were well fixed and glued together, I then fi.cd a tight thread to the two extremi- tics of the stopper, in order to keep ic pieces together, and let them dry, qitier in the sun or in a gentle heat for alout a fortnight. At the end of this
? time
dia» uae
31
time I took a cork-maker’s knife and cut my stoppers of a proper shape ; and having always fitted them to the mouth of the jar, they have never
proved defective.
Having corked my jars, and driven in the stopper by means of the ‘bat, the bottles being always placed upright in the bottle boot, I made use of a compound lutiag- This luting (com- municated to me by Mr, Bardel) is
_ made of quick lime, which is slaked in
the air by being sprinkled with water, till 1t becomes reduced to a powder. The powder to be kept in this state in corked bottles ready for use. This lime mixed with a cheese made of skimmed milk (fromage a la pie), and formed to the thickness of paste, produces a luting which hardens rapidly,
4) and
33
and which withstands the heat of boil-
ing water.
I besmear the whole of the outside of the stopper with this luting, and I cover the edge of the jar with hemp and strips of linen placed above and close to the stopper, and hanging down to the rim.
Farther, that the iron wire may have force enough to keep down the stopper, I put a picce of cork seven or eight lines high, and sixteen or eighteen lines in diameter, in the middle of the large stopper which is itself too big to allow the wire to have any effect upon it. By means of this second cork, placed in the middle of the large stopper, I am able to make the wire take a proper hold of the cork and give due strength and solidity to the stopper.
When
33
When every thing has thus been foreseen and prepared, and, above all things, well corked, tied, and wrapped up in bags, there remains nothing to be done, but to apply the preserving
principle, that is, heat, to the substances
duly arranged, and thisis the most easy part of the operation.
I place all the veasels, bottles or jars, | upright in a boiler, which I then fill with cold water up to the necks of the vessels; I then cover the boiler with its lid, which is made to rest upon the vegsels. 1 cover the upper part of the lid with a piece of wet linen, in order that the sides of the lid may exactly fit, and all evaporation from the water- bath be impeded as much as possible.
When the boiler has been thus filled and adjusted, I light the fire beneath. c 6 When
34
When the water-bath begins to boil, I take care to maintain the same degree of heat for the greater or less quantity cf time required by the substances ex- posed to its influence. When this time has elapsed, I then instantly put out the fire by means of a coal extinguisher
(étouffoir).
After the fire has been put out a quarter of an hour, I let out the water of the bath by means of the cock ; after the water has been withdrawn half an hour, I uncover the boiler, and I do not take out the bottles till one or two hours after the uncovering; and this terminates the operation.
The next day, or a fortnight after- wards, for that is immaterial, I place my bottles on shelves, as I do wine, in a cool and shady place. If I purpose
sending
35
sending them a great distance, I think it worth while to pitch them before I place them on the shelves; otherwise this last operation is not absolutely necessary. I have now by. me, bottles which have been three years lying un- der a stair-case, the substances con- tained in which retain as much flavour as if they were just prepared, and yet they were never pitched.
We have just seen, from all that has been said, that alimentary sub- stances, in order to be preserved, should be, without exception, subjected to the application of heat in a water-bath ; after being rigorously excluded from all contact with the air, in the manner, and with the precautions already indi- cated.
The preserving principle is, as I have
36
have already observed, invariable in its effects, Thus every loss I have sus- tained from any of the articles being spoiled, had no other cause. than an erroneous application of the principle, or some negligence or omission in the preparatory process already pointed out. It sometimes happens to me even now, that my op2rations do,not per- fectly succeed ; but no man makes ex- periments in any of the arts, or in any branch of natural philosophy, without being liable to disappointment. Nor can any one, therefore, who is employed in such a process as mine, flatter him- self that he may not sometimes find his commodities spoiled from some de- fect in a vessel, or in the interior of a cork. But in fact, when duc attention is given, these losses seldom take place.
§ VI.
87 § VI.
The means of distinguishing among the Bottles or Jars, as they are taken from the Boiler, ‘such of them as, Srom some neglect in the preparatory process, some accident, or the action of the fire, are in danger of occa- stoning a loss, or spoiling the sub- stances enclosed in them.
When the operation is completed, of whatever kind it may be, I take the greatest care in my power to examine all the bottles and jars one by one, as I take them from the boiler.
I have remarked in some, defects in the glass, as stars and cracks occasioned by the action of the heat in the water- bath ; or by the tying, when the mouth of tbe vessel has bcen too weak.
I have
38
I have observed in others, a moisture round the stopper, or little spots near the mouth, from which I inferred that part of the substance enclosed had oozed out during the dilation or expansion produced by the heat of the water- bath : these are the two principal obser- vations that usually occur to me: and whenever I observe either of these appearances on any bottle, I always set it aside, and make use of the sub- stance immediately, that nothing may be lost.
The first of the flaws pointed out, arises from the quality, and originally bad structure of the bottle; but the second may arise from any one of four causes :—I1. From a bad cork ; 2. from bad corking ; 3. from the bottle having been filled too near the brim; and 4. from bad tying. A single one of these
faults
faults is sufficient to spoil a bottle
more easily, therefore, a complication of them.
In the applying of heat to the watere bath, I have had various obstacles to encounter, more particularly when peas were to be preserved; for peas are of all substances the most difficult to pre- _ serve completely. This vegetable, when gathered while it is too young or too ten- der, dissolves in water, and in conse- quence the bottle is found half empty, and cven this half is not fit to be kept ; hence, whenever this circumstance oc- curs, I set aside the bottle and make use of the article immediately. If the peas have been gathered two or three days, the heat occasions them to lose all thei: flavour; they become hard ; they ferment before the operation; the bottles break 1 in the water- bath with an
explosion ; ;
40
explosion; those which resist the first heat break afterwards, or are ‘faulty : and this is easily recognised. by the liquor in the bottle, which becomes turbid ; while peas which are well pre- served, leave the liquid pellucid.
It'is not necessary to recommend dis- patch and the utmost cleanliness in the preparation of alimentary substances. This is absolutely indispensable ; more especially in what respects the substances — themselves, which are to be preserved.
I take care to have all my preparatory arrangements made before I begin the process ; that there may be no waiting, and that the best use may be made
of the time employed in carrying it on
DESCRIPTION ©
43
DESC RIPTION OF MY PROCESS, AS APPLIED TQ THE VARIOUS ARTICLES INTENDED TO BE PRESERVED.
§ VIL Boiled Meat. ( Pot-au-Feu de Meénage. »)
ie ‘put a quantity of meat into the pot to be boiled in the ordinary way.. When it was three-fourths boiled, I took out one half of it, the bones of which I had already taken off, as.1 pur- posed to preserve it, When the meat was completely boiled, I strained the. broth, and after it had become cool, I put it in bottles which I corked well, tied and wrapped up in their several bags. The beef which I had taken out when three-fourths done, I put into jars which I filled up with a part of the same broth. Having corked,: luted» and
42
and tied up these, and wrapped them in bags, I placed them, and the bottles containing the broth, upright in a caul- dron or boiler. I filled this boiler with cold water up to the rim of the bottles and jars. I put the lid upon the boiler, causing it to rest on the vessels within, and took care to surround it with a wet linen cloth, in order to impede as much as possible, any evaporatien from the water-bath. I heated the boiler, and when the water-bath had been made to — boil, I kept up the same degree of heat for an hour, and precisely at t the hour, let the fire pass into an ex- tinguisher. Half an hour afterwards, I let off the water from the bath, by means of the cock at the bottom of the boiler. At the end of another half hour Itook cff the lid. An hour or two afterwards, 1 took out the bottles and jars. (The time of doing this is, how
ever —
ever, immaterial, andthe operator will consult his own convenience.) The. next day I besmeared the corks with rosin, in order to: forward the bottles
eae Jars to different sea-por‘s.-
be
;
At the end of a year, anda year and half, the broth and boiled meat were found as good as if made the day they were eaten.
EE IE SERED
§ VAT. Gravy.
In the year 12, having reason to hope that I should be employed to provide some nourishing provisions for the sick on board his majesty s vessels, in con- sequence of some experiments which
had already been made in the sea-ports, by
44,
by order of his Excellency the Minister of the Marine and Colonies, on ali-_ mentary productions preserved ac- cording to my method; I made the necessary arrangement for fulfilling the orders I had reason to expect. In con- sequence, that I might not want too many bottles and jars, and that I might be able to condense the substance of eight messes in a bottle of the size of one litre, I made the following ex- periment. As, in general, evaporation cannot take place, but at the expence of » the object to be condensed, * I made some gravy, in the proportion of two pounds of good meat and poultry to one litre. My gravy being made, and strained
@ Jellics, essences of meat, the nubstance of ice and portable soups, which are prepared from the soft and white parts of animals, preserved at a great expence by means of evaporation, and drying in stoves with the aid of harts-
horn and isinglass, furnish merely factitious aliments, without flavour or any other than a burnt or mouldy taste
45
strained and suffered to become cool, I put it in bottles. After having well corked, and tied the bottles and wrap- ped them in bags, I placed them in the boiler. I had taken out, when one quarter dressed, the best pieces of the beef and poultry. When these were _ grown cold, I put them in jars, and filled the jars with the same pravy. Having well corked, luted, tied and wrapped up these jars, 1 set them upright in the same boiler with the bottles of gravy. Having filled the boiler with cold water up to the rim of the bottles and jars, and having covered the lid of the boiler with a wet linen cloth, I heated the water-bath. When it was made to boil I kept up the same degree of heat for two hours, and completed this ope- ration as I did the preceding.
The beef and fowls were found well dressed
46
dressed, and were kept, as well as the gravy, for more than two years. |
§ IX. Broth, or Jelly. im
I composed this jelly, according to the prescription of a physician, of calves feet and lights, red cabbage, car- rots, turnips, onions, and leeks, taking a sufficient quantity of each. A quarter of an hour before I took this jelly from the fire, I added some sugar-candy with some Senegal-gum. I strained it as soon as it was made. After it was cold it was put in bottles, which were corked, tied, wrapped up in bags, and — put in the water-bath, which was kept boiling one quarter of an hour, and this jelly was preserved and remained as
good
47
od as it was ; the day on which it was | made.
$m
Round of Beef; Fillet of Mutton, - _ Fowls and young Partridges.
I prepared all these articles as if for common use, but only three.fourths dressed, the young partridges being roasted. When they were grown cold, I put these articles separately into jare of a sufficient size. Having well cork- ed, luted, tied and wrapped them up, J put them all into the water-bath which was kept on the boil for half an hour. They were forwarded to Brest; and from thence were sent to Sea for four months and ten days, together with some vegetables, gravy, and pre-
D served
48
served milk, all well packed uy in a chest.
When opened, eighteen different kinds of preserved food were tasted, every one of which had retained its freshness ; and not a single substance had undergone the least change at Sea.
To the experiments made.with these | four kinds of provisions, I can add two others made by myself; the one, a - fricasee of fowls; and the other, a mate- lot of eels, carp, and pike, with an— addition of sweet-bread, mushrooms, © onions, butter, and anchovies, all dressed in white wine. The fricasee and the matelot were perfectly preserved.
These results prove sufficiently that the same principle, applied with the same preparatory process, and with the same care and precautions, in general
preserves
49
preserves all animal: productions. But it 1s to be observed that in the previous : cooking of each articles, it is to be on- ly three-fourths dressed at the utmost, i in order that the remainder of the re- -quisite cooking. may be communicated by means of the water-bath.
There are a number of articles whichi can bear an additional hour of boiling in-the water-bath. without any danger, as broth, gravy,- jellies and the essences of meat, poultry and ham, the juice of the: grape and of: plants, &c. But there are also others which will sustain — a great injury from a quarter of an hour’s or even a minute’s too much. boiling. . Thus the result will always: depend upon the dexterity, intelligence and judgment of the operator.*
| D2 SX...
P s.eT he celebrated Cuartan says, in his Elmers de | : Chimie,
50 § XI. New-laid Eggs.
The more fresh the egg is, the longer it withstands the heat of the water-bath. I consequently
Chimie, discours préliminaire, p. cxxxi. “ We hear in manufactories of nothing but the caprice of experiment, but this vague phrase has its origin only in the ignorance in which the workmen are of the true principles of their att; for nature does not act according to any principle of discernment, but obeys constant laws. The dead matter which we employ in our manutactories, exhibits necessary ‘ effects in which the will can have no share, and conse- quently can have no caprice. Make yourself acquainted, we should say to tht manual operator, with the substance on which you are to operate, study better the principles of. your art, and you will be able to foresee, predict and cal- culate every thing. It is your ignorance alone which renders your operations a constant groping in the dark,
and a discouraging alternation of success and disappoint- ment.”
/In fact, the operator who proceeds with a perfect know- ~ ledge of the principles of his art, and of the results of its application, will never ascribe the failure of his process to caprice, but will impute it to the neglect of some indis-
| pensable
sia i cee iailli\
51
I consequently took eggs the day they had been laid, placed them in a jar,
with raspings of bread, to fill up the vacuities, and secure them against
_ breaking when removed to a distance.
Having well corked, tied and luted the jars, &c. I placed them in a boiler of
a proper size * to give them seventy-
five degrees of heat.{- Having taken D3 the
pensable precaution in the application of his principle; and his disappointment will serve as a guide for him to calculate better and improve his preparatory process. Convinced that the effects that flow from his principle are invariable, he knows that eve,y kind of loss and damage can proceed only from am: <sror in the application of his principle. |
_ © This operation performed on a great scale, that is in a larger boiler, would require too much exactness, as it would be more difficult to command just the due degree of heat in such a boiler than in a small water-bath which may be set on and taken off at pleasure.
| + That is, of Reamur, or 200 of Fahrenheit, in like manner, the 80 of Reamur, or boiling point mentioned below, is 212 of Fahrenheit. .T.
52
the water-bath from the fire, I took out the eggs as soon. as the water was so cool that I could put my finger in it. I then took out the eggs and kept them six months. At theend of that period © I took the eggs out of the jar, put them into cold water which I set on the fire, and heated it to seventy-five degrees: I found them fit to dip a toast of bread into, and as fresh as when I prepared them. As tohard eggs, which are to be cut into slices and fricaseed, I heat the water-bath eighty degrees, and as soon as it begins to boil, I remove the water-bath from the fire.
(oxi inee Milk.
I took twelve litres of milk fresh from the cow; I condensed it in the water- bath —
53
bath and reduced it to two-thirds of its volume, frequently skimming it. Then I strained it through a boulting cloth. When cold { took from it the skim which had risen while it was cooling, and bottled it, with the usual process, and afterwards put it in the water-bath
which I let boil for two hours; and at_
the end of several months, I perceived that the cream had separated itself and was swimming in the bottle in the | form of flakes. To obviate this incon- venience, I made a second experiment — on a like quantity of milk which I con- densed in the water-bath, reducing it” to one half; instead of one third, as I had done the former. I then added to the milk, so reduced, the yolks of eight. new laid eggs well beaten. Having left the whole thus well mingled half an hour on the fire, I completed’ the - D4  _—_— experiment
(54
— as Before. This expedient , pete succeeded. :
| | ‘The ap of egg de so coniplagiad | Ginbined all the. particles, that at the end of a. year, ‘and-even of eighteen months, the milk remained as fresh as
when I put it in the bottles. The first .
- also was preserved more than two years. The cream which was in flakes disap-
' peared when put on the fire. Both —
sustained the boiling alike. From both, butter and whey were afterwards obtained. In the different-experiments _ and chymical analyses to which they were exposed, it was found that the last, being much the better, was equal _ to the best cream sold at Paris to drink with coffee. Sine
a xi
of cream.
85 4, Xa. Cream.
I took five litres of cream taken with care from milk of the preceding even-
“ing. I condensed it in the water-bath to four litres, without skimming it. I
took off the skim w hich was formed above, in order: to strain it through
_a boulting cloth afterwards, and let it
cool. After having taken off the skim which had risen while cooling, I put it in half bottles, observing ie usual process, and let the water-bath boil for one hour.
At the end of two years this cream was found as fresh as if prepared the same day. I made some good fresh butter with it; making from four to five ounces of butter from half a litre
D5 § XIV.
~ § XIV. Whey:
I prepared some whey by the ordinary — process. When clarified, and grown cold, I put it in bottles, &c. and let it. remain in’ the water-bath -which was boiling one hour. However well the whey may be clarified,- when put into the water-bath, the application of the heat always detaches some particles of — cheese which are deposited. I preserved some in this way two and three years, and before I made use of it, I strained. it that it imight be very clear. :On an emerger: scy you may content yourself with carefully decantering the oe for | this purpose. |
4
[nn i
EGR. . Of Vegetables.
Ne ; _ As the difference of climates renders. : the productions of different countries more or less early, and varies their qualitics, kinds and denominations,* atfention will be given by the operator to the circumstances of the spot in
which he resides.
At Paris and its environs, June and
E ee ° July are the best months for preserving green peas (petits pois verts), small windsor beans (petites feves de marais), sea Digi and
® For this reason the translator adds the original names
of the vegetables spoken of, It imxy happen that some ot the kinds of: fruits and roots ment:oned by the author, do not exactly correspond with those vei:ich are considered as the same in ths. country. “Whatever peculiarities there may be in the articles themsclves, these will hardly affect the treatrnent they have to undergo in the process of pre-.
serving them, = Ty
58
and asparagus (asperge). Ata later pe- riod, these vegetables suffer greatly from. heat and dryness. In August and Sep- tember I preserve artichokes (arti- chauts), French beans (haricots verts eé © blancs), and cauliflowers (choux-fleurs).
In general, all vegetables intended ‘to be preserved should be used as re- cently gathered as possible, and pre- pared with the utmost rapidity, so that there should be as it were, but one step from the garden-bed to the water-bath.
§ XVI.
Green Peas. (Pelits pots veris.)
The clamaré and the crochu ate the two kinds of peas which I prefer, es- pecially —
99
pecially the latter, which is the most juicy and sweet of all, as well as the earliest, except the michaux (hastings), ‘which is the first pea, but this kind is not fit to be preserved. I gather the peas when they are not too young and tender, for they are apt to dissolve in water during the operation. I take them when they are of a middling size, They are then in a more perfect state, and have an infinitely finer taste and flavour. I shell them as soon as they are gathered. I separate the large ones, and they are then put in bottles, the bottles being for that purpose placed on the stool before mentioned, in order that as many peas as possible may, by shaking the bottle, oe made to go into them ; I then cork the bottles, &c. and put them in the water-bath, which is made to boil for an hour and half, if the season be cool and moist ; and two
hours
60
hours in a dry and hot season ; and I terminate the operation as before.
I aiso put in Hettles the larger peas which I had separated from those w ‘hich were more delicate. These, also, I put into the water-bath, which I let boil according to the season, two hours, or two hours and an half,
§ XVII. Asparagus. (Asperge.)
I clean the asparagus is if for ordi- nary use, either with the stalk, or the buds only. Before I put them in bot- tles or jars, I plun.;c them into boil- | ing water, and afterwards into cold water, in order to take away the pe-
culiar sharpness of. this vegetable.
The
61
The stalks are placed in the jars with great care, the heads being downwards: the buds are put in bottles. After both are well drained, I cork the bottles, &e. and I put them in the water-bath, where they remain only till the water thoroughly boils.
§ XVII.
Windsor Beans.
(Petitcs feces de marais.)
Neither the feverole (the small dried bean) nor the judienne, which resem- bles it, are fit to be preserved. I make use of the genuine Windsor, or broad bean, which is of the thickness and breadth of the thumb, when ripe. I gather it very small, about the size of the end of the little finger, in ordcr to
| preserve
62
preserve it with its skin. As the skin becomes brown when in contact with the air, I take the precaution of put- ting the beans in bottles as soon as shelled. When the bottles are full, the beans having been shaken down gently on the stool, and in that way the vacancies in the bottle having been filled up, I add to each bottle a little bunch of savory; I cork them quickly in order to give them one hour’s boiling in the water-bath. When this vege- table has been quickly gathered, pre- pared and preserved, it has a white, ereenish colour; on the contrary, when the operation has been tardy, it becomes brown and hard,
§ XIX,
63 § XIX. Peeled Windsor Beans.
( Fevcs de marais dérobées.)
__-In order to preserve Windsor beans stripped of their skins, I gather them larger, about half an inch long at the 3 utmost. I take off the skin, bottle them with a small bunch of savory, &e. and I put them in the water- bath, which is made to boil an hour
and half,
CTD
§ XX.
French Beans.
(Haricots verts et blancs.)
The bean known by the name of bayolet, which resembles the Swiss
bean, is the kind fittest to be preserved 3s green,
64
green, withthe pod. It combines uni- formity with the best taste. I cause the beans to be gathered as for ordinary use. I string them, and put them in botdes, taking care to shake them on the stool, to fill the vacancies in the bottles. I then cork the bottles and put them in the water-bath, which is to boi! an hour and half. When the beans are rather large, I cut them lengthways into two or three pleces : and then they do not require being in the water- bath longer than one hour.
Of the kinds of haricot, of which the seeds or beans themselves are to be preserved, the Soissons haricot is justly entitled to the preference. For want of that, I take the best of any other species of the haricot blanc that I can meet with. | gather it when the shell begins to turn yellow. I then
shell
65
shell it immediately, and bottle it, &c. I put it in the water-bath, to give it a two hours’ boiling.
esx !.
Artichokes. (Artichauls.)
To preserve artichokes whole, I ga- ther them of a middling size ; after having taken off all the useless leaves and pared them, I plunge them into boiling water, and immediately after- wards into cold water. Having drained them, I put them into Jars which are corked, &c. and they receive au hour’s
boiling.
To preserve cut artichokes (en quar- tiers), I divide them (taking fine spe- Pe , cimens)
66
cimens) into eight pieces. I take out the choke and leave very few of the leaves, I plunge them into boiling water, and afterwards into fresh water. Haying been drained, they are then placed over the fire in a saucepan, with a piece of fresh butter, seasoning, and fine herbs. When half dressed, they are taken from the fire and set by to cool. They then are put in jars, which are corked, tied, luted, &c. and placed in the water-bath, in which they re- ceive half an hour's boiling.
§ XXII. Cauliflowers.
(Choux-fleurs.)
I plunge the cauliflower, like the ar- tichoke, in boiling water, and then in
cold
67
cold water, after having first plucked it.
When well drained, I put it in jars, which are corked, &c. I place it in the water-bath, in order to give it half an hour's boiling, &c.
As the seasons vary, and are some- times dry and sometimes moist, it will be soon obvious, that it is necessary to study and adapt the various degrees of heat required according to the season. - Attention to this circumstance must
never be distegarded. For instance,
in a cool and damp year, vegetables are more tender and consequently more sensible to the action of fire. In this case, the water-bath should be made to boil seven or eight minutes less; and in dry seasons, when vegetables are firmer, and better support the action of fire, seven or eight minutes boiling should be added.
§ XXII,
68 § XXIII.
Sorrel. (Oscille.)
I gather oseille (sorrel), belle-dame* — noirée (bect), laitue (Icttice), cerfeuil (chervil), crboude (green onion), &c. in fit proportions. When they have all been well plucked, washed, drained, and minced, 1 cause the whole to be stewed together in a copper vessel well tinned: Thesevegetables ought tobe well stewed, as if for daily usc, and not dried up and burned as is oftea done in families, when it is intended to preserve them. This quantity of stewing is the most fit. When my herbs are thus prepared, I set them to cool in carthen or stone vessels, Afterwards I put thein in
bottles
® A species of the Bella-donna very generally made use of as an ingtedicnt in French soups. T.
69
bottles with a wide mouth. I cork them, &c. and I put my sorrel in the water-bath, which is allowed a quarter of an hour's boiling merely. This time is sufficient for preserving it ten years untouched, and as fresh as if it was just taken from the garden. This mode is, without dispute, the best and most economical for families and hospitals, civil and military. It is, above all, most advantageous to the Navy: for sorrel thus prepared may be brought from-the Indies, as fresh and savoury as if dressed the same day.
§ XXIV. Spinage, Succory, and other Herbs.
(Epinards et chicorées.)
Sorrel and succory are prepared as if for daily use, When fresh gathered, plucked,
7O
plucked, scalded, cooled, squeezed and minced, I put them :in bottles, &c. to | give them a quarter of an hour's boil- ing in the water-bath, &c.
Carrots, cabbages, turnips, parsnips, onions, potatoes, celery, chardoons, (cardons d Espagne), red beet, and, generally, all vegetables, may be pre- served alike, either simply scalded, or prepared with soup, in order to be used when taken out of the vessel. In the first case, I cause the vegetables to be scalded and half boiled in water with a little salt. I then take them from the water in order to strain them and let them cool; and afterwards put them into bottles, and into the water-bath. I let the carrots, cabbages, turnips, parsnips, and red beet, remain in the water-bath while it boils one hour: and the onions, potatoes, and celery,
&e.
qi
&c. half an hour. In the other case. I prepare my vegetables with soup, either with or without meat, as for ordinary use. When _ three-fourths boiled and well prepared and seasoned, I take them from the fire to iet them cool. Then I put them in bottles, &e. and give them a good quarter of an hour's boiling in the water-bath.
— § XXV. A. Soup called Julienne.
I compose a Julienne of carrots, leeks, turnips, sorrel, French beans, celery, green peas, &c. These I pre- pare in the ordinary way, which con- sists in cutting the carrots, turnips, leeks, French beans and cclery into
E sinall
72
small pieces, either round or long. Having well plucked and washed them, I put these vegetables into a saucepan over the fire, with a largish piece of fresh butter. When these are half- done, I add the sorrel and green peas. After the whole has been stewed down, I moisten the vegetables with good gravy, prepared for the purpose, with good meat and poultry. I let the whole boil halfan hour, Then I withdraw the » fire to let it grow cool; and having put the Julicnne into bottles, &c. I let it boil half an hour in the water-bath. Julienne prepared in this way, has been kept by me more than two years,
The Julienne au maigre is prepared in the same manner, except that, instead of gravy, I moisten mv vege- tables, when well dressed, with a clear. vegetadle soup, either of French beans,
lentils,
73
lentils, or large green peas, which I have preserved ; and I give it in like manner half an hour's boiling in the water-bath.
§ XXVI.
Vegetable Soup. (Coulis de Racines.)
I compose and prepare a vegetable soup in the usual way ;,I make the soup so rich, that a bottle of the size of a litre can supply a dish for twelve persons, by adding two litres of water to it, before it is made use of. When it has grown cool, I put it in bottles, to give it half an hows boiling in the water-bath. _
(=z 2 § XXVIII.
> § XXVII.
Love-Apples.
(Tomates, ou Pommes d’ Ameur.)
I gather love-apples very ripe, when they have acquired their beautiful colour. Having washed and drained them, I cut them into pieces, and dis- solve them over the fire in a copper vessel well tinned. When they are well dissolved and reduced one third in compass, I strain them through a sieve sufficiently fine to hold the kernels. | When the whole has passed through, I replace the decoction on the fire, and I condense it till there remains only one third of the first quantity. Then I let them become cool in stone pans, and put them in bottles, &c., ‘in order to give them one good boiling only, m the water-bath.
I have |
— a a
75
I have not yet tried any.cxperiments with the flower of the love-apple, but there is no doubt that this new method will furnish means of deriving, at a slight expence, a great value from them also.
§ XXVIII.
Herbs and Medicinal Plants. (Plantes Potagéres ct Médicinules.)
I filled a bottle with mint (menthe powrée) in branches and full of flowers. I stirred it with a stick to make the bottle hold a greater quantity of it. I corked it well, &c. and gave it a slight boiling in the w ater-bath, It was per- fectly preserved.
The same may be done with alf E 3 _ plants
76
plants to be preservedin bunches. The operator will caiculate the degree of heat which it will be ncecssary to give to the several subjects of his expe- riment.*
§ XXIX.
* The mece of extracting the juice of plantg by meurs cf water has more or less inconvenience. Al those juices which have a principle that is very volatile and casy to evaporate, lose infinitely, even in warm water ; much more so therefore, when the l.eat of the water is raised to a higher degree, and when the plants have been left for a
long time in digestion.
Aromatic vegetables are infused, when the objcct is to’ preserve the aroma, and not impart to the water the extractive principle which the plant contains. Therefore, tea and coffee are made by infusion. But all the theories ancient and modern, and all the new apparatus employed to seize and hold fast the aroma of the coffee are still very deficient.
Ebullition which is often times resorted to in order to extract the aroma of plants by means of distillation, in spite of all the apparatus made use of for keeping the same closed up, most frequently destroys the nawvire of
the productions. | Not
———
77 § XXIX. The Juices of: Henio
I have succeeded in preserving very well the juices of such plants as lettuce, chervil, borage ( bourache), wild succory (chicorée sauvage), water-cresses (cres- son de fontaine), &c. I prepared and purified them by the usual process, I corked them, &c. in order to give them one boiling in the water-bath.
‘4 ee) XXX,
Not only are the principles extracted by the water in-
-jured by this first operation, but they scarcely retain any
strength after the evaporation which it is usual to make them undergo, in order to form essences of them. ‘The extract therefore, exhibits nothing but the appearance of the soluble and nutritive priaciples of vegetable and animal substances ; since fire, which is necessary to form an es- sence by means of cvaporation, destroys the aroma and almost all tite properties of the substance which contains it*
18 § XXX. | rs and their Juices.
Fruits and their juices require the utmost celerity in the preparatory pro- cess, and particularly in the application. _ of heat to the water-bath. »
The fruit which is to be preserved either whole or in quarters, ought no< to be completely. ripe, because it cis- solves in the water-bath, In like man- ner it should not be gathered either at ‘the commencement or the end of the season. ‘The first and the last of the crop have neither the fine flavour, nor the perfume of those which are cather- ed in the hcighth of the season, that is, when the greater part of the crop of each specics is ripe at the same period. |
§ XXXI.
79 § XXXL. White and Red Currants in Bunches. ( Groseilles rougcs ct blanches en Grappes. »)
I gather the white and red currants apart, and not too ripe. I collect the finest, and in the finest bunches; and I bottle them, taking care to shake. them down on the stool, in order to fill up the vacancies in the bottle. “Then I cork them, &c. in order to put thm in _ the water-bath which I am careful to watch closely; and as soon as I per- ceive it boils, I withdraw the fire ra- pidly, and a quarter of an hour after- wards draw off the water from the bath by means of the cock, &c.
ES § XXXII.
80 § XXXII.
White and Red Currants, stripped.
(Groseilles rouges et blunches égrences. )
I strip the white and red ‘currants apart. ‘They are immediately put into ‘bottles, and I. conclude the operation with the same attention as in preserving the currants in bunches. I preserve an greater quantity of currants stripped, than in bunches; as the stalks always give a harshnicss to the currant juice.
§ XXXII.
Cherries, Raspberries, Mullerries.
(Crises, Framboises, Mures ct Cassis.)
I gather these fruits before they are too ripe, that they may be less squeez- ed
81
ed in the operation. I put them in separate bottles, and shake the. bottles gently on-the stool. I cork them, &e, and I complete them in the same man- ner, and with the same care as_ ine currants,
§ XXXIV. Juice of Red Currants.
I gather red currants quite ripe, and squeeze them upon fine sieves. I put into a press the skins which remain upon the sieves, in order to extract all the juice which may be in them, and this I mix with the former juice. I perfume the whole with a little rasp- berry juice, and I strain this decoction through a sieve finer than those used before. I put the juice in bottles, &c. | E 6 _ and
82 and expose them to the water-bath,
with the same attention as the stripped currants, &c.
I proceed in the same manner with the juice of white currants and har-_ berries (épines-vinettes), as well as with that of pomegranates, oranges, and lemons.
§ XXXV. Strawberries, (Fraises.) —
I made a number of experiments on the strawberry, and in various _ways, without being able to obtain its per- fume. I was forced to have recourse _ to: sugar: in consequence, I squeezed some strawberries, and strained them
through
83
through a sieve, as if I were about to make ice. TI added half a pound of powder sugar, with the juice of half a lemon, to a pound of strawberries. I ‘mixed the whole together, and. put the decoction in bottles which I corked, &c. I exposed it to a water-bath till it began to boil, &e. This mode succeed - Pivery well, in every respect, except the colour, which’ was considerably
faded ; but that ae be supplied.
§ XXXVI.
Apricots. (Abricots. )
For the table, the wild and garden apricot (fabricot commun, et Cabricot _ péche) both taken from trees standing free in the open air, are the best kinds ’ for
84
for preservation: I commonly, mingle these two kinds together, because the former supports the la‘ter, which has more sugar in it, and which dissolves more from the action of heat. They may nevertheless be prepared apart, provided the precaution be taken, of letting the garden peach remain a few - minutes less in the water-bath than the wild peach. ‘That is, as soon as the water-bath begins to boil, the fire is to be taken away from the garden peach, while the fire may be allowed to remain under the wild peach until the water- bath completely boils.
I gather the apricots when they are ripe, but somewhat firm; when, on being squeezed gently between the fin- vers, the stone is perceived to detach itself from the fruit, As soon as ga- thered, I eut them in halves, take out
the
BE
the stone, and peel off the skin with a knife as delicately as possible. I put them into bottles, cither in halves or quarters, according to the size of the mouth, and shake them on the stool to fill up the vacancies. I add to each bottle from twelve to fifteen almonds ; I cork. them and put them into the. water-bath to receive one boiling only ; and ¥ instantly withdraw the fire with the same-precaution as made use of in the preparation of the currants, &c.
§ XXXVII.
Peaches and Nectarines,
( Péches, Brugnons.)
The grosse mignonne and the calande are the two kinds of peach which unite the most flavour and perfume. For a ay want
86
want of these, I take the best I can meet with.
I gather the nectarine (brugnon) more ripe than the peach, because it supports — the heat better: and on the other hand, I leave the skin on it in order to pre- serve it. Moreover, the same process is observed as in preserving the nectarine, the peach, and the apricot; in every instance watching the water-bath close- ly, as I doin preserving the bunches of currants.
—§ XXXVIII.
_ Prunes from Green Gages, and Plumbs. (Prunes de Reine-Claude et Mirabelles.)
I have made prunes of whole green-
gages, including the stone and the stalk, as
87
as well as of other great plums; and even of perdrigons and alberges, which succeeded ‘very well. But there are these inconveniences in preserving the _ largest fruits whole, that few of these | large plums can be put into even a large jar, since the vacancies cannot be filled up by shaking the fruit, without altogether crushing them; and_ that when the heat of the water-bath is ap- plied to them, they shrink, and the jars are found half empty.
In consequence, I have abandoned this too expensive mode, and am ac- customed to preserve all these large plums, cut in halves, after: having ta- ken out the stone. This is the easiest and most economical manner, corks of a sufficiently large size for large objects being very ag and also rare, when the econ is very fine; the vessels too’
a which
: ‘ are q a. by tos i: cot Boy
. 88
which have a narrow or middling neck are more easy to be well corked, and the operation is in consequence more certain. As to the murabelle [a small white plum] and all other small plums, ] prepare them with the stone in them, after having taken off the stalk ; for they are in this way easier to shake close,-and they leave but-few vacancies in the bottles. In general, I-observe, in the preservation of all these prunes, either whole or cut in halves, the same process, care and attention, which I have pointed out under the head of apricots and peaches,
XX XEKe Pears of ooh) kind.
When the pears are pecled, and cut into quarters, and the pips with their _ husks
89
husks are taken out, I put. them into | bottles, &c. in order to place them in | the water-bath. I carefully attend to the degree of heat they have to receive,
which, if they are of a kind usually eaten raw, should not be more than’
sufficient to make the water-bath boil. When the preserve consists of pears usually stewed or boiled, then I let them remain boiling in the water-bath, five or six minutes. Pears which have fallen from the tree require a quarter of an
hour's boiling, &c.
§ XL. Chesnuts, Truffles, and Mushrooms. (Marrons, Truffes, et Champignons.) |
_I pierce chesnuts at the point with the Bont of a knife, as if I meant to roast them.
pari
90 them. I put them in bottles, and give them one boiling m the water-bath.
Having well washed and brushed the truffies in order to take away all the soil, I cut. off the upper part gently with a knife. Then [ put them into bottles either whole or in picces, ac- cording to the diameter of the neck The remainder I put in bottles apart. The whole being well corked, &c. I put them in the water bath to receive an hour’s boiling, &c. It is not neces- sary to récommend that the truffles should be sound; and recently gathered. —
I take Afushrooms fresh from the bed, well formed and firm. Having peeled and washed them, I put them in a saucepan on the fire, with a piece of butter or some good olive oil, in order to make them eject their liquor. I
leave
91
eave them on the fire till this liquor 1s : reduced one half. I withdraw them in order to let them grow cool in a pan; after which, I bottle them and give
‘them one good boiling in the water- bath.
—§ XLT. The Juice of the Grape or Must.
‘During the vintage of 1808, T took black grapes, carefully gathered from the vine; after having taken away the rotten and green grapes, and stripped the others from the stalks,. I squeezed them upon a fine sieve, and afterwards put into a press the husks which re- mained on the sieve, in order to extract. the remainder of the j juice; and then put the produce both: of the sieve and the —
a press |
G2
press into one cask. Having let it stand in this state twenty-four hours, I put it in bottles, &c. to give it one good boiling in the water bath. When the operation was completed, I with-. drew the bottles from the boiler. The action of the fire had precipitated the little colour which the grape-juicg had assumed during the preparation, and it was become very white. I then placed it in my laboratory in a rack as if it’ had been wine.
I repeated all these experiments on the 10th of September 1809, in the presence of the special commission nominated by his Excellency the Mi-— nister of the Interior, composed of the most distinguished persons of the Te fession. _
_ New experiments which I have be-
cun,
93
gun, as well as others which I purpose to make on various objects, will be’ de- tailed in a memoir which I shall publish as soon as I shall be able to speak ‘of their result.
RET IT TD a
OF THE MODE OF MAKING USE OF THE SUBSTANCES WHICH HAVE BEEN PRESERVED. )
§ XLII. Meat, Game, Poultry, Fish.
Meat which has in the preparatory dressing, as well as the boiling it re- — ceived in the water-bath, received its | due quantity of cooking, will, when itis — taken to be used, require only to be pro- perly warmed in order to produce both
soup and meat (potage et bouilli). | | , For
O4
For the'sake of greater economy, and to lessen the number of bottles and jars wanted, it is better to make in the first instance a good gravy as already pointed out by me. For both the beef and the gravy need only to be warmed, and by. adding one half or two-thirds of water to the gravy a good soup is provided. |
In this manner, a bottle containing a litre of gravy may, by adding two litres of boiling water to it at the moment that it is to be used, and adding a little galt, furnish a dozen good messes. Thus
it is easy)at a very slight expenceé to keepa little stock of provisions against — _ an emergency and hot weather, when it is so difficult to procure them, more especially in the country.
All meat, poultry, game, and fish, which
95
which have received threc-fourths of their dressing in the preparatory pro- cess, and the remainder in the water- bath, as already pointed out, may, when taken out of the vessels, be heated to . the proper degree in order to be in- stantly served at table. If, for instance, the substance taken ‘from the bottle or jar, had not received either enough previous dressing, or enough heat from the water-bath ; it is immediately put — on the fire in order to supply what is deficient. Consequently, when the operator has taken due care in making his preparations, having properly sea- soned and dressed them, the use to be made of them afterwards, will at ail events be easy and convenient; for on the one hand they will need only to be warmed, and on the other hand, they my, if necessary, be eaten cold,
Substances
F
96
Substances thus prepared and pre- served, do not, as might be imagined, require to be consumed as soon as they are opened. Provisions may be used from a vessel eight or ten days after it has been uncorked,* care being taken only to replace the cork as soon as the necessary part of the provision has been taken out. Besides, it is easy to regulate the size of the vessels from one to twenty-five litres or more, ac- cording to the rapidity of the expected consumption.
§ XLII.
® See the report made to the Socictd d’ Encouragement pour [Industrie nationale, by Mr. Beuriat, in the name of the Committee. Two half-bottles, one of milk, the other of whey, after remaining uncorked from twenty to thirty days, had been re-corked with little cork ; nevertheless the two substances retained all their properties.
97 § XLII. Jellies made of Meat and Poultry.
A well prepared and preserved jelly, cayefully taken in pieces out of the jar may be used to garnish cold dishes, or it may be even dissolved in the water- bath, the vessel containing it being first uncorked ; afterwards it may be poured in a dish to congeal again before it is made use of.
Under an infinity of circumstances, a cook may be in want of the substances necessary to make a sauce with. But with the essences of meat, poultry, ham, &c. as well as with a provision of _ jelly well preserved and prepared, they
may be furnished in an instant.
The broth or jelly prepared and Pegerved as pointed out in page 46 is 52 eaten
98
eaten either cold as it is found in the bottles, or diluted .with more or less boiling water, in the proportions which persons of experience may judge suita- ble in the several instances.
§ XLIV. Milk and Cream. Cream, Milk and Whey, prepared
and preserved in the manner already pointed out, are used in the same way, _ and for the same daily purposes, as the same articles when fresh.
Since cream and. milk are perfectly preserved in. this manner, there is no ‘doubt that desert-creams might be preserved by a similar process, as well as those which are used for ices. These,. hhaving been well prepared and ccm-
a, pleted
99
pleted before they are put into bottles, will only require to be yently warmed in the water-bath, the bottles being uncorked, in order to facilitate its coming out of the vessel. In this manner creams and ices may be fur- nished instantly.
§ XLV. Ve egctables.
Vegetables put into bottles without being dressed, and entirely. submitted to the action of heat 1 in the water-bath,
as before described, require to be pre-
pared for use‘on being. taken out of the
: botiles. This preparation will be made “according to thé season, and every one’s taste and inclination. Attention 3 must be given to the washing of the
ee vegetables |
100
vegetables when taken from the bottle; and to facilitate the taking them out, I fill the bottle with Juke-warm water, and after having drained it of the first water, I wash the vegetables in a second water somewhat hotter, and having drained them, I then prepare them for a meat or vegetable soup,
§ XLVI. French Beans. ( Haricots.)
I scald French beans (haricots verts,) as if they were fresh in water, with a little salt when not sufficiently dressed by the preserving process. This often happens to them as well as to artichokes, asparagus and cauliflowers. If suffi- ciently boiled, on being taken out of
the
101
the bottles, I have only to wash them in hot water in order to prepare then: afterwards for vegetable or meat soup.
4 scald in the same way the beans of the hAaricot blanc; when sufficiently dressed, I take them from the fire and icave them in the boiling water, half an hour, and even an hour, in order to render them more tender: I then prepare them for soup.
§ XLVII. Peas, Beans, &c.
Green peas are dressed in various ways. If they are ill cooked in the season, it is the cook who is blamed ;
_ but if they are not found good in winter, the fault is thrown on the person who has preserved them, though the fault
F4 most
102
most frequently arises from some of che substances employed; either from the bad butter, or the oil or rancid fat which is made use of through neg- ligence or economy. At another time they are prepared two hours too soon. They are suffered to stick to the bottom of the saucepan when on the fire, and they are served smeiling of the butter which is turned into oil with a burnt taste; or thev are prepared without care and with coo much precipitation. It - is thus we see green peas brought to the ‘table sw.inming in water; but every one has his way. The following is mine.
As soon as the peas have been waslied and immediately afterwards drained (for neither this vegetable nor the windsor-bean must be suffered to re- inain in water, for that would take
away
Se hie ied
103
away their flavour), I put them on the fire in a saucepan with a morsel of good fresh butter. I add to them a bunch of parsley and chives. After having. tossed them several times in butter, I
dredge them with a little flour, and
moisten them immediately afterwards
with boiling water up to the level of the
peas. I Icave them thus to be boiled a good quarter of an hour, until very httle sauce remains. Then I season them with salt anda little pepper, and leave
them on the fire until they are stewed
down; Ithen take them off the fire immediately, in order to add a piece
of fresh butter as large as a nut, with
a table spoonful of powder sugar for each bottle of peas. I toss them weil without replacing them on the fire,
until the butter is melted, and I serve
them. up in the shape of a pyramid upon a dish, which I take care to warm
lod
F 5 thoroughly.
104
thoroughly. I have observed several times, that by adding sugar to the peas
when upon the fire, and giving them |
only one boiling, the peas became hard and the sauce ran so that it could no
longer bind the peas together. Thus
great attention should be given to the
not putting in thesugarand the last piece
of butter until the moment of serving them up. This is the only way of dressing them well, for neither in summer nor winter ought any sauce to appear among the peas. ; ao - There is another mode of eating green peas and which may suit many persons ; this consists in simply boiling the peas in water. When done, the water is drained off and the peas are tossed with a piece of good fresh butter, salt, pepper and sugar, all together over a very gentle fire, they arc then served
up
id a
105
up directly upon a very hot dish. Care must be taken that the peas do not boil with the seasoning, otherwise the butter turns into oil, and the green peas are dissolved in the water.
cook the small windsor-beans, as well with as without their skin, by the same process and with ‘the same attentions which I observe in dressing green peas.
I make an excellent soup-maigre, with large preserved peas which are equally good for a meat soup. As to asparagus, artichokes, cauliflowers, &c. they are dressed in the usual way after having been washed, &c., Green peas, beans, French beans, and all kinds of © vegetables may be three-fourths boiled, seasoned at the same time, as is done when intended for immediate use, put into bottles or other vessels when cool,
F 6. corked, .
106
corked, &c. and allowed one _ half hour’s boiling in the water-bath. By these means vegetables will be preserved and quite ready, which may be made use of in an instant, without any other care than to warm them ; and there are also many instances in which these vegetables may be eaten cold. In this way all difficulties may be ren.oved in traveiling by land or water.
iy ies At ah
t ge:
§ XLVI Spinage and Succory.
I dress spinage and succory as usual, in either vegetable or meat soup. Each bottle of a litre, contains two or three dishes, either of spinage, or succory according to their strength. When I want to make use of a part only I re-
cork
107 |
cork the bottle which I keep for another Give a4 | |
§ XLIX. Vi egetable Soups.
Having emptied a bottle containing a litre of preserved Julienne, I add two litres of boiling water with a little salt, and I havea dish for’ twelve or fifteen persons.
As well as a Julienne, a coulis de racines, a soup of lentils, carrots, oni- ons, &c. being well prepared, furnishes
with the greatest economy, excellent dishes 1 in an instant.
All farinaccous substances, such as oatmeal, rice, spelt, semoulia, vyer- micelli, — and in general every thing. that may be formed into a paste, nu-
tritive
mee ee
ah el O8
tritive and easy of digestion, may be — prepared and seasoned with either ve- getable or meat soup, and even with milk, before they are made to undergo the preserving process, in order to’ facilitate the use of them. at sea and in armies at a moment of ‘necessity. ?
§ L. - Tomates and ‘Herbs. ~~ Luse preserved Tomates or fove-apples in the same manner as those taken fresh in the scason.. They need only ‘to be properly i, and seasoned ‘when taken out of the bottle. | A Sorrel preserved in the manner poirited out, does not, when taken out of the bottle,:in the least differ from "fresh sorrel in J une. I make use of. it in the same way. Laas | : ye Asal
. ——— Sapip ee e
109
As to mint (menthe poivrée) and all other plants which may be preserved in bunches; cooks will know how to make the proper use of them, as well as of _ the juices of herbs.
§ LI. Preserved Fruits, Marmelades, Se.
The manner of making use of fruits, preserved by the process I have point- ed out, consists, Ist. in putting ° such — fruit into a fruit jar, in the same state in which it isin the bottle, without adding any sugar, because many per- sons, more especially ladies, prefer fruits with their natural juice. At the - same time I prepare another jar with a preserve of grape-syrup or powder sugar, for those who prefer it, I have
| 3 from
110
from experience learnt that grape-syrup preservesthe aroma and agreeableacidity of fruits, much better than sugar. This is a very sinple and economical mode of preparing an excellent dish of preserved fruits, which is the more con- venient, as every one can satisfy his own taste as to the mixture of sugar with hus fruits.
2. In order to make preseryca’ with sugar (compotes .sucrées), 1 take a pound of preseryed fruits, it matters
-not which; this, on heing taken out of
the bottle, T put, with its juice, over the fire i ina skimming pan, mixing wiih it four ounces of crape syrup. As soon as‘it begins to boil, L withdraw it from tlic fire, and -take of the froth by means. of a piece of brown paper, which I appty to the surface. As soon as I have skimmiedit, I take -the fruit
bas
prin ae it ~Sfyh Tee Eee ae
gently:
ag IN aS
111
gently off the syrup, in order to put it into a fruit-jar. After having reduced - the syrup one half over the fire, I put “itupon the fruifin the jar. Fruits thus - preserved are sufficiently sweet, and- have as fine a flavour as a preserve — ‘made in the season with fresh fruits.
3d. In‘order to preserve in brandy either cherries, apricots, green-gages, pears, peaches, mirabelles, &c. (com- potes « Teau de vie), I take a pound of preserved fruit, together with its” juice, which I put in a saucepan, on the fire, together with a quarter of a pound of grape syrup. When ready
to boil, Iskim it; after which, I gently take the fruit from off the syrup, and
putitina yar. I leave the syrup on the fire, till it is reduced to one-fourth of | its bulk. Then I take it from the fire in order .to add to it a glass of good _ brandy’;
112
brandy; and having mixed the whole, I pour the hot syrup upon the fruit in the jar, which I take care to close well - that the fruit may be better penetrated
by the syrup, &c.
The preserved pear and peach may be alike made use of to make a Bur- gundy wine conserve with cinnamon, as well as compotes hee |
Ath. I Ante a marme Fils, either of | apricots, peaches, green-gages, or mi- rabelles, by the following process. I take for one pound of preserved fruit, | haif a pound of grape syrup. I boil the whole together over a quick fire, taking care to stir it well with a spoon 2 to prevent its boiling. When thé mar melade is boiled to’a slight consistency,
I take it off, because the confectionary a
which is the least boiled is the best. As
\ 113
As preserved fruits afford a facility of
' making confectionary just when it is ‘wanted, they may, by a little boiling” only, be had at any time, fresh and of. 2 excellent quality. | |
§ LIL.
Currant Lins |
The mode of making Pant jam with the juice of this preserved fruit, — is quite simple. I put half a pound of sugar to one pound of currant juice, which ought to be perfumed with a little raspberry. Having clarified and dissolved my sugar, I put the currant juice to it, and. give it three or four boilings ; and when it falls from the
skimmer i in small lumps not larger than a lentil,
114
a lentil, I take it from the fire to put it in jars, &c.
§ LULL Syrup of Currants.
In order to make syrup of currants, I warm the juice of this fruit till it is ready to boil. I then strain it through a cloth, By these means I obtain the Juice, limpid, and freed from its mu- cillages When strained, I add half a pound of grape syrup to a pound of fruit, and put the whole on the fire to- gether ; when boiled to the consistence of a slight syrup, I take it from the fire to put it in bottles when it is
cold.
There is a very simple and economi- — cal mode of making use, not only of currant
. ~— sa. *
115
currant juice, but that of all fruits
which are employed to compre an acid beverage. |
This mode consists merely in putting into a glass of water slightly sweetened with grape syrup, a table spoonful of
the juice of preserved currant, or of any other fruit that. may be at hand,
which is poured into another glass and then drank off. ‘This mode is the more
convenient; because it will be. always
easy to have these preserved juices at hand, or to procure them at a small ex- pence. In this way my family has
_ been, for the space of fifteen years, in the habit of making use of currant
juice ; and most frequently we prepare
this substitute for lemonade, without
either sugar or syrup.
-§ LIV.
116
§ LIV. | Ices. ¥" |
I have prepared and made, in the mode usually employed in the fruit season, ices of currants, raspberries, apricots, and peaches, as well as straw- berries, preserved in the manner pointe ed out oe me. |
I nate these experiments before the » late improvement in the art of making. grape syrup, but now that this pro- duction has.been brought nearly to per- fection, the syrup of the acid grape manufactured by Mr. Privat of Meze, will soon advantageously supply ths place of the juice of the sugar cane, . in. the preparation of the ices of fruit. As i have already observed, the grape syrup preserves the aroma of all fruits. . better -
a
117
better than sugar. Sugar overpowers to so great a degree the taste of the fruits, that it is necessary to add
some lemons to the ices of fruits, in — order, as it. were, to bring out the
aroma. When therefore the juice of an acid grape shall be made use of, the lemons will become unnecessary, and the ices of fruit will be the richer. The sweet syrups of the grape will be successfully made use of with all ice-
creams.
§ LV. Cordials. 9 ( Liqueurs.) _ Ihave composed liqueurs and rata: fies with the juice of preserved fruits
and sweetened with grape syrup. These preparations
118
preparations yielded . in nothing to the best home-made liqueurs.
The simple and easy modes which I have pointed out, of preparing every | kind of preserved fruit for daily use, — prove sufficiently that this method, as sure as it is useful, will introduce the _ greatest economy in the consumption of the produce of the sugar-cane. 7 _ The consumer, and more especially” the manufacturer, who is obliged to lay in during summer, a considerable stock of — this foreign commodity for syrups, | liqueurs and confectionary, | as well as all the objects of pharmacy, | may. dis- pense with it; for it will be sufficient if they lay in an adequate stock ‘of fruit. - in the season, and prepare it’ in the manner pomted out, to be exempt from the necessity of preparing it with: su- ; ger except on an emergency, and in
+ EEN: 3 oe . bs ee.
the
119 the quantities actually wanted. It will
follow that the greater part of all these fruits will be preserved, altogether
without, or at least with a small quan- tity of sugar; that many of them will
be prepared with grape syrup, and that
the sugar from the cane will be made use of only for indispensable objects,
or to comply with the old habits, and gratify the luxury of a few.
It will follow, that in a plentiful year, sugar will not be necessary in
order to provide against a scanty sea- ‘son; and that, with a slight expence,
the same enjoyment will be derived from the preserved produce of two,
three, and: four years, as from a year
of plenty.
G | § LVI.
| 120 § LVI. Chesnuts, Trufftes, MST
On taking the chesnuts an of the vessel in which ‘they have been pre- served, I plunge them in cold water, © - sprinkle them with a little fine salt, and roast them in a pan over a-quick fire. In this manner they are excellent. | The moistening them and the put- ting salt upon them may be dispensed with, but they must always be roasted
over a quick fire. |
I make the same use of preserved tifles. and mushrooms, as of osc recently gathered.
- {SLI
121 § LVI. Grape Juice, or Must.
When I made my first experiments of preserving grape juice in its fresh
state, I was unacquainted with Mr.
Parmentier’s ‘* Information concerning the means of furnishing a substitute
__ for sugar, in the principal uses made of
it in medicine and domestic economy.” * ‘It is this valuable information which supplicd me with the means of avail- ing myself-of fresh experiments, and making use of two hundred bottles of grape-juice preserved by me six months before.
Ist. I made very good grape syrup, following the process of Mr. Parmentier, which is literally as follows.
Gr 2 Preparation
@ 6 Ptnstructton aur lcs moyens de suppléeer le sucre
dans les principaux usages qu'on en fuil pour la médecine
et économie domestique; par M, PanMenTian”
; om gee Fae
122
Preparation of Grape Syrup. «“ You take -twenty-four [French] pints of grape juice and put one half of it ina boiler placed ou-the fire, with
the precaution of not suffering it to
boil with too much force. You add fresh juice as that in the boiler evapo- rates 5 you skim it and stir the surface, to add to the evaporation.. When the whole of the juice has been put into the boiler, you skim it, you take the
boiler off the fire, and add some lye-
ashes tied up in a cloth, or whiting |
(blanc @Espagne, Spanish, or Troy- white), or chalk reduced to a powder, and first diluted ina little grape juice, until it) no ionger effervesces, or, as it were, boils in the liquor which was
shaken.
“ By these means, the acid contain- ed in the grape, 1s separated and neu- tralized.
_ oe
123
tralized. In order to try the liquor, put blue paper into it, and when it does not turn red, then you may be satisfied that the liquor is no longer acid. Re- place the boiler on the fire, after having let it-scttle an instant, and put in two whites of beaten eggs. Strain the liquor through a woollen cloth, fixed on a wooden frame of twelve or fifteen | square inches, so that it occupies little room ; then boil again, and continue the evaporation.
‘‘ In order to know whether the syrup ,be sufficiently condensed, let some drop from a spoon upon a plate : if the drop falls without spirting or spreading, or if when divided, the halves run into each other again but slowly, then you may infer that it has acquired -the proper consistency.
G 3 <¢ Pour
124
“* Pour it into an earthen vessel which is not varnished ; and when completely cold, transfer’ it to vessels of a moderate. size, neat, dry, and well corked ; and placed it in the cellar. A bottle once opened, should not remain long only ~ half filled; and when you make use of it, take care to hold the neck down- wards.
“¢ It is hardly possible to determine precisely, the quantity of chalk or ashes necessary to be used. Less is required in the South than in the North, but at all cvents, more than is necessary will do no harm, since it ‘remains upon the straining cloth with the other insoluble salts and the skin. |
‘If in order .to preserve these syrups for a longer time, you were to = carry
125
earry on the boiling too long, you would find yourself mistaken; for the syrup would not fail to chrystalize at the bottom of the vessel, while the body would become thin: on the other hand, if the syrup were not sufficiently evaporated, it would soon ferment. A housekeeper who has made these syrups twice, will have learnt the degree of boiling which ought to be given to the syrup, better than can be taught her by rule.”
Syrups and Ratafies.
With this same syrup, I have pre- pared preserves, confectionary, syrups and beverages, as well as liqueurs and ratafies of all the kinds of fruit I have spoken of.
2d. I made syrup of the same ‘grape juice and by the same process, G4 except
126
except that I boiled the latter but _ slightly, that is, one quarter less than the former; as I wished to satisfy my- self whether it would be preserved by . the application of heat to the water- bath, in the way before pointed out. Having prepared my syrup, I put it when cold, into three half bottles >» one full, and the other a - quarter empty. I corked and sealed the bot- tles, and let them remain in the water- bath only till it boiled, &c; I re- marked no difference in.the full and half full bottles, and all three were completely preserved. |
3d. I took six pints of preserved grape juice, to which I added two pints of good old proof brandy, and also
two pounds of grape syrup, which I had — 4
prepared. This preparation which I mixed well, I made use of to compose _ four
197
four kinds of liqueur, by means of ine fusions of apricot-kernels, mint, orange flower, badian, which I had prepared before: thee iqueurs having been well strained, were found very good, and sufficiently sweet.
4th. I took two bottles of preserved grape juive, which I poured into two other fit bottles. I corked and tied these bottles, and left them standing upright ten days. During this inter- val, the hquor caused its cork to burst, like the best Champagne wine, and mantled in the same way.
5th. I repeated this last experiment in. the same manner. At the end of
twelve or fifteen days, observing no
appearance of fermentation in the bot- tles, I uncorked them in order to let in the air, and I then put into them a
ie | G5. | table —
re re ete it ee
128
table spconful of preserved raspberry juice. Having re-corked and sealed them, I let them remain cight days. longer upright. At the end of that . time, both the white and the red juice (le blanc et le rosé) caused the cork to spring out. They mantled completely, and were very agreeable to the taste, — _ particularly the red, adage with - raspberry. . After Fit experiments made of the | “Massy grape [in the department of Seine and Oise], it is more than pro- ‘bable that in the fine.vineyards of the South, infinitely more precious results will be drawn from the making use of this method. Grape juice will be pre- served there, in order, by congelation, to reduce it at will, to the consistence of syrup, after having taken away its — Sg for the sweet syrup; or if the _ juice
129
juice be condensed over the fire, the quantity of boiling made use of for condensing the syrup, will, by the
operation © of heat in the water-bath in
any preparatory process, be rendered immaterial for the preservation of the
syrup for several years.*
By means of this process, which is easy to be put in practice, and of little expence in the execution, syrups may be obtained clear and white (even when produced from black grapes), and of
a pure sweetness, free. from a certain
flavour of molasses and. burnt sugar,
from which it has not hitherto been | c 6 found
~ © The original is more precise, and refers to an instru-
ment made use of in France for ascertaining the density
of liquors, an Arseometer, which, at least in its appli-
cation to grape syrup, is unknown in this country: the words are, ‘* les degrés de cuisson de 25, 30, ou 33 a Tardométre, devient indifftrent pour conserver ces _sirups,”
(Se Te
130
found possible to exempt grape syrup, when boiled in the ordinary mode, suf- ficient for its preservation,
_.Thus this precious production, pre- served in bottles and vessels of every size, may be transported to a great dis- tance and in all seasons, coming from Bergerac, Méze, and all the manufac- tories of the South, to improve the produce ‘of our small vineyards, and make all classes of society share in the enygymicnt of this HEIN resource.
-§ LVI
General Observations. <<
From this detail of experiments, it is
obvious that this new method of pre- serving animal and vegetable substance, — proceeds from ue simple principle of
applying
ee. 18) |
| applying heat in a due degree to the several substances, after having de- prived them as much as possible ci all contact with the ‘external air,
It might on the first view of ‘the subject be thought that a substance, either raw or previously acted upon by fire, and afterwards put into bottles, might, if a vacuum were made in those bottles and they were completely cork- ed, be preserved equally well with the application of heat in the water-bath. This would be an error, for all the trials I have made have convinced me that the absolute privation of the contact of external air (the internal air being. _ rendered of no effect by the» action of heat), and the application of heat by. means of the water-bath, are both in- dispensable to the complete preservation of alimentary substances, - ae
| My
133
My object is not like that of the Bourdeaux chymists, to disunite the component parts of the animal sub- - stanee, and obtain the animal jelly in a separate state, as well as the animal fibre, free from its juice, and so made to resemble tanned leather. Neither is it my endeavour to furnish at a great expence, as in the preparation of port- able soup, a tenacious paste or glue, better adapted to derange the stomach than to provide it with a salutary nou- rishment.
My problem is, to preserve all nu- tritive substances with all their peculiar and constituent qualities. My experi- ments prove that I have resolved this — problem.* |
| ie: ‘It
® Some persons of enlightened understandings, but who have, perhaps, delivered themselves over tothe spisit - oi eis
133
dt is to the ection of this problem | that I have devoted’ my ‘fortune and | twenty
of system and prejudice, have declared themmeters against my method, alleging a pretended impossibility. But is it then difficult on the principles of a -sound, natural philosophy, to assign a reason for the preservation of alimentary substance by my process, ? May we not infer, that the application of caloric, or heat, to the water-bath, Operates in producing a gentle fusion of the constituent fermenting principles, ‘so .as (o destroy the predominating agency of fermentation? This agency is an essential con- dition of fermentation, at least of its taking place with a certain promptitude: Further, there is no fermentation without air; this being also excluded by my method, ‘we have two assignable causes for its success ; the theory of which appears to flow naturally from the means prac- cally employed. |
Indeed, if we refer to any of the methods made use of and any of tne experiments and observations of ancient and modern times, upon the preservation of alimentary substances, with which we are acquainted, we shall-find that jire is every where the principal. agent, either in the natural duration; or in the artificial preservation of veges table and animal substances.
Fabroni has proved that heat applied to grape juice or must, destroys the fermentation of this vegeto-animal, which
134
twenty years of labour and meditation. Happy that I have: already been able to render service to my fellow citizens and humanity, I rely on the justice, ge- nerosity and intelligence of a wise go- vernment, which never fails to en- courage useful discoveries. That go- vernment will perceive that the inventor of this method of preservation could not obtain from the invention itself an indemnification for his labour and ex- pence. The chief importance of this process lies in its subservience to the
2
ca wants
which is pre-eminently leaven. Thenard has made like ‘experiments on cherries, gooseberries, and other fruits. The experiments of the late Vilaris, and of Mr. Cazales, learned chymists at Bourdeaux, who have dried meat by means of stcves, equally prove that the application of heat destroys tne agents of putrefaction.
Drying, boiling, evaporating, as well as the caustic and savoury substances which are employed in the preservation of alimentary productions, all serve to shew that caloric in ite various modes of application, produces the same effects. -
135 wants of civil and military hospitals, and particularly of the Navy. It is in these departments of the public service that my process may be employed in a ~ manner advantageous to the state, and it is from them that I may receive the _ just reward of my labours. - I expect every thing from the beneficent views of the minister, and my expectations will not be disappointed. i
§ LIX. Practical Remarks. }
_ The bottles and other vessels of every kind fit for the preservation of alimen-
tary substances will occasion but a very slight expence at one time. They may bes always used again, if care be taken to rince them as soon as they are empty ; ; good corks, string and 5 wire are not ex- —
pensive.
136
pensive, As soon as the wedi known, proper bottles and j jars will fe Mut with at the manufacturers, corks of every size and properly prepared for use will be furnished by the cork-cuttcrs, as well as iron-wire fit for use.
It will be always adviseable to pro- cure corks before bottles, and in that ‘case no other bcttles need be purchased
_ than such as may have necks suited to
the size of tlie corks, for 1 have been often unable.to procure. corks of such
a size as I could Sua “
The glass- fouses of fe Garre, Séves, and des Prémontr ‘és near Courcy-le- Chdteau, are already accustomed to the. manufactory of corks and j jars necessary for the preserving process. Tam most satisfied with the latter, which has served me for the last four years.
Good
137
Good corking depends only ona little practice. It will suffice to cork a dozen bottles with care and exactness, in order to familiarize a person with the method. very day, wine and liquors are bottled and transported by land and water to the remotest places. Mven glass vessels containing from forty to cighty litres in measure have been sent to a great distance full of oil of vitriol and other liquids. It will be the same with animal and vegetable productions, “preserved in glass bottles or jars, when sufficient care and attention shall be given them. This is the principal thing required. How many rich li- quors and other substances would be better preserved which are cither lost or spoiled for waft of being well corked!
No one will: Aoubts after all the ex- | periments I have detailed, that the adoption
138
adoption of this new method, which,
as may be seen, unites the grcatest
economy to a perfection unlooked for
till the present time, will secure the following advantages.
1. That of considerably diminish- ing the consumption of sugar, the pro- duce of the cane, and of giving the greatest extension to the manufactories of eeTape syrup. | That of preserving for use in all _— ee and all scasons, a number of | alimentary and medicinal productions, - which being very abundant in some places at certain seasons, are therefore wasted, ‘being considered.as of no value ; while the same substances, under other
circumstances, being much wanted, be- | _ come of double and even four-fold value; and sometimes cannot. be procured at any price, such as. qeitikae and eggs.
139
3. hat of procuring civil and | military hospitals, and even for the armies the most valuable assistance, the details of which would be super- a fluous here. But the great advantage of this method consists principally in its application to the service of the Navy. It will supply fresh and whole- some provisions for his majesty’s vessels on long voyages with a saving of more than fifty per cent.. Mariners will in case of ADrese be furnished with broth, various and cooling beverages, vege- tables and fruits; ina word, they will be able to partake of ‘a number of alimentary and medicinal substances, which will alone be. sufficient to pre- vent or cure the diseases coNtracted at Sea, more especialy the worst of them all, the scurvy. These advantages eminently merit the - public attention when we reflect that salted provisions,
Bae i and,
=e: .
, >
140
and, above Ar their bad qualities, have. | cused the loss of more lives at Sea than. shipwrecks and naval engage-:
ments, © © ge -
4. Medicine will -find in this me-~ thod the means of relieving humanity, by the facility ‘of meeting every where, and in all seasons, animal substances, and all kinds of vegetables, as well as their juices, preserved with all their natural qualities and virtues: by the same means it will obtain Tesources in- ~ finitely precious in the production of . distant regions, preserves in their NESE state. |
5, From this method will arise a new branch of industry, relative to the productions of France, by their circula- tion through the interior, and the ex-
portation abroad, of the produce with | which
141 eich nature ee blessed fhe different countries. 6.. This method will facilitate the exportation of the wine of many vine-
yards: wine which can scarcely be kept
a year, even when not removed from
the spot, may hereafter be preserved
many years though sent abroad.
Finally, this invention cannot fail to enlarge the domain of Chymistry, and become the common benefit of all countries, which will derive the most precious fruits from it.
So many advantages, and an infinity of others which the inagination of the reader will easily conccive, produced by one and the same cause, are a source of astonishment.
“SOCIETY
aaa
SOCIETY FOR THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF NATIONAL INDUSTRY.
Paris, 7th April, 1809.
‘THE SECRETARY OF THE SOCIETY FOR THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF NATIONAL
- INDUSTRY, TO MR. APPERT, PRO- PRIETOR AT MASSY. — =
Sir,
I have the pleasure to trans- mit to you a copy of tie Report made to the Société d’Encouragement, by Messrs. Guyton-Morveau, Parmentier, and Bouriat, on your preserved vege- table and animal substances.. Nothing can be added to the judgment passed by the Committee upon your discavery. They announce, that it has not been in.
their power to make any experiments, — : | either
1 he RSet
MSs 143
a | ? either sufficiently exact, or continued Sor a sufficient length of time, to enable them to verify to what extent the sub- stances prepared by you may be pre- served; bit what they have themselves observed, suffices fo enable them to form an opinion to which they were previous- ly disposed, by the numerous and de- — cisive testimonies which attest -your success.
The Society are of opinion that they are rendering a:service to the. country and humanity, when they make known so useful a discovery with the eulogies which it merits.
Their desire will be accomplished, should their suffrage determine the public to make use of your pro- ductions, and so contribute to confer upon you the just rewards of your
labours, 7 3 |
H Accept,
144
Accept, Sir, the assurance of the perfect respect with which I have the honour to salute you.
MATH, MONTMORENCY, Secretary, &c.
EXTRAGT.
145
EXTRACT FROM THE = PROCES-VERBAL OF THE SITTING OF THE COUNCIL OF. ADMINISTRATION, WEDNESDAY, 15TH MARCH, 1809.
Report made by Mr. Bouriat, in the name of a Special Committee, on Vegetable and Animal Substances, preserved by Mr. Arrert.
The’ council referred to a committee, consisting of Messrs. Guyton-Morveau, Parmentier, and myself, the exami- nation of vegetable and animal: sub- stances presented by Mr. Appert, and preserved by his process, for more than eight months.
These substances were, 1. Pot-au-feu [a standing French
dish of boiled meat, fowls, &c. | H 2 2. C onsomme,
146
. Consommé, gravy.
~ Milk.
. Whey.
. Green Peas.
. Small Windsor Beans. . Cherries.
. Apricots.
. Currant Juice.
. Raspberries.
SO Ont Om w@ Db
pend
Each of these articles was contained in an earthen vessel hermetically seal- ed, the cork being fastened with iron Wire and pitched. Proceeding metho- dically in our enquiry :
We found in the pot-au-feu a jelly tolerably rich, with a piece of becf and two pieces of fowl in the middle.- Warming the whole with care, to a suitable degree, the soup was: found good, and the meat which was sepa-
rated
147
rated from it, very tender, and of ar vereeable flavour.
The consommé appeared to us to be excellent; and though prepared fif. teen months before, there was scarcely any discernible difference between its then state, and what it would have been, if made fresh the same day,
The milk was found to be of a yellow- ish colour, resembling that of colostrum or beestings,m ore thick, as well as sweeter and more savoury than the or- dinary milk : a superiority itder ives from the concentration it has wnder- gone. It may be affirmed that milk of this kind, though prepared nine months before, may supply the place of the greater part of the cream sold at Paris. What however will appear more extra- peaaty | is, that this same milk having
a3 been
148
been put into a pint bottle which was uncorked a month before, to take out a part of it, and re-corked afterwards with little care, was also prescrved, having undergone scarecly any change. At first it appeared to have somewhat thickened, but, a sheht shaking was sufficient to bring back its ordinary h- quidity. LT present it here in the same bottle, that you may convince your- sclves of a fact, which I should have had a ditficulty to believe, if 1 had. heard of it only, without having the evidence before me.
The whey which we afterwards ex- amined, presented some singular ap- pearances not less astonishing. It had all the transparency of whey recently prepared. Its colour was deeper, it had a stronger taste, and it was some- what thicker. It underwent a change
7 also
149
also with less rapidity, having been ex- posed to the air at the end of a fort- mieht; fora bottle opened six weeks ago, occasionally shaken, and ill corked, did not begin to lose its transparency till the end of a fortnight. Its surface at the end of more than a month was covered with a somewhat thick mouldiness, which when carefully taken off, left the remainder still possessing the flavour of whey.
The green peas and the Windsor beans, boiled with the attention en- jomed by Mr. Appcrt, furnished two excellent dishes, which the rcmotencss of the usual season of such vegetables appeared to render still more finely flavoured and egreeable.
Whole cherries, and apricots cut in quarters preserved a great part of the H 4 ~ flavour
150
flavour they had when gathered. It 1s true Mr. Appert was:obliged to gather them before they were quite ripe, lest they should lose too much of their
figure in the glass jars in which they —
were prese rved.
The currant and raspber ry quice ap-
peared to us to cnjoy almost all their
qualities. We found the aroma of the raspberry perfectly preserved, as well as the somewhat aromatic acid of the currant. Their colour only was a little
faded.
Such were theresultsonour examining —
the substances prepared according to Mr,
_ Appert’s process, more than eight months,
and some of them a year, and fifteen months before; for instance, the whey. We could only receive his statement as to the time of the previous prepara-
tion
4
:
151
tion of these articles, as they had been deposited but two months with the Society ; but even this shorter period
is sufficient to give us a favourable bee opinion of the author's process. We are the more justified in relying on Mr. Appert’s declarations, as persons
. highly worthy of credit, have by their own experiments, convinced themselves that similar substances may be pre- served for more than a year. Mr. Appert forwarded to the Council mere specimens of the articles I have enu- merated; but he prepares a still greater variety of alimentary substances. He
did not communicate his process to us.
Observations.
The art of better preserving vege- tables and animal substances in the state in which nature produces them, _has been to a considerable degree the “ee & wn 5 object
ee ML ee ee
152
object both of pharmacy and chyiistry. To attain that end various means have been employed. Desiccation, ardent
spirits, acids and oils, saccharine and saline substances, &c. have been made — use of; but it. must be confessed that
these means cause many productions _ to lose a part of their properties, or
otherwise znodifies them, so that their
aroma and flavour are no longer to be recognized, From this peint of view,
the provess of Mr. Appert appears to
us preferable, if without having re- course to desiccation he adds no ex- trancous substance to that he wishes to
preserve. There is every reason to — believe that his method is by so much
the better, as the substances on which he operates are more capable of sustain- ing so high a temperature without a sensible change, | i
Several
i
sy
3
153
Several persons of acknowledged merit, have by desire of the prefects in different Seaports, examined Mr. Appert's: preparations. It is only ne- cessary to read the reports made by these well-informed persons, in order to be convinced of the excellence of the author’s process. —
At Brest, for instarice, on the 14th of April 1807, the committee named by the Maritime Prefect express them- selves as follows :
« It is demonstrated by every thing just said, that all the alimentary sub- stances, in number eighteen, embarked in the Sfationnaire, December 12,1806, and disembarked April 13, 1807, and which were examined by a committee for that especial purpose, under the __ presidency of a commissary of marine
2 H 6 belonging a 7
154
belonging to the hospitals, underwent no change while they were on board, and that they were in the same state at the several periods of the embarka- tion and disembarkation.
‘«¢ It may be added that Mr. Appert’s process for the preservation of the arti- cles examined, has been followed by all the success he had promised himself ; and that with improvement, which he considers as very easy, and finding means to diminish the number of ves- sels employed, these provisions would offer great advantages on board his majesty’s and other vessels.”
The Committee nominated at Bour- deaux by the Prefect of the Depart- ment, assert, positively :
“ The detail which we have just given,
1 ———
ee
155
iven, on the objects prepared by Mr. Appert, will point out to you that they were in a state of perfect preservation; that the means made use of do not de- pend on the addition of extraneous
substances, and that these means are
founded on a process invented or im- proved by Mr. Appert, which do not destroy the perfume or flavour of the subjects submitted to their inHuence.”
Rear-Admiral Allemand wrote a let- ter to Mr. Appert, of which I subjoin a copy. |
“ I communicated your letter, Sir, to the Captains, under my orders,. and they tasted the day before yesterday the vegetables I purchased of you
fourteen months ago, one bottle of
which my mattre-@hétel had by ac-
- cident left in the store-room. As green
peas
156
peas and beans are e just beginning to be
- gathered, the officers actually believed your preserved vegétables to be fresh,
so well had you succecded ; they wish. to purchase a large quantity of them,
-as well as. soup; fruit, and nicat in bot-
thes. I shall also take a considerable — |
quantity for myself. at the-end of the
season.
< T am. $0 well persuaded, Sho ‘of: the infinite ak antage which would at- — tend the providing a quantity of articles
for the use of the sick on board, that if his Excellency, the: Minister of the
Marine and Colonies, should do me tire - honour to ask for my opinion, I shall
; not hesitate to confirm this my opinion, -as well for the sake of the government and of the sick, as of yourself. I shall
take the earlicst opportunity to speak
with him on the ‘subject. Accept the
assurance of my high consideration.
© On
eo 2
157
“ On board the Imperial Ship le Ma- jestueux, at anchor off the Ile d’ Aix. (Signed) ‘ ALLEMAND.” “7th March, 1807.” |
Copy of .a Letter of Vice-Admiral Martin, Maritime Prefect, to Mr. Appert, at Brest.
“ I have received, Sir, your letter of the 27th of last. April. According to. your desire, I have addressed to his Excellency, the Minister of the Marine
and Colonies, a report of the examination
of a variety of provisions ‘prepared ac- re to gone process.
« J shall neglect no opportunity of ‘making knowu a discovery which ap- _ pears to be as useful to the State us it is Interesting to seamen, I have the ho- nour to. salute you.
“ The vice admiral, maritime- ‘prefect,
(Signed) ‘“ Martin.” Bs Pocket’, 22d Ma; Ys - 1807. a
158
It is apparent from these reports, which appear to be alrnost the same, - though made in towns remote from
each other, at different periods and by different persons, that the process of Mr. Appert is as certain as it is useful. ‘Te affords themeansof enjoying through- out the einpire, during the whole year, and with great convenience, the pro- ductions which belong alone to a part of it, without fearing that they may have undergone any change by their
having been transported to a great dis-
tance, or from the remoteness of the season of their grow th. Merely under
this point of view, the advantage ap-
“pears to be great: and it has not es- caped the notice of the poets and _amiable’writers, who, to amuse them- _ selves, sing the art of cookery. Mr. a. | has lagna? received from
oe 2s apes.
= . ek them |
would have been necessary to preserve
159
them the most flattering and highly de- served praises.*
The process of this manufacturer is
‘not less valuable in the sparing of sugar
in the use of fruit; for without the aid of that article, it preserves the juice till the moment of its consumption, when only a small portion needs to be added to the juice ; double the quantity
the
® These postes et littérateurs amiables qui chantent pour s’amuser, 4te M. de Berchouz, author of the charming ~ poem la Gastronomie, and the authors of the Almanec des Gourmands, an annual publication written with ine finite wit and humour, and which enjoys a higher reputa- tion, and, more extensive popularity, than any other work of taste published in France, since the revolution. For an account of both these productions the reader is referred to the Lirerary PanoraMa, Vol. VII. pp. 661, and 719.
_ The Almanac of Gluttons, if it be not the standard of
poetic genius in imperial France, is at least an indication of the direction which talent is now taking: 3 dircction,
whi righ: the laws and literary police of the Napcleon govern-
"ment ml not fail effectually to maintain. T.
* 6 Cee
160
the same fruit. Jt may be further added that the flavour and aroma of sub- stances are better preserved by Mr. Appert’s process, than by the decoctions usually made use of in order to preserve them with sugar. This will be coa- sidered as a very great-advantage, when we reflect how prodigious a quan- tity of this’ colonial produce is every year employed to preserve the different kinds: of fruit and their juices. The establishment of Mr. Appert has not perhaps been duly appreciated by rich capitalists, who might have given it that desirable extension which it will only gradually receive; if the author is abandoned to his own resources.
The:success he has already met with,
Increases his zeal and makes him carry ©
his views further. He promises to trans- mit, unchanged, the most agreeable
productions
lt i
161
productions of our soil beyond the Line. He purposes to multiply the enjoyments of the Indian, the Mexican, and the African, as well as of the Laplander, and. to transport into France from re- mote regions, an infinity of substances which we should desire to receive jn their natural state.
. The experiments already made on board. several. vessels, prove that ‘the sick among a‘crew will be well satisfied with Mr. Appert’s preparations, which furnish: them with the means of pro- curing, when necessary, meat and broth of. a good quality, milk, acid - fruits, and even anti-scorbutic juices ; for Mr. Appert assures us he t 1s able to preserve these also. |
With respect to the embarkation of a meat essary for a whole crew on a
long
163
long voyage, a slight difficulty seems to lie in the requisite multiplicity of bottles. But Mr. Appert will, without doubt, find means to obviate this in-
convenience, by the choice of vessels
less fragile and of a larger size.
Our opinion of the substances’ pre- served by Mr. Appert, and transmitted
to. our examination, is, that they were.
all of a good quality ; 3 that they may be
made use of without any inconvenience ;
and that ‘the Society owes great praise to thé author for having so far advanced the art of preserving vegetable and ani- mal substances. We are happy to ren- der th's homage to the zeal and disin
terestedness with which he has laboured .
to attain his end.
When the relations of ‘ commerce
shall be rendered more easy, | Mr. Ap-
pert ;
Te
li od cael
163
pert will require nothing beyond his:
own ‘talents and perseverance, to esta-
bhish a branch of commerce as useful to
himself as to his country ; but at the present moment his fellow citizens can- not better recompense his labours, than by employing the ied of his ma- ee ag
Note. —Mr. A preg desires to pre-
serve his connection with the Society, in order to inform them of the result of
the fresh exertions to which hei is about . to devote himself, on. the invitation of — your acai tce.
The council concurring in. opinion
with its. committee, adopts the present : report and its conclusions, and resolves —
that
164
that it shall be inserted.in the minutes of the Society.
(Signed) Guyton-MorveEAu, PARMENTIER,
BourtaT.
(A true copy.) Maru. MonTMORENCY, Secretary.
FINIS.
on a
Printed by Cox and Baylis, 75, Great Queen Street, Lincoln’s-Inn-Ficlds.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold ly
BLACK, PARRY, and KINGSBURY,
Booksellers to the Hon. the East-India Company,
No.7, Leadenhall Street.
AGRICULTURE DEFENDED—In Answer to “a Com- prrative Statement of the Food produced tram Arable and Grass Land; with Observations on the lite Inclcsures, pubushed by the Rev. Fuxe Hestor, Aichdeacon of Buck;s.”’ © Inscribed to the Landholders of the Unites King- dom of Great Br.tain and Ireland, by Puttarator. 8vo.
Os,
ASTATIC ANNUAL REGISTER. — The Asiatic An- nual Register, ora View of the History of Hindustan, and of the Politics, Commerce, and Literature, of Asia Vol. XI. For the Year 1£09. By E. SaMveL, il. 2s. half- bound. Vol. XII. for 1=10, is in the Press.
Complete Sets, in IP vols. 9d. 14s. half-bound, or any single Volume may be had. a
BROUKE’s ST. HELENA.—A History of the Island: of St..Heiena, fron its D'scovery by the Portuguese, to the Year 1806; io which is added an Appendix. Delicated, ~ by Permission, tc the Honourable the Court cf Directors for Affairs of the United English East-India Company, By T. H. Basoxr, Sec-etary to the Government of St. He- Tena. 8vo. 10s. 6d,
A few Copics in rcyal 8vo. 15s. | WILLIAMSON's ‘AGRICULTURAL . MECHANISM
—Agiiculeural Mechanism 3 of, a Uvsplay of tiie sevesal Propertics and Powers of the Vehicles, Implements, and .
Pullished by Brack, PARRY, and Kivosnury,
Machinery, connected with Husbandry ; together with a great variety of Improvements and Inventions never before
offered to the Public ; whereby numerous Inconveniences ~
‘may be obviated, and Defects corrected. The whole fami- liariy arranged, and illustrated by Twenty Copper-plates.
Dedicated to the Bath and West of England Society. By
Capt. Tuomas Witttramsom (Honorary Member), Au- thor of “The Wiid Sports of the East,’ ‘ Mathematics Simplificd,’: and ‘ The East-India Vade-Mecuin.’ 8vo. 10s.6d. . '
WILLIAMSON’s VADE-MECUM. — The East-India Vade-Mecu:n ; or Complete Guide to Gentlemen intended for the Civil, Military, or Naval Service of the Hon. East- India Company. By Capt Tuomas’ Witviamson, Au- thor of ‘ The Wild Sports of the East.’ 2 vols. 8vo. 11. 8s.
BUCHANAN’s JOURNEY trHrovoun MYSORE, &c.
—A Journey trem Madras, through the Countries of My- —
sore, Canara, and Malabar, performed under the orders of the Most Noble the Marquis Wellesley, Governur-General
of India ; for the express Purpose of investicating the State |
of Agriculture, Arts, and Commerce ; the Religion, Man- ners, and Customs ; the History Netural and Civil, and Antiquities, in the Dominions of the Rajah of Mysore, and the Countries acquired by the Honourable East-India Compiny, in the late and former Wats, from Tippoo Sul-
tan. By Frawcis BucHANAN, M.D. Fellow of the Royal.
Society, and of the Society of Antiquaries of Loniton ;
Fellow of the Asiatic Society of Calcutta; and in the Mee |
dical Service of the. Honourable Company, on the Bengal
Esta! lishunent. Published under the Authority and Pie,
tron:ge of the Honourable the Directors of the East-India Company. SJlustrated by a Map, and other numerous Engiavi gs. 3.vol. dto. 61. 6s.
A few Copies in royal 4to. Ql. Qs.
BURDER’s VILLAGE SERMONS; —or, Short ant
Plain Discoursed, tor tye Use of Families, Schools, and
Religious Societies. By the Rev. Geonch Burper. 6
“vols. 2s. cach. A‘l suld separate. ~ Ditto, in Bvo, at 3s, each,
7 ‘ 5 q
‘
ees te io Ne ee ee
A ONE > On ee ES a A a ies EE ya a line a
