ive eae ae
ithe ent tin corti
copinn Neca HTS My hd afi Re aes Wess
J isi wi shaiae fvetiepeh : peoritry e naka prety Affe Bees itagise ,
tog Staged re ® ete bercnpt pat ire: wapdlarah te erie agit S$4e sp biedy fe ces ol acide |® if Weorier toate df Osha Fe ANF be aie ;
Me Hee Whe Fe toaiae insets Pi ee Wrigeyeh to steered piney yet seh ais Bh dba one: x ay ue ( bite oF ak ee rf ane
4 aay Und, pane ae Fett 4 4 areata, tee pd thee poreqvee 9 r er si Sores ; +42 eat ‘i Pa ispoataaee fe
Stijeerntches alana cei ST
toe jake erie ee “nate dngniacanaee Boi hs ipha pend fi ak torte ree ter aa
6. raf ; ‘a ee f iy ate et ie spans 1 Sw ate yinee siete ne
rest ana
etna ith astey a
oe Legh AS ace ae
at
ae Pf Ty : eres yneonbraty Sark tena
He nae, ‘ bate ee is : Mwdispays ras ade a he deta be bebe gl sosiiee te * 3 a ies ene Hy Bee hrs nee.
cat putin a Metis i) ath eae! ote
5. apy opp hee estes pareve hr ry ar it SoeA sas of sees Verte PL spied: fa et cere} Y Sim aatbiaveuhiga piven eas jee bete ph Gate fete i ples estreg oi Cathe asia 8) : p coe verte
ny abn Fy ay COE Lasisn eee
pepe Mak Asya ie
we obeiy
prcranesen eis aes rheptg: A iene
Ws MANA ret nerd pitied Perr NSteaebive tegerate moe mf isa ial jaa te
ait
his Sra eiebeyrhe rat hip sah aes chat ; sit htaivl ran z + ie eee oy
Cy eter is: Paty
eS os ot ae S Pasedimaracd:
AY Stenting Anes
Posie tiie Faaseled £8) iva
very eater
a Ser yy edhe bP the Be beh) Went Febgan Marah Rees:
gr, ALBERTS COLLEGE LIBRARY
AS 7) a,
ta
n iv
i’
KING ALFRED'S
ANGLO-SAXON VERSION OF
BOETHIUS
DE CONSOLATIONE PHILOSOPHIE: ST. ALBERT’S COLLEGE LIBRARY
WITH
A LITERAL ENGLISH TRANSLATSQN,
NOTES, AND GLOSSARY. C x KLA ND “oIBRRRY. LIBRARY
%
THE REV. SAMUEL FOX, M.A.,
OF PEMBROKE COLLEGE, OXFORD, AND RECTOR OF MORLEY, DERBYSHIRE
Property of
COSA
Please return to Graduate Theological LONDON: GEORGE BELL & SONS, YORK STREET. covent carpEnUnton Library 1890.
IFZ2
LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, STAMFORD STREET AND OHARING OR03S.
ah
PREFACE.
A portion of the works of King Alfred having already appeared in the series of which this volume forms a part, the Editor thought that a complete edition of his Anglo-Saxon translation of the treatise of Boethius de Consolatione Philo- sophiz would be acceptable. Some years since, the late Mr. Cardale published the prose of the Anglo-Saxon version with an English translation, which was soon afterwards followed by an edition of the Metres, with a literal translation by the present Editor. In the edition now printed, the judicious selection by Mr. Cardale from the different readings of the only MSS. in existence has been carefully weighed, and, for the most part, followed. The MSS. alluded to are the Cot- tonian MS., Otho, a. vi., now in the library of the British Museum, and one which contains merely a prosaic version, in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. The MS. in the British Museum formerly belonged to Sir Robert Cotton, and was so much injured by the fire which destroyed a portion of his valuable collection before its removal to our great public library, that for many years it was utterly useless, con- sisting merely of detached tragments thrown together in a box, until, by the skill and industry of the Rev. Joseph Stevenson and the late John Holmes, Hsq., it was rearranged in 1844, the detached parts being neatly put together within a border of new parchment, and is now rendered so perfect that most of it can be read with the greatest ease! This MS. contains a similar translation of the prose portion of
6117
Vv PREFACE.
Boethius to that in the Bodleian Library, but the Latin Metres are rendered in Anglo-Saxon verse, while those in the Bodleian MS. are translated in a prosaic form. In this edition every word contained in both MSS. is given, and the variations, which are the result of a careful collation, are marked at the foot of each page.
The original work of Boethius de Consolatione Philo- sophie is extremely interesting from the circumstances under which it was written. The author, whose full name was Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius, was born between a.p. 470 and 475. His father dying while he was young, he was brought up among his father’s friends at Rome, who were distinguished men, and of whom Symmachus, to whom allusion is made, was one. Boethius was famous for his general learning, and also for his extensive charities. He married Rusticiana, the daughter of Symmachus, and was the father of two sons, Aurelius Anicius Symmachus, and Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius, who were consuls A.D. 522. His high character naturally brought him into public notice, and, after being consul a.p. 510, he attracted the attention of Theodoric, king of the Ostrogoths, who gave him a responsible appointment in. bis court, and consulted him on many important subjects. After attaining the greatest height of worldly prosperity, his happiness was suddenly overcast. His unflinching integrity provoked enmity in the court of Theodoric ; and his boldness in pleading the cause of Albinus, when accused of treason by an informer, seems to have afforded his enemies a plea for charging him and Symmachus with the intention of delivering Rome from the barbarian yoke. Whatever grounds there may have been for the charge, he was treated with great injustice, not being allowed a trial, and a sentence of confiscation and death being passed against him without a hearing! He was im- prisoned in the baptistry of the church at Ticinum, which was to be seen till a.p. 1584; and during this imprisonment
- PREFACE. Vv
he wrote his books De Consolatione Philosophie. He was afterwards beheaded, or, according to some writers, he was beaten to death with clubs. Symmachus was also beheaded, and Rusticiana was reduced to poverty, until, through the kindness of the widow of Theodoric, who was regent during her son’s minority, her husband’s confiscated property was restored to her. A tomb was erected to the memory of Boethius by Luitprand, king of the Lombards, in the church of S. Pietro Cielo d’Oro; and afterwards a more magnificent one by Otho III., with an epitaph by Pope Sylvester II. There is much difficulty in deciding whether Boethius was a Christian or a devout heathen. Whatever he may have been, there is not in the original treatise any mention of the consolations which Christianity affords to the unfortunate. As is elsewhere stated, any allusions to the Christian religion which occur in the following pages, are in- troduced by King Alfred. Yet, as it has been well observed _ by an eminent writer, “If, on the one hand, the general silence on the subject of Christianity in such a book, at such a period of his life, proves that, if he was a Christian, its doctrines could hardly have been a part of his living belief ; on the other hand, the incidental phrases which occur, the strong religious theism which pervades the whole work, the real belief which it indicates in prayer and Providence, and the unusually high tone of his public life, prove that, if a heathen, his general character must have been deeply tinged by the contemporaneous influences of Christianity.”
The peculiar circumstances of King Alfred’s life very naturally produced a sympathy in his mind for the suffer- ings of the noble Roman, and were the happy means of pro- ducing a work, in which, at the distance of a thousand years, we can hear, as it were, our revered sovereign speaking to us in his own language on some of the most important topics of human life! For although King Alfred professed to trans- late the work of Boethius, yet he inserted in various parts
vi PREFACE.
many of his own thoughts and feelings, and thus composed — several moral essays, in which he has, in a manner, trans- mitted himself to posterity. The imperfection of King - Alfred’s early education will account for a few mistakes in — names and historical facts. These, however, by no means lessen the value of the translation ; and instead of wonder- — ing at their occurrence, one should rather feel surprised that — they are not more numerous and more important, consider- ing the disadvantages under which he laboured. The trans- lation was made, as the royal author states, amid “ various and manifold worldly occupations, which often busied him both in mind and in body. The occupations,” said he, “ are very difficult to be numbered which in his days came upon the kingdoms which he had undertaken to govern.” On this account our wonder may well be excited, since we meet with literary attainments which, in those days, were to be sought rather in the retirement of the cloister than in the noise and tumult of a camp, which was often in the neighbourhood of harassing foes.
King Alfred entirely altered the arrangement of Boethius, for, instead of dividing his work into four books, and sub- dividing each book into chapters, as his author had done, he divided the whole work into forty-two chapters, alluding occasionally to the books of the original. The first six chapters of the Anglo-Saxon version comprise the chief part of the first book of Boethius, together with a short introdue- tion. The next fifteen chapters contain the substance of the second book. The third book is translated in the fourteen chapters which follow. Four chapters and part of another, viz. part of chapter xl., are devoted to the fourth book ; and the remaining portion of chapter xl., together with chapters xli. and xlii., completes the whole.
Although the work is deeply interesting, yet the most striking portion will be found in the following chapters: In chapter xv., there is a pleasing description of the golden age.
PREFACE. Vil
Tn chapter xix., the vanity of a too eager pursuit of fame is pointed out. In chapter xxi., the power and goodness of the Creator in governing and upholding the universe are displayed. Chapter xxv. contains a dissertation on natural disposition. The first part of chapter xxix. describes the weakness and unhappiness of kings, while the second part illustrates the dangers to which royal favourites are exposed by the treatment which Seneca and Papinian met with. The second part of chapter xxx. declares the natural equality of mankind. Chapter xxxiii., part iv., contains an address to God. Chapter xxxv., part iv., contains the fable of the giants warring against Jupiter, and the history of the tower of Babel; and part vi. relates the story of Orpheus and Eurydice. Chapter xxxviii., part i., gives the account of Ulysses and Circe. Chapters xl. and xli. are devoted to an inquiry into divine predestination and human liberty. The last chapter treats of God and eternity.
The Editor has availed himself of the kind permission of Martin Tupper, Esq., D.C.L., &c. &c., to substitute his excellent poetical translation of the Metres for his own literal one, and he tenders his sincere thanks for the per- mission which has been so freely accorded. He also begs to acknowledge the great assistance which he bas derived from the labours of the late J. S. Cardale, Esq., and from the valuable suggestions of his highly-esteemed friend Dr. Bos- worth, Professor of Anglo-Saxon in the University of Oxford.
SAMUEL FOX.
Morley Rectory, March, 1864.
PROEMIUM.
————
wt
AELFRED Kunmz pey pealhycod Siyye bec. 4 hie of bec
Ledene on Enzliyc pende. ypa hio nu iy zedon. hpilum he yecze popd be popde. hpilum anbdzic of andzice. spa ypa he hit pa ypeocoloyc 3 andzicrullicoyc zepeccan mihte fop peem miyt- licum! 4 manizrealbum peopuld” biyzum pe hine oft ezpep ze
on mote ze on lichoman biyzoban. Da biyzu up pme ypipe
eapfop pime® pe on hiy Sazum on pa picu becomon pe he undepranzen heerde. 3 peah pa he pay boc habe zeleopnode 7 og Leedene co Enzliycum ypelle zepende. 4 xepophte hi ere to
leope.* ypa ypa heo nu zedon iy. 3 nu bit 7 pop Loder naman
halyap® elcne papa Se pay boc peedan lyyce. ‘p he pop hme ge- bidde. 7 him ne pice zip he Inc puhchcop onzice ponne he mihce.® roppemse ele mon yceal be hip andzicey maede and be hiy emeccvan sppecan Set he yppecp. J 60n ‘f p he dep :-
1 Cott. mipheum. 2 Bod. popdum 4. § Cott, pumu, * Cott. ba sepophce be hi ervep leobe. 5 Cott. healya’. © Cott. meahze.
PREFACE,
Kine ALrrep was transiator of this book, and turned it from book Latin into English, as it is now done. Sometimes he set word by word, sometimes meaning of meaning, as he the most plainly and most clearly could explain it, for the various and manifold worldly occupations which often busied him both in mind and in body. The occupations are to us very difficult to be numbered, which in his days came upon the kingdoms which he had undertaken, and yet when he had learned this book, and turned 7 from Latin into the English language, he afterwards composed it in verse, as it is now done. And he now prays, and for God’s name implores every one of those who lists to read this book, that he would pray for him, and not blame him, if he more rightly under- stood it than he could. For every man must, according to the measure of his understanding, and according to his leisure, speak that which he speaketh, and do that which he doeth.
TITULI CAPITUM.
I.
ZEpeyc hu Govan zepunnon Romana pice. J hu Boecwuy hi | polbe bepzdan. y Deodpic pa f anfunde. and hme het on | capcepne zebpinzan :- p- 2.
; II. Pu Boeciuy on dam capcepne hir sap eopiende peey :- p. 4
1B
Pu ye Piyd5om com co Boetie epeyc inne on pam capcepne.
7 hme onzan fpefpian :- p- 4 iA
Pu Som hine yimgentde zebed. 3 hiy eapfopu co Lobe meende : p. 6.
Vs Pu ye Piydom hme eft pece J puhte. mid hip anbd- Jpopum .- p- 8. VI. Pu he him pehce biypell bi pepe sunnan. 3 bi oppum cunzlum. 3 bi polenum :- p. 14. VII.
Pu ye Piydom yede pam Mode $ him naht ypipop nepe ponne hic foplopen hepde pa populd yelpa pe hic wp co ze- punod heerde. 4 yeede him birpell hu he hic macian yeeolde zip he heopa pezen beon reeolde. 7 be per yerpey yexele. 3 hu hip zodena peopica ealpa polde hep on populde habban lean :-
p- 16. VITl. |
Pu P Mod andrpopede pepe Lerceadpiyneyye. 3 yaede P hic | hic wzhponan onzeace ycyldiz. eac yeede P hic pape ofpecen mid Sey lapey yane P hic ne mihce him zeandypopian. Da cpap ye fiydom. ip nu zc pinpe unpihepiyneyye iy pu eapp fulneah foppohc. cele nu pa zeyelpa pip pam yopzum °- p. 24.
TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS.
yee First, how the Goths conquered the empire of the Romans, and how Boethius wished to deliver them, and Theodoric then discovered it, and gave orders to take him to prison. __p. 3.
I. How Boethius in the prison was lamenting his hard lot. 5. 1008 : How Wisdom first came to Boethius in the prison, and
|| began to comfort him. p. 5 IEVe
How Boethius singing prayed, and lamented his misfor-
4 tunes to God. p- 7 V.
How Wisdom again comforted and instructed him with his
answers. p- 9. VI.
| How he related to him a parable of the sun and of the
} other heavenly bodies, and of the clouds. p. 15. VII.
How Wisdom said to the Mind, that nothing affected it more, than ¢hat it had lost the worldly goods which it before was accustomed to; and spoke to him a parable, how he
} should act if he should be their servant; and concerning the
ship’s sail; and how he wished to have the reward of all his good works here in ¢his world. Dike
VI.
How the Mind answered the Reason, and said that it per- ceived itself every way culpable ; and said that it was oppressed | with the soreness of trouble, so that it could not answer him. Then said Wisdom: This is still thy fault that thou art almost | despairing ; compare now the felicities with the sorrows.
p- 25.
<A
xii TITULI CAPITUM.
1X Da onzan ye //1;50m ere seczan birpell be pepe sunnan. h° j heo ogephhc ealle oppe yceopan. j-zepioycpap mid hipe leohvell J hu pone ymylcan ye peey pmnder yy :- p- 26._
es
Pu Boecruy yeede he ypycole onzicen hepbe f hic eall yop. pepe ye /iydom yeede. J seo oprophney. 7 Sa yelpa pe he ep _ pende pec xeyelpa beon yceoldan ‘peoheay nepan. 3 hu ye Viyoom. } he mihte zepeccan f he [zeyeeliz |! peepe. paede hip ancop pepe Sa zt fayt on eoppan :- p. 26.
xe
Pu yeo Leyceadpiyney him andypopete and cpeep. } heo pende p heo hime hpechpeznunzer upaharen hepde 3 pulneah ze- bnoht wt pam ilean peoppreipe Se he wp heepde. and acrode hime hpa harte eall } he polde on piyye populde. yume habbap
ny IPR
pelo 3 nabbap ane :- p. 80, XII.
Pu ye Viydom hine lepbde. zip he feyc hur tumbpian polte.
he hic ne yecte up on pone hehycan cnoll ;- p- 36. XIII.
Pu ye Vipdom yede hie meahcan Sa ymealicop pppecan.
foppampe yeo lap hpechpeznunzey eode on hip andzic:- p. 36.
XIV. }
Pu pec Mod cpep hp: him ne yceolde lician peezep land. I hu re Piydom ahyode hpat him belumpe to hipa peezepueyye |
. 40 Vi. Pu yeo Leyceadpiryney yaede hu xerelz seo fpopme eld pey .- p. 48, XVI.
Pu ye Piydom yeede } hihi polbon ahebban foppam anpealde | op pone heofen. and be Deodpicer anpeald 7 Neponey ;- p. 48.
XVII. Pu } Mod yaede P him nerpe seo mexzp ¥ seo zIcpunz foppel ne licode.. bucon co lape he cilade :- p- 58.
1 Bod. unsepeelis.
TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS. Xili
IX. Then began Wisdom again to speak a parable concerning | the sun, how she outshines all other stars, and obscures them ) with her light; and how the raging of the wind troubles the placid sea. p: 27. xX. ; __ How Boethius said, he plainly perceived that it was all true that Wisdom said: and that the prosperity, and the enjoy- | ments which he formerly thought should be happiness, were § nothing: and how Wisdom, that he might show that he § was happy, said, that his anchor was still fast in the earth. é p. 27. XI. ) How Reason answered him, and said, that she thought she { had in some measure raised him up, and almost brought him { to the same dignity which he before had: and asked him who { had all that he would in this world: some have nobility and § have not riches. p. 3l. | XII.
How Wisdom instructed him, that if he were desirous to - build a firm house, he should not set it upon the highest hill- top. p. 37.
XIIT.
How Wisdom said, that they might then argue more closely, because the instruction had in some measure entered into his understanding. p. 37.
XIV. How the Mind said, why should not fair land delight him P _and how Wisdom asked, what of their fairness belonged to him p. 41, XV. How Reason said, how happy the first age was! p: 49.
XVI. How Wisdom said, that men would exalt themselves for | power to heaven: also concerning the power of Theodoric and Nero. p. 49. XVII. How the Mind said, that power and covetousness never well pleased him; but that he toiled with reluctance. p. 59.
x1V TITULI CAPITUM.
XVIIL XIX.
Be hliyan:- pp. 60—68. XX.
Be pepe pipeppeandan pypde. 7 be pepe opyopzan:- p. 70. XXI.
Be dey elmihtizan Gober anpealde. hu he pele eallum hiy
xeycearcum :- p- 72.
XXII.
Pu ye Viydom ¥ seo Leyceadpiyner hepdon pec Mod anes wezpep ze mid smealicpe sppece. ze mid pynpuman yange :- p. 76. XXIII. Pu ye Piydom lepbde pone pe he polde paeeycmbeepeland yapan. he acuhze of epeyc pa popnay. 3 pa fypyay. j} pa unnyccan peod. 3 hu he sede zp hpa bicvepey hpey on bepede. } him
puhze beobpead pi ypecpe :- p. 78. XXIV.
Du menn pilmap Suph ungzelice xeapnunza cuman to anpe
eadizneyye :- p- 80. XXV.
Du Lod pele ealpa zeycearca mid pam bpidlum hip anpealder. y hu ele zerceare ppizap pip sete zecyndey. 3 pilnap ‘p hic cume pibep ponan pe hic ep com: p. 88.
XXVI.
Pu ye fiysom yeede P men mihcon be Lobe ypelce hi maece. J hpeepep ye pela mihce pone mon zedon ypa pelme ‘} he manan ne popfce. J hpapep Boetie eall hip populd heode pa he ze- paelzoye pee :- p. 90.
XXVILI.
Pu ye peopprcipe mez zedon cu ping pone Syrezan pam | oppum dyyezum peonpne. 7 hu Noni pzey fopepeden op pam — azyloenan ypeprdpeene. 3 hu xlcey monney yrel bip py openpe zip he anpald heey :- p. 94.
XXVIII.
Be Nenone pam Layene:- p. 100.
TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS. Xv
XVIII. XIX. Of Fame. pp. 61—69. XX. | Of adverse fortune, and of prosperous. peel, | XXII. | Of the power of Almighty God; and how he governs all { his creatures. p. 73. XXII | How Wisdom and Reason had restored the Mind, both } with profound argument, and with pleasant song. pari, : XXII.
_ How Wisdom instructed the man who would sow fertile 1 land, that he should first take away the thorns, and the furze, /and the useless weeds: and how he said, that if a person had tasted anything bitter, honeycomb seemed the sweeter
} to him. p. 79. XXIV.
How men desire, by different means, to arrive at one
) happiness. p. 81. XXV.
How God governs all creatures with the bridles of his power: and how every creature tends towards its kind, and } desires that it may come thither, from whence it before 7 came. p. 89.
XXVI.
How Wisdom said, that men were able to understand con- cerning God, as in adream: and asked, whether wealth could | make a man so rich that he should not need more: and whether to Boethius, all his condition were agreeable, when he was most prosperous. p- 91.
XXVIII.
How dignity may do two things to the unwise, who is honoured by other unwise persons: and how Nonius was re- buked for the golden chair of state: and how every man’s evil is the more public when he has power. p. 95.
XXVIII. Of Nero the Cesar. p- 101.
if : i xvi TITUIT OAPITUM. ‘i y XXIX, +
Ppepen per cynmzer neaperc 7 hip fpeondycipe meze znizne mon pelizne j palbendne zedon. 3 hu pa oppe ppiend cumap mid pam pelan. 3} epc mid pam pelan zepicap:- p. 102.
XXX. :
Du ye ycop sanz }P ma manna feznodon dyyizer folcer ze- | opolan. Sonne hie feznedon soppa ypella. -p iy } hi pendon hip becepan ponne he pepe. Sonne fezniap hi pey pe hi pceamian yeeolde :- p- 105. XXXII, ;
Pu ye yceal pela neananeyya zepolian pe per lchoman luycar poplecan yceal. j hu mon mex py ilcan peonce cpepan } nevenu yend zeyeelize. zip man cpip pet Sa men yen zerelize Sa heopa lichoman luycum fylizap :- p- 110.
XXXII.
Pu Ser anpeanda pela mepp Sa men pe beop atihce to pam yopum xerelpum. 3 huye piydom ip an anlipe cpaere peepe yaple. J 1p Seah becepa ponne ealle pay hchoman epeercay. 7 peah hpa zezadejue ealle pay andpeapdan zo0d. Sonne ne mez he no pe papop beon ypa peliz ypa he polde. ne he epc him nefp See he wp penbde :- p- 114,
XXXII : ’ Pu ye Vipdom herbe xeceht pam Mode pa anicneyya papa yopena yeelpa. poloe hi pa yelpe zecaecan. 7 bi pam pip ze- yelpum. ‘p ip pela. J anpeald, j peoppyeipe. J Fopemepner. J pilla : p. 118. XXXIV.
Pu ye Piydom hepde zenehc hpec $ hehyce zob peep. poloe | him pa zeneccan hpep hic per. 7 hu of pam mycelan zobe | cumap pa leyyan ;- p. 134.
KXXV.
Pu ye fipdom lepbde f (hod } hic yohte on imnan him f hie} zp ymbucan hic-pohce. ¥ foplecte unnycce ymbhoxan ypa he ypipore mihce. 3 hu Lio pealc ealpa zeycearca 7 eallpa xoba mid pam yceoppoppe hiy zodneyye :- p- 154.
=
TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS. XVil
XXIX. Whether the king’s favour and his friendship are able to ' make any man wealthy and powerful: and how other friends come with wealth, and again with wealth depart. p- 103.
XEXEXS How the poet sung, that more men rejoiced at the error of the foolish people, than rejoiced at true sayings: that is, that _ they thought any one better than he was. Then do they re- joice at that which should make them ashamed. p- 107.
XXXI. How he shall suffer many troubles, who shall yield to the ® lusts of the body; and how any one may, by the same rule, i say that cattle are happy, if he say that those men are happy who follow the lusts of their body. pai.
XXXII.
How this present wealth hinders the men who are attracted to the true felicities: and how wisdom is one single faculty of the soul, and is, nevertheless, better than all the faculties of the body; and though any one should collect together all these present goods, yet cannot he the sooner be so happy as he would, nor has he afterwards that which he before ex-
pected. p- 115. XXXII. How Wisdom, having taught the Mind the resemblances ' of the true felicities, would then teach it the true felicities themselves: also of the five objects of desire, namely, wealth, and power, and honour, and glory, and pleasure. p: 119.
XXXIV. How Wisdom, having explained what the highest good was, would then explain to him where it was; and how from the great good come the less. p- 135.
XXXV.
How Wisdom instructed the Mind, that it should seek within itself what it before sought around it, and should dis- miss vain anxieties as it best might: and how God directs all creatures and all good things with the rudder of his goodness.
p. 155.
b
XViil TITULI CAPITUM.
XXXVI.
Pu $ Mod yede pam Piydome f hic onzeate } him Lod peahce Suph hme $ } he pehce. 7 fop hpy ye zoda Lod lace mz yrel beon. 3 hu yeo zerceadpryney bed P Mod H hic sete on hipe yepidpeene. 7 heo yceolde beon hiy ladveap. 7 hu heo
yeede Sat cu pmz pepen pilla 7 anpeald. zip hpam Sapa auppey |
pana pepe. } heopa ne mihte napep bucon oppum nauht don: p- 170. XXXVII.
Be pam ofepmobdan pican 3 unpihcpyan. 7 hu mon hehp pone heapod beah et pay epnepezey ende. and hu mon yceolde zlcne mon hacan be pam deone pe he zelicoye pape :-
p. 186 XXXVIL
Be Tpoia zepmne.. hu €Eulixer ye cyning hepde tpa Seoda undep pam Larepe. and hu hiy peznay pupdan foprceapene to piuldeopum ;- p- 194.
XXXIX,
Be pyhcpe fiounze 4 be unpihcpe. 7 be pyhcum eabdleane. 4 hu [muyclice pica 7 manizpealde eappopa] cumap co pam zo5um ypa hi co pam yrelum yceolbdan. 3 be pape fopeceohunza Loder 1 be Saepe pypde :- p. 210,
XL.
Pu ele pypd beop z0d. yam heo mannum 70d pince. yam heo him yrel Since :- p- 234. XLI.
Pu Omepuy ye zoba yceop hepede pa sunnan, 7 be pam ppeodome ;- p. 244.
XLII.
Pu pe yceoldan eallon meezne ypypian eepcep Tiobe. ele be hip andzicvey maepe :+ p- 256.
x
TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS. xix
XXXVI.
How the Mind said to Wisdom, that it perceived that God said to it through him that which he said: and asked, why
the good God suffers any evil to be: and how Reason desired _ the Mind to sit in her chariot, and she would be its guide:
and how she said that will and power were two things; and
_ that if to any man there were a deficiency of either of them, _ neither of them could without the other effect anything.
p. 171.
XXXVI. Of proud and unjust rulers; and how man should have the crown at the end of the course: and how we should describe every man by the beast which he was most like. p- 187.
XXXVIII.
Ofthe Trojan war: how Ulysses the king had two countries under the Cesar: and how his thanes were transformed into wild beasts. p. 195.
XXXIX.
Of right hatred, and of unright, and of just recompense : and how various punishments and manifold misfortunes come to the good, as they should to the wicked: and concerning
the predestination of God, and concerning destiny. p. 211.
XL.
How every fortune is good, whether it seem good to men, or whether it seem evil to them. p- 235. XLI.
How Homer the good poet praised the sun: and concern- ing freedom. p- 245. XLI.
How we ought with all our power to inquire after God,
every one according to the measure of his Saat Ht p- °
ye
wn
_
—_
; i: eQ
=
= ——
BOETHIUS.
CAPUT I.
ON dzpe cide pe Goran of SciSdiu meexzpe pip Romana pice
zepin upahoron. 7 mip heopa cynmzum. Rasdzora and Ealle- pica pepon hacne. Romane bupiz abpecon. and eall Icaha
pice } iy becpux pam muntum J Sicilia Sam ealonde in anpald —
xepehton. J pa eptep pam foperppecenan cynmnzum Deodpic yenz to pam ilcan pice. ye Deodpic per Amulmgza. he per [ypiycen. peah he on pam Appianiycan zedpolan Suphpunode. Pe zehec Romanum hiy fpeontycipe. ypa p hi moycan heona ealdpihca pypde beon. Ac he pa xzehac ypide yrele zeleyce. J ypise ppape zeendode mid manezum mane. f py co eacan oppum unapimedum yflum. } he Iohanney pone papan hec oyylean. Da per yum conyul. } pe -hepecoha havap, Boeciuy pey hacen. ye pey in boccpzepcum 3 on populd peapum ye puhcpiyeyca. Se Sa onzeat pa manizfealdan yrel pe ye cyninz Deodpic pip pam Cpiycenandome ¥ pip pam Romamycum picum oybe. he pa zemunde Sapa epneyya 7 papa ealdpihca Se hi undep Sam Carepum heepdon heopa ealdhlapopdum. Da onzan he ymeazan 7 leopmizan on him yelfum hu he } pice dam unpihcpiyan cyninze apeppan mihte. 7 on pyht xeleazpulpa and on pibcpiypa anpald zebpimzan. Sende pa dizellice apendzeppicu co pam Layepe co Lonypcancmopolim. pep ip Cpeca heah bupz 4 heopa cyneycol. rop pam ye Larepe pay heopa ealdhlaropd cynney. beebon hine pec he him co heopa Upipcendome ¥ co heopa ealdbpihcum zerulcumede. Da } onzeat ye pelhpeopa cyninz Deoopic. 6a hec he hme zebpimzan on cancepne 7 pep mne belucan. Da hic Sa zelomp $ ye appypSa pey on ypa micelpe neapaneyye becom. pa pay he ypa micle ypisop on hy Mode
fen dt
e” _ ST. ALBERT'S COLLEGE LIBRARY
BOETHIUS.
——_o——
CHAPTER I.
- Am the time when the Goths of the country of Scythia 4 made war against the empire of the Romans, and with their nett Na Xtoe! A\.
2
\
_ kings, who were called Rhadgast and Alaric, sacked the Roman } city, and reduced to subjection all the kingdom of Italy, which | | is between the mountains and the island of Sicily, and then, after the before-mentioned kings, Theodoric obtained posses; | sion of that same kingdom: Theodoric was of the race of the” Amali; he was a Christian, but he persisted in the Arian heresy. He promised to the Romans his friendship, so that they might enjoy their ancient rights. But he very ill per- formed that promise, and speedily ended with much wicked- ness; which was, that in addition to other unnumbered crimes, he gave order to slay John the Pope. Then was | there a certain consul, that we call heretoha, who was named _ Boethius. He was in book-learning and in worldly affairs _ the most wise. He then observed the manifold evil, which the king Theodorie did against Christianity, and against the Roman senators. He then called to mind the favours and the ancient rights which they had under the Cesars, their ancient lords. Then began he to inquire, and study in him- self, how he might take the kingdom from the unrighteous king, and bring it wrder the power of faithful and righteous men. He therefore privately sent letters to the Cesar, at Constantinople, which is the chief city of the Greeks, and their king’s dwelling-place, because the Ceesar was of the kin of their ancient lords: they prayed him that he would succour them with respect to their Christianity and their ancient rights. When the cruel king Theodoric discovered this, he gave order to take him to prison, and therein lock up. When ‘it happened that the venerable man was fallen into so great B2
4 BOETHIUS. CHAP. II. IT.
zebpered. spa hiy Mod xp ypisop co pam populd selpum zepunod py. J he Sa nanpe fporpe be imnan pam capcepne ne xemunbde. ac he zereoll mpol of Sune on pa flop. 3 hme
aycpehce ypipe unpoc. and opmod hine yelpne onzan pepan I
puy pmgenbde cpeep. CAPUT II.*
DA lod pe ic ppecca zeo lurcbeeplice yonz. ic yeeal nu heoriende pmzan. 3} mid [ypipe] unzepadum popdum zereccan, peah 1c zeo hpilum zecoplice runde. ac ic nu pepende) ZiIpciende OF Zepadpa popda miyfo. me ablendan par unzetpeopan populd yelpa. 7 me pa foplecan ypa blmodne on piy Simme hol. Da
bepeapodon elcepe lustbepneyye pa Sa ic him eppe bere —
cpupode. da pendon hi me heopa bec to and me mid ealle ypomzepican. To phon yceolban la mine fiend sexzan pet 1¢ xeyeeliz mon pepe. hu mez ye beon zeyeeliz se Se on Sam Ze- yelpum Suphpunian ne moc :-
CAPUT III”
§ I. DA ic pa diy leop. cped Boeciuy. xeompiende arunzen hepde. Sa com Sep zan in co me heorencund Piysom. j P min muyinende Wood mid hip popdum zexpecce. 3 pur cpap. Pu ne eapict pu ye mon pe on mimpe ycole pape aed! 4 zeleped. Ac hponon pupde pu mid piyyum populd sopzum pup pipe zeypenced. bucon ic pac pu heyyc Sapa paepna co hnape fopzicen Se ic pe wep yealde. Da chipode? ye Piysom 4 cpap. Lepicap nu apipzede populd sopza of miney pexener Mode,  foppam ze smd pa meeycan yceapan. Lacap hme ere hpeopfan co minum lapum. Da eode ye f/iydsom neap. cpep Boeciuy. minum hpeopriendan zepohce. J hic spa mopul® hpec hpeza* upanepde. adpizde pa mmey® Moder eazan. and hic fpan bhipum popdum.° hpzepep hic oneneope hip porcepmodop.’ mid Sam pe da P Mod pip hip bepende.® Sa zecneop hic ypipe rpeocele hiy azne® modon. ‘p pey re /ipdom pe hit lanze ep cyde 3 leepde.
ac hic onzeac hiy lane ypipe cocopenne ¥ rpipe cobpocenne!” mid
® Boet. lib. i. metrum 1.—Carmina qui quondam, &e,
» Boet. lib. i. prosa 1.—Hece dum mecum, &e.
1 Cott. ayeded. * Cott. cleopode. * Bod. mopohl. 4 Cott. hpugu. 5 Bod. mimeney. © Cott. ppasn hbum popdum. 7 Cott. peeycepmodop. ® Bod. pr bepende. ® Cott. agene. 10 Cott. cotopene 4 ypibe cobposoene,
§1. : BOETHIUS. 5
trouble, then was he so much the more disturbed in his mind, as his mind had formerly been the more accustomed to worldly prosperity ; and he then thought of no comfort in the prison ; but he fell down prostrate on the floor, and stretched himself, very sorrowful, and distracted began to lament himself, and thus singing said :
CHAPTER II.
Tape lays which I, an exile, formerly with delight sung, I shall now mourning sing, and with very unfit words compose.
1 Though I formerly readily invented, yet I now, weeping and
sobbing, wander from appropriate words. To blind me, these unfaithful worldly riches, and to leave me so blinded in this dim hole! At that time they bereaved me of all happiness, when I ever best trusted in them: at that time they turned their back upon me, and altogether departed from me! Wherefore should my friends say that I was a prosperous man? How can he be prosperous, who in prosperity cannot always remain P
CHAPTER III.
§ I. Wuen I, said Boethius, had mournfully sung this lay, then came there into me heavenly Wisdom, and greeted my sorrowful Mind with his words, and thus said: How, art not thou the man who was nourished and instructed in my school ? But whence art thou become so greatly afflicted by these worldly cares? unless, I wot, thou hast too soon forgotten the weapons which I formerly gave thee. Then Wisdom called out and said, Depart now ye execrable worldly cares from my disciple’s mind, for ye are the greatest enemies. Let him again turn to my precepts. Then came Wisdom near, said Boethius, to my sorrowing thought, and it so prostrate somewhat raised, then dried the eyes of my Mind, and asked it with pleasant words, whether it knew its foster- mother. Thereupon, when the Mind turned towards him, it knew very plainly its own mother, that was the Wisdom that long before had instructed and taught it. But it perceived his doctrine much torn and greatly broken, by the hands of foolish persons, and therefore asked him how that happened.
6 BOETHIUS. CHAP.IV |
7 oyyizpa hondum. 7 hine pa gpan! hu } zepupde. Da andppypde~ ye fiybom him 4 yeede. } hiy zmzpan herdon hme spa coto-— penne. pep peep hi ceohhodon hi hme eallne habban yeeoldon. - ac hi zezadepiad monireald Synz on pepe Foptpupunza. } Ons pam zilpe. bucan heopa hpele epc to hype? boce zecippe :-
§ I.° Da ongan ye fiydom hpeopyian op per Mover cyoepneyye. J onzan pa z15d1an ) puy cpzep. €ala on hu zpund- leayum yeade } Mod ppinzp.® ponne hic berceypmap pyye— populde unzeppeepneyya. zip hic Sonne fopzet hip azen leoht. ‘) iy ece zerea, and ppinzp on pa ppembdan piycpo. } pmd populd
=~
yopza. ypa ypa piy Mod nu dep. nu hic nauhe elley naz burae 6
snopnunza | -
§ III. Da ye Piydom pa 3 reo Lerceabpiyney pir leop arunzen heydon. pa onzan he efc sppecan 3 cpep co pam Mode. Ic Zeyeo Se iy nu Fporpe mane Seapf ponne unpotneyye :-
§ IV. Foppam zip pu Se ofpceamian* pilc Smer zedpolan. ponne onzmne ic pe ysona bepan 7 pe bpmze mid me co heofonum. Da andypopode him > unpore Mod 7 cpp. Ppec la hpeec prt piy nu pa zod 7 ‘f edlean.® pe Su ealne pez xehete Sam monnum pe Se heoprumian poldan. ip pip nu pe cpide pe — pu me zeo yxbdeyc. f ye piya Placo cpeede. f pay. pec nan - anpeald nepe puhc bucan yuhtum peapum. Lemhyc pu nu per pa puhcpiyan pm lape 3 fopppycce. foppam hi Smum pillan polbon ysulzan. y pa unpyhcpiyan reondan® upaharene puph heopa pondzebda J puph heopa yellice. } hi py ed meezen heopa
unpihe zepill poppbpmzan, hi pmd mid zipum J mid xepcepeo- |
num’ zerypppode. foppam ic nu pille zeopnhce co Lode cleopian, Onzan pa ziddien. J pus pmzende cpp.
CAPUT IV.?
EALA pu yerppend heoroner 4 eoppan. pu Se on pam ecan —
yecle pucyayc. pu pe on hpedum feepelde pone heofon ymb- hpeopreyc. J Sa cunzlu pu xederc pe zehyprume. 7 pa punnan
pu zebderc P heo mid heone beophcan peiman pa peoyctpe adpeerep —
pepe ypeancan nihce. spa dep eac se mona mid hiy blacan
leohte pec pa beophtan yceoppan Sunniap on pam heorone. ze ~
© Boet. lib. i. metrum 2.—Heu, quam precipiti, &e.
4 Boet. lib. i. metrum 5.—O stelliferi conditor orbis, &c.
1 Cott. ppesn. 2 Cott. mhepe. 3 Bod. dpmss. * Cott. onyceamian, 5 Cott. 5005 and ba edlean. § Cott. piendon, 7 Cott. serptpodum.
mB It)11T. Ly. BOETHIUS. 7
Then answered Wisdom to him and said, that his scholars had thus torn him, when they endeavoured to possess them- selves of him entirely. But they gather much folly by pre- sumption, and by arrogance, unless any of them to their amendment return.
§ II. Then began Wisdom to grieve for the frailty of the Mind, and began to sing, and thus said: Alas! into how un- fathomable gulf the Mind rushes when the troubles of this world agitate it. If it then forget its own light, which is eternal joy, and rush into the outer darkness, which are the cares of this world, as this Mind now does, now it knows nothing else but lamentations.
§ IIL. When Wisdom and Reason had sung this lay, then began he again to speak, and said to the Mind: I see that there is now more need to thee of comfort, than of bewailing.
§ IV. Therefore, if thou wilt be ashamed of thine error, then will I soon begin to bear thee up, and will bring thee
with me to the heavens. Then answered the sorrowful Mind
to him, and said: What! O, what! are these now the goods, and the reward, which thou always promisedst to the men who would cbey thee? Is this now the saying, which thou formerly toldest me that the wise Plato said, that was, that no power was right without right mannersP Seest thou now, that the virtuous are hated and oppressed, because they would follow thy will: and the wicked are exalted through their crimes and through their self-love? That they may the better accomplish their wicked purpose they are promoted with gifts and with riches. Wherefore I will now earnestly call upon God. He then began to sing, and thus singing said:
CHAPTER IV.
O rHov Creator of heaven and earth! thou who reignest - on the eternal seat! thou who turnest the heaven in a swift course! thou makest the stars obedient to thee: and thou makest the sun, that she with her bright splendour dispels the darkness of the swarthy night. So does also the moon with his pale light, which obscures the bright stars in the
~
8 BOETHIUS. CHAP. ¥.
eac hpilum pa yunnan heope leohtey bepearap ponne he betpux uy J hine pypp. ze eac hpilum pone beophcan yceoppan pe pe
atap mopzenyceoppa. pone ilcan pe hacap oppe naman zfen- ~ yceoppa. pu pe pam pmcepdazum yeleyc pcopte ciba 3 pay yumepey dahum lanzpan. pu pe pa tpeopa puph pone yreapican pid noppan J earcan on heepreyc cid heopa leaga bepeagayt. J eft on lenccen oppu lear yelleyc. puph pone ymylcan yupan peycepnan pmd. Ppec pe ealle zercearca heoprumiap 4 pa ze- yecneyya pmpa beboda healdap. bucan men anum ye de orepheopd. Eala Su elmihtiza yerppend and pihtend eallpa zerceayca. help nu pinum eapmum moncynne. Ppy pu la Dpihten wpe polderc f seo pypd spa hpypgan yceolte. heo ppeap pa unyeildizan 3 nauht ne ppeap pam yeildizum. piccap manyulle on heahyeclum. 7 halize undep heopa potum ppy- cap. yticiap zehydde beophce cpercay. 3 pa unpihcpiran calad pa pihcpiyan. nauht ne depezap monnum mane apay. ne P leaye lot pe beop mid pam pnencum beppizen. foppam pent nu yulneah eall moncyn on tpeonunza zip seo pypd spa hpeopran mot on yfelpa manna zepill. 7 pu heone nele ycipan. €ala mm Dpihcen. pu pe ealle zercearca opepyihyc. hapa nu mildelice on _ pay eapman eopSan. and eac on eall moncyn. foppam hit nu eall pnp on Sam ySum diyye populde :-
CAPUT V.°
§ I. DA } Mod pa pillic yap cpepende py. J pir leop pm- xende pey. ye oom pa 3 yeo Leyceadpyner him bhpum eazum on locude.! 7 he pop per Moder zeomepunze? ney nauht zebpered. ac cpap to pam Mobde. Sons, ypa ic pe epee on Siyye unpocneyye zereah Sur mupciente.® ic onzeac p Su pepe ucarpapen* of pmeyr peedep epele. } 1p of mmum lapum. pep Su him Fone oF Sa pu Sine feepcpeedneyye foplece. 3 pen- bey't ‘P yeo peond® par populd pende heope azeney poncey bucon Loder zepeahce. 3 hip parpunze.® 3 monna zepyphcum. Ic pyce P pu ucarapen peepe. ac ic nyyce hu feop. xp pu pe yelp hit. me zepehteyc mid pmum ysapepibum. Ac peah pu nu fiep yie’ ponne pu pepe. ne eapt pu peah ealler of pam eapde adpipen. peah pu Sep on xedpolose. ne zebpohce Se eac
© Boet. lib. i. prosa 5.—Hee ubi continuato dolore, &e.
1 Bod. eahum on locodon, 2 Cott. seompunsa. 3 Cott. mupe miende. 4 Cott. ucadpiren, 5 Cott. plo pypd. & Cott. sebayunsa 7 Bod. yp reo.
7 a ee) 219 5 gS Ea
“ §1. BOETHIUS. Beak me heaven: and sometimes bereaves the sun of AL BRA P y he is betwixt us and her; and sometimes the bright star which we call the morning star; the same we call by another name, the evening star. Thou, who to the winter days givest short times, and to the summer’s days, longer! Thou, who the trees, by the stark north-east wind in harvest-time, of _ their leaves bereavest; and again in spring, other leaves _givest, through the mild south-west wind! What! do all creatures obey thee, and keep the institutions of thy com- mandments, except man alone, who is disobedient? O, thou _ almighty maker and governor of all creatures, help now thy miserable mankind. Wherefore, O Lord, ever wouldest thou, ‘that fortune should so vary? She afflicts the innocent, and afflicts not the guilty. The wicked sit on high seats, and trample the holy under their feet. Bright virtues lie hid, and the wicked deride the virtuous. Wicked oaths in no wise injure men, nor the false lot which is with fraud con- cealed. Therefore almost all mankind will now proceed in doubt, if fortune may thus vary according to the will of evil men, and thou wilt not control her. O, my Lord, thou who _overseest all creatures, look now mercifully on this miserable earth, and also on all mankind: because it now all struggles in the waves of this world,
CHAPTER V.
§ I. Wuitst the Mind was uttering such sorrow, and was singing this lay, Wisdom and Reason looked on him with cheerful eyes; and he was nothing disturbed on account of the Mind’s lamentation, but said to the Mind: As soon as I first saw- thee in this trouble, thus complaining, I perceived that thou wast departed from thy father’s country, that is from my precepts. Thou departedst therefrom when thou didst abandon thy fixed state of mind, and thoughtest that Fortune governed this world according to her own pleasure, without God’s counsel, and his permission, and men’s deserts. I knew that thou wast departed, but I knew not how far, until thou thyself toldest it to me, by thy lamentations. But though thou art now farther than thou wast, thou art not nevertheless entirely driven from the country; though thou hast wandered therein. Nor, moreover, could any other
10 BOETHIUS. CHAP. vg : nan opep man on pam zedpolan bucan pe yylpum. puph pme- axene zemeleyce.! ne yceolbe pe eac nan man ppelcer co- zeleyan pep du zemunan poldeyc hpylepa zebypbda pu pepe 7~ hpylepa bupzpapa fop populde. oppe ere zayclice hpileey zepep- — yerpey Su pene on Smum Mode. J on pmpe* zerceadpipneyye. *f ip pu eapc an papa pihtpiyenpa ¥ papa pihcpillendpa. pa beop pepe heofencundan lepuyalem bupzpape. of pepe neppe nan. — buon’ he rely polde. ne peapp adpigen. } ip of bir zodan pilla.— pepe pep he pepe. simle he heyde pone mid him. ponne he pone mid him herbe. pepe pep he pepe. ponne pey* he mid hiy agnum cynne. J mid hiy aznum buphpapum on hip — aznum eapde ponne he pey on pape pyhtpiyepa xemanan. — Spa hpa ponne spa pey pyppe bip } he on heopa Seopbome — beon mot. ponne bid he on pam hehycan fppeodome. Ne onycunize ic no pey neopepan and py uncleenan ytope. zIF 1¢ pe zepabne zemece. Ne me na? ne lye mid xlaye xepophtpa paza ne heahyecla® mid zolbe 7 mid zImmum zZepenedpa. ne boca mid zolde appicenna me spa ypype ne lyre. ypa me lyyet on pe pihcey pillan. Ne yece ic no hep pa bec. ac } } pa bec popycenc’ peer ic pm’ zepic ypipe pate. pu yeofoderc pa pon- pypo? ezpep ze on papa unpihcpiypa anpealba heaneyye. ze on minpie unpuppneyye and fopereupeneyye. xe on papa man- — yulpa foppropleceneyre on pay populd ypeda. Ac foppon pe pe iy pipe’? micel unpocneyy nu zecenze.!! ze of Sum yppe. ze oy Sinum™ znopnunza. ic Se ne mez nu zet Zeandpypdan zp Son Sey cid’? pypd :-
§ IL! Foppan eall 4 mon unzidlice onzinp.'* nefp hic no xlcepne!® ende. Donne pepe ysunnan yema on Auzuycur monpe hacayc yemp. ponne dyyezap ye pe ponne pile hpile peed Oppeycan pam opium! rupum. ppa dep eac ye Se pmctpezum pedepum pile blopman!” yecan. Ne miht pu pm ppinzan on mudne pincep.!§ Seah Se pel lyrce peapmey muytey :-
§ IIL. Da chipode re Pipdom 4 cpep. Moc 1c nu cunnian hpon pmne!® peeycpeednezye. pat 1c panon”? onzicon meeze hpo- nan”! ic pm cilan yeyle y hu. Da andpypde P Mod 7 cpap.
£ Boet. lib. i. metrum 6,.—Cum Phebi radiis grave, &e.
& Boet. lib. i. prosa 6.—Primum igitur paterisne, &e.
' Cott. semeleyce. 2 Bod. pmne 3 Bod. buza. * Bod. pepe. 5 Cott. no. § Bod. sephcpa heahrecla. 7 Bod. yoppens. 8 Cott. pat 1p bin. ® Cott. poonpypd. © Cott. rpa. ™ Cott. get setengZe. 2 Cott. bmpe 18 Cott. cud. 4 Cott. uncudlice onsynd, & Bod. zelvane. 16 Cott. Spysum. 17 Cott. bloyeman. 18 Bod. ppmsan on medde pintep. 19 Bod. bin. 2 Cott. bonan. 21 Cott. hponon.
Seiseaen BOETHIUS. 11
man lead thee into ‘error, except thyself, through thine own negligence. Nor could any one thus believe it of thee, when thou wouldest call to mind, of what families thou wast, and of what citizens, as to the world: or again, spiritually, of what society thou wast in thy mind, and in thy reason: that is that thou art one of the just, and of those who will rightly, who are the citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem. Thence no one was ever driven against his own will, that is from his right will. Wheresoever he might be, he had this always with him; when he had this with him, wheresoever he might be, he was with his own kin, and with his own citizens, in his own land, when he was in the company of the just. Whosoever, then, is worthy of this, that he may be in their service, he is in the highest freedom. I shun not this inferior, and this unclean place, if I find thee well in- structed. Jam not desirous of walls wrought with glass, or of thrones ornamented with gold and with jewels; nor am I so desirous of books written with gold, as I am desirous of a right will in thee. J seek not here books, but that which books are profitable for, that 1 may make thy mind perfectly right. Thou complainedest of evil fortune, both on account of the height of unjust power, and on account of my mean- ness and dishonour; and also on account of the uncontrolled license of the wicked, with respect to these worldly goods. But as very great trouble has now come upon thee, both from thine anger and from thy sorrow, I may not yet answer thee, before the time for it arrives.
§ IL. For whatsoever any one begins out of season, has no good end. When the sun’s brightness in the month of August hottest shines; then does he foolishly, who will at that time sow any seed in the dry furrows. So also does he, who will seek flowers in the storms of winter. Nor canst thou press wine at mid-winter, though thou be desirous of warm must.
§ III. Then spake Wisdom, and said: May I now inquire a little concerning the fixedness of thy mind, that I may thereby discover whence and how I may effect thy cure? Then answered the Mind, and said: Inquire as thou wilt.
12 BOETHIUS, CHAP. V.
Cunna ypa pu pille. Da cpep seo Lerceadpiyney.! Gelerre? pu pec yeo pypd pealde pire populde. od3e auhe [zoder] rpa zepeoppan mze bucan pam pyphcan.® Da andpypde $ Mod J cped. Ne zelype* ic no } hic zepeoppan muhce ypa enbe- bypdlice. ac co yopan® 1c pat $ ce Lod pihcepe ip bir azner
at
peopcey. J 1c no ne peapp of pam yopan zelearan. Da and-—
pypoe ye Vipoom ere 3 cpep. Ymbe f ice pu zyddodeyc nu hpene zp and cpxde. } ele puht ppom Lode piyce® hip phe ciman. Jj hiy pihce zerecneyre fuleobe bucan menn anum. FOppam ic pundpize ypipe unzemeclice hpet pe reo’ oppe hpet pu mene nu pu pone zelearan hepyc. Ac pic peulon peah zit Seoplicon ymbe f beon.® 1c naz ful zeape ymbe hpet pu zyc* cpeoyt. Zeyeze me. nu pu cpiyc H pu nah"? ne cpeoze P ce Lod pyre populbe pihcepe™ ie. hu he ponne polbe f heo pepe. Da andpynd | Mod 4 cpap. Uneape ic mez fopycandan pine acrunza. j cpiyc peah ‘ 1c pe andpypdan yeyle. Se /iyd5om pa cpep. Venyc Su ‘ 1¢ nyce pone pol!? pmpe zedpefedneyye Se Su mis ymbganzen eapct. ac yeze me hpelcey ender ele anzin pimze. Da andpypse } Mody cpap. Ic hic zemunbe zeo. ac me herp peor znopnunz pepe zemynde benumen. Da cpxd ye Viydom. aye Su hponan ele puht come."® Da anbdpypde Mod 7 cpep. Ic pac ele puhc spam Lode com. Da cpep ye Viydom. Pu mez pet beon. nu pu P anzm payc. f Su eac pone ende nyce. foppam yeo Lebperedner mez fp Mode onypcypian.!*
ac heo hit ne mez hiy zepiccey bepeapien. Ac ic polde } pu me ~
yeedeyct hpapep pu piyceyc!> hpeee pu yelp pepe. Pic pa andpypde J cpep. Ie pac f 1c on hbbendum men y on xzerceadpiyum eom Jj peah on deadlicum. Da andpypde ye //1ysom 4 cpep. Payc pu abc’® oppey bi pe yelpum co yseczanne bucan! } punu yedeyc. Da cpep } Mod. Nav ic nauht oppey. Da cpap ye Viybom. Nu 1c habbe!® onzicen Sme opmobdneyye. nu Su elf nayt hpet pu yelp eapt. ac ic pac hu pm man zecilan!® yceal. foppam pu yeedeyc f pu ppecca”? pepe 4 benearod elcer zober. yoppam pu neycerc hp pu pape. pa pu cypdeyc P pu neyteyc hpelcey ender xlc anzm pilnode. pa Su pendeyc ‘f* ypceop-
' Cott. Sceadpipney. 2 Bod. neleyys.  * Bod. pyphtum. * Bod.
selipde. 5 Cott. pobum. § Cott. pire. 7 Cott. Ty. § Cott. bion. 9 Cott. Z1ez. 0 Cott. noh. 1 Cott. plhepiyige. —-? Cott. dem. %Cott.cume. ™ Cott. arcypzan. ™ Cott. pre, 1° Cott.
auhz. 1 Cott. buzon, 18 Cott. heebbe. Cott. cian. 20 Cott. ppeccea.  ” Cott, pat ve,
§ 111. BOETHIUS. 13
Then said Reason: Dost thou believe that Fortune governs this world, or that aught of good can be thus made, without the Maker? Then answered the Mind, and said: I do not believe that it could be made so full of order; but I know forsooth that God is governor of his own work, and I never swerved from this true belief. Then answered Wisdom again, and said: About that very thing thou wast singing a little while ago, and saidst, that every creature from God knew its right time, and fulfilled its right institution, except man alone. Therefore I wonder beyond measure, what it can be, or what thou meanest, now thou hast this belief. We must, however, inquire still more deeply concerning it. I do not know very well about what thou still doubtest. Tell me, since thou sayest that thou doubtest not that God is governor of this world, how He, then, would that it should be. Then answered the Mind, and said: I can scarcely understand thy questions, and yet thou sayest that I must answer thee. Wisdom then said: Dost thou think that I am ignorant of the severity of thy trouble, that thou art encompassed with? But tell me, to what end does every beginning tend? Then answered the Mind, and said: I remembered it formerly, but this grief has deprived me of the recollection. Then said Wisdom: Dost thou know whence every creature came? Then answered the Mind, and said: I know that every creature came from God. Then said Wisdom: How can it be, that now thou knowest the beginning, thou knowest not also the end? for grief may agitate the mind, but it cannot bereave it of its faculties. But I desire that thou wouldest inform me, whether thou knowest what thou thyself art. It then answered, and said: I know that I am of living men, and rational, and neverthe- less of mortal. Then answered Wisdom, and said: Knowest thou anything else, to say of thyself, besides what thou hast now said? Then said the Mind: I know nothing else. Then said Wisdom: I have now learned thy mental disease, since thou knowest not what thou thyself art: but I know how I must cure thy disease. For this reason thou saidst thou wert an exile, and bereaved of all good, because thou knewest not what thou wert. Thou showedst that thou didst not know to what end every beginning tended, when thou thoughtest that
14 BOETHIUS. CHAP. VI.
leaye men ¥ peceleare pepon zerelize 3 pealdendayr pyre populde. 7 peep pu cypderc eac pu nyycere mid hpilean? zenece Lod pylz piyye populde. oppe hu he polde } heo pepe. pa pu peedeyc fH pu pendeyc? p pior ylipne pynd par populd pende bucan Lobdey peahce.® ac* per ypipe micel pleoh } Su ypa penan yceolderc. Ney hic na’ $ an } pu on unzemechicum unzerelpum pepe. ac eac } pu fulneah mid ealle roppupte.
Danca nu Lote } he se zerulcumade pec ic pin zepit mid =
ealle ne roplec. Ve habbad nu zeot pone meycan Sel pepe cyndpan pmpe hele.® nu pu zeleopyc P yeo pypd Suph hie yelpne bucan Lobey zepeahte pay populd pendan ne meze. nu pu ne peanfe pe nauht ondpedan. foppam pe of pam lyclan ypeapcan de Su mid pepe cyndpan zerenze lier leoht pe on- hehce.? Ac hic nip zt ye tima f 1¢ pe healicop maze onbpyp- dan. roppam hic ip elcey moder pre ‘> yona ypa hit foplec yopepidayr. ypa folzap hic leayypellunza. of pam ponne onzin- nad peaxan pa muiycay-pe } Mod zedpefap. 3 mud ealle fops- plmad pa sopan zepiehpe ypelce muiytay ypelce nu on Sinum Mobde pmodan. Ac ic hie yceal epeye xepmmian.® 1c yrSSan py ep meeze pec sope leoht on pe zebpmgzan :-
CAPUT VI."
LOLA nu be pepe yunnan. 7 eac be odpum cunglum. ponne ypeaptan polenu him befopan zap. ne mazon hi ponne heopa leohc yellan. ypa eac ye supepna pmd hplum miclum ycopme zedperep pa yee Se ep pay pmylce pedepe xleyhlucpu on co yeonne. ponne heo ponne ypa xemenzed pypd mid San ypum. ponne pypp heo ypipe hpade unzladu. peah heo zp zladu pepe on co locienne. Ppeec eac ye bpoc. peah he ypipe of hip puhe pyne. ponne pap micel ycan pealprende of pam heahan munte on innan fealp. 7 hine codeld. 3 him hip puht pyner piprcenc. spa 508 nu pa peoytpo pmpe zedperedneyye pippcandan minum leohtum lapum. Ac zip pu piluize on pihtum zelearan yope leoht oncnapan. aryp fpam pe pa yrfelan yelpa J Sa un- netcan. J eac pa unnetcan unzeyelpa. Jj pone yrlan eze pyre populde. ip pec Su Se ne anhebbe on ofepmeccto on pinpe xeyundrulneyye J on pinpe opropzneyye. ne eft pe ne zeoptpype
h Boet. lib. i. metrum 7,—Nubibus atris, &e.
1 Cott. hpeleepe. ? Cott. pende. *% Cott. sebeahte. 4 Cott. eac. 5 Cott. no. © Cott. heelo. 7 Cott. onlyhte. ® Cott. pce. 9% Bod. sebinngian,
|
CHAP. VI. - BOETHIUS. 15
outrageous and reckless men were happy and powerful in this world: and moreover thou showedst that thou didst not know with what government God rules this world, or how He would: that it should be, when thou saidst that thou thoughtest that _ this inconstant Fortune changes this world without God’s counsel. But it was a very great peril that thou shouldest
§ so think. Not only wast thou in immoderate trouble, but
_ thou hadst well-nigh altogether perished. Thank God, there- fore, that he has assisted thee, so that I have not entirely for- saken thy mind. We have already the chief part of the fuel _ for thy cure, now thou believest that Fortune cannot of her- _ self, without God’s counsel, change this world. Now thou _ hast no need to fear anything, for from the little spark which thou hast caught with this fuel, the light of life will shine upon | thee. But it is not yet time that I should animate thee more _ highly: for it is the custom of every mind, that as soon as it | forsakes true sayings, it follows false opinions. From hence, _ then, begin to grow the mists which trouble the mind, and withal confound the true sight, such mists as are now on thy
} mind. But I must dispel them first, that I may afterwards
the more easily bring upon thee the true light.
CHAPTER VI.
Loox now at the sun, and also at the other heavenly
| bodies; when the swarthy clouds come before them, they
cannot give their light. So also, the south wind sometimes with a great storm troubles the sea, which before, in serene weather, was transparent as glass to behold. When it then is so mingled with the billows it is very quickly unpleasant, though it before was pleasant to look upon. So also is the brook, though it be strong in its right course, when a great stone rolling down from the high mountain falls into it, and divides it, and hinders it from its right course. In like manner does the darkness of thy-trouble now withstand my enlightened precepts. But if thou art desirous with right faith to know the true light; put away from thee evil and vain joys, and also the vain sorrows, and the evil fear of this world; that is, that thou lift not up thyself with arrogance,
16 BOETHIUS. CHAP. VII.
naner zober on nanpe pipeppeapdneyye. popsam pec Mod ylemle bid zebunden mid zedperedneyye. pep pyya cpeza yrela aupep picyad ;- :
CAPUT VII!
§ I. DA zerprzobe ye Yiybom ane lycle hpile. oppec he onzeac pey Moder mzepancay. pa he hi pa onzicen hzrbde. da cped he. Ing ic pme unpocneyre on piht onzicen hebbe. ponne niy pe nauhc! yprpop ponne pet pu foplopen here. pa populd yelda pe pu ep hepdeyc. 7 xeompayct nu foppam pe heo onhpypred iy. Ic onzice xenoh ypeocule } a populd yeelpa mid pipe manizne ypecneyye ypipe lycelice oleccap pam Modum pe hi on layc pillap ypiporc beypican. 4 ponne zt nihycan. ponne hy ley peenap.” hi on ofepmodneyye® foplecap on pam meyran rape. Ing Su nu pican pilc hponan hy cumap. ponne mihc* pu onzican’ hi cumad of populd zicpunza. Lig pu ponne heopa peapay pican pilc. ponne miht pu onzycan ‘p hie ne beop nanum men zecpeope.® be pem pu mihe’ onzican $ pu pep nane myphpe on nefpbdeyc. Sa pa pu hie hepbdeyc. ne eft nane ne roplupe. pa pa pu hve foplupe. Ic pende  1¢ pe x10 zelaped heyde $ pu hi onenapan cupeyc.® 7 1¢ pice® f pu hi onreune- dey. pa pa pu hie heepberc. peah pu heona bpuce. Ie pce! pu mine cpiday prs heopa pillan ofc peedeyc. ac ic pat P nan zepuna ne mez nanum man! beon onpended. Pp pec Mod ne ye be pumum dele onycryped. poppam pu eant eac nu of pmpe youlneyye ahpopren ;-
§ IL.‘ Eala Mod. hp bepeapp pe on pay” cane 7 on par znopnunza. hpec hpezu unzepunelicey!® } pe on becumen ip ypelce oppum monnum exp ‘ ilce ne exlede. Ing pu ponne penyc hic on pe zelonz ye P pa populd yelpa on pe ypa onpenda yinc. ponne eapt pu on zedpolan, ac heona peapay pint ypelce. hie beheoldon on pe heona!* azen zecynd. J on heona!l® pandlunza hie zecypdon heopa fercpedneysye.!® ppilce.!? hy'®
i Boet. lib. ii, prosa 1.—Posthee panlisper obticuit, &e. k Boet. lib. ii. prosa 1.—Quid est igitur, o homo, &e. | 1Cott. nohz. * Cott. penad.  % Cott. opmodneyyre. * Cott. meahz, | 5 Cott. onzecvan, 6 Bod. ne tpeope. 7 Cott. meahz. 8 Cott. cube. 9 Cott, and 1c piyre. © Cott. pire. 1 Cott. men. 2 Bod. ba. | 8 Cott. penys bu ‘} hichpes miper pie. o8Se hpec hpusu ungepiylicey. | ™ Cott. hiopa. 1 Cott. hiopa,. 1 Cott, unreyctpedneyre. 7 Cott. — ypylce. 18 Cott. hi. |
§ 1.1. BOETHIUS. 17
in thy health, and in thy prosperity; nor again, despair of any good in any adversity. For the Mind is ever bound with misery, if either of these two evils reigns.
CHAPTER VII.
§ I. Tarn was Wisdom silent a little while, till he per- ceived the Mind’s thoughts. When he had perceived them, then said he: If I have rightly understood thy trouble, nothing affects thee more than this, that thou hast lost the
| worldly prosperity which thou formerly hadst, and now
lamentest because it is changed. I perceive clearly enough that worldly goods with many an allurement very deceitfully flatter the minds which they intend at last utterly to betray : and then at length, when they least expect it, scornfully leave them in the deepest sorrow. If thou now desirest to know whence they come, then mayest thou learn that they come from worldly covetousness. If thou then wilt know their manners, thou mayest learn that they are not faithful to any ' man. Hence thou mayest understand that thou hadst no
_ pleasure when thou hadst them; nor again, didst lose any when thou didst lose them. I thought that I had formerly instructed thee, so that thou mightest know them; and I knew that thou despisedst them when thou hadst them, though thou didst use them. I knew that thou, against their will, didst often repeat my sayings. But I know that no custom can be changed in any man without the mind being in some measure disquieted. Therefore how art also now moved from thy tranquillity.
§ II. O Mind, what has cast thee into this care, and into these lamentations? Is it something unusual that has hap- pened to thee, so that the same before ailed not other men? If thou then thinkest that it is on thy account that worldly goods are so changed towards thee, then art thou in error: for their manners are such. They kept towards thee their own nature, and in their changeableness they show their con- stant state. They were exactly, when they most allured thee, such as they are now, though they flattered thee with false happiness. Thou hast now understood the unstable promises
Cc
18 BOETHIUS. CHAP. VII.
pepon pihce pa hi de meye zeoleccan ypilce hi nu pmbdon.— peah pe hy pe oleccan’ on pa leayan yelpa. Nu pu hagyt onzycen pa ponclan cpupa? per blindan luster. Sa cpropa Se Se nu yimbdon opene. hi smdon zc mid manezum oppum behelebde. Nu pu payc hpelce peapay pa populd yselpa habbap 3 hu hi | hpeappiap. Ing pu ponne heopa pezen beon pile. 7 pe heona beapay liciap. to hpon mypuyc pu ypa rprpe. hp: ne hpeapfoye Su — eac mid him. zip du ponne heopa untpeopa onycunize. ofep- hoza® hi ponne J adpip hi ppam pe. foppam* hi ppanap pe co— pmpe unpeanere:- Darlcan pe Se zedydon nu pay znopnunza. yoppam pe pu hi hepdeyc. pa wean pe peepon on yoilneyye. Zip pu hi na ne unbdeprenze:- Da ilcan pe habbap nu heona azney pancey roplecan. naler pmey. pa pe nefpe nanne mon bucon ysopze ne foplecap. Dyncap pe nu ypipe Sype° J ypipe leope pa pmz Sa pe naupep ne ymt ne zetpepe to habbenne. ne eac ede co foplecanne. ac ponne heo hpam fpom hpeop- yende beods. he hi yceal mid pam meycan yape hip mobdey poplecan;- Nu du hie ponne eptep pmum pillan pe xetpepe habban ne mihc.° 3 hy pe pilap on mupnunga’ xebpmgzan. - ponne hie pe ypam hpeoprap. co hpaem cumap hi ponne eller. bucan to tacnunze yopzey Jj anpyealdey paper :- Ne pmdon pa populd yzlSa ana ymb co pencenne pe mon ponne herp. ac xele zleap Mod behealc hpelene ende hi habbap. 7 hic ze- papenap zxpep ze pip heona pneaunza ze pip olecunza. Ac zip¢ pu pile beon heopa Sezn.* ponne yeealt pu zeopne xepolian xe hpec py pe co heona penunzum. yj co heopa peapum. 4 to heona pillan belimpp. Ing pu ponne pilnayc  heo pop Smum pinzum oppe peapar nimen. oppe® heopa pilla y heopa xepuna iy. hu ne unpeoppayt pu ponne pe yelpne. paec pu pps!” pip pam hlapopdrerpe pe pu yelp zecune ¥ ppa peah ne meahc" hiona pidu Jj heopa zecynd onpendan. Ppec pu pacyc zip Su piney peiper yezl onzean Sone pmd cobpedrc. } pu ponne lecyc eal eopep yepeld co pey pinderdome. ypa zip pul? pe yelpne to anpealde pam populd yeelpum xerealderc. hic iy phe pet pu eac heona peapum fulzanze. Yenc pu P Su p hpepfende hpeol. ponne hic on pyne pypp. maze oncyppan;- Ne miht pu pon ma papa populd yeelpa hpeappunza onpendan :-
1 Cott. holcen. ? Cott. panclan tpeopa. 3 Cott. orephige. * Wanting in Bod. MS. ® Cott. diope. 6 Cott. meahc. ” Cott. #|
mupcuns a. 8 Cott. Ses5n 7 hiopa hiepa. ® Cott. obep. 10: Bod. §| pilz. 1 ne meahct is wanting in Bod. MS. ” Cott. ypaeac sp bu.
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 19
of this blind pleasure. These promises which are now ex- posed to thee, are yet to many others concealed. Thou now knowest what manners worldly goods have, and how they change. If thou, then, art desirous to be their servant, and their manners are pleasing to thee, wherefore mournest thou so much? Why changest thou not also with them? But
if thou wouldst avoid their deceits, then despise them, and
drive them from thee, for they seduce thee to thy ruin. The same things which have now occasioned to thee these lamenta- tions, because thou hadst them, would have suffered thee to be in tranquillity if thou never hadst obtained them. The same things have now forsaken thee, of their own will, not of thine, which never forsake any man without occasioning sorrow. Do these things now seem to thee very dear and very precious, which are neither constant to possess, nor yet easy to relinquish: but when they are departing from any one, he shall with the greatest sorrow of his mind relinquish them ? Since, then, thou canst not, according to thy wish, have them faithful to thee, and they will bring thee into mourning when they depart from thee; for what else then do they come, but for a token of care and unmixed sorrow? The worldly goods are not alone to be thought about which we at the time pos- sess, but every prudent mind observes what end they have; and forewarns itself both against their threats, and against ther allurements. But if thou choosest to be their servant, then oughtest thou willingly to bear whatever belongs to their service, and to their manners, and to their will. If thou, then, art desirous that they should, on thy account, assume other manners than their will and custom is; dost thou not then dishonour thyself, inasmuch as thou rebellest against the government which thou thyself hast chosen ? and nevertheless thou canst not change their custom or their nature. Besides, thou knowest that if thou spreadest the sail of thy ship to the wind, thou then leavest all thy course to the power of the wind. So, if thou hast given up thyself to the power of worldly goods, it is right that thou shouldest also follow their manners. Thinkest thou, that thou canst turn back the revolving wheel when it moves in its course? No more canst thou alter the inconstancy of worldly pros- perity. ' c2
a
20 BOETHIUS. CHAP. VII.
§ III.' Ic polbe nu zec P prc mane! pppeecan ymbe pa populd— yelda. co hpam etpice pu me ep } du hi poplupe pop mmum Smzum:- Pp. mupenayc? pu pd min. ypilce pu pop mmum= Smzum yeo® Smey azner benumen. ezpep xe pmpa pelona. ze_ pmey peopprerpey. eezpep papa pe com ep fppom me. pa hi pe- on lenbde pepon:- Ure nu cellan befopan yplcum Seman ypilce pu pille. 3 zip pu zeyepan miht } emiz Seaplic man ypelcey hpe azney ahte. 1c hit pe ert eal azipe P pu zepeccan miht H- pmey azney pepe:- “Dyrme* 4 unzelepedne ic pe undeppenz pa pu perc to monnum become. ¥ pa pe zecydde. 3 zelapde. J pe pa ynyccpo on zebpohce pe pu pa populd ane mid bezeate. pe pu nu ysopziende anroplece. pu mihc pey habban pane $° pu minpa xia pel bpuce. Ne miht pu no zepeccan. pu pmer auhc roplupe. Ppt seorayc pu pipme:- Pabbe ic pe apep be- numen pmpa zipena papa pe pe Fypom me comon:- Atle yop pela. and yop peoppyeipe sindon mme azne peopay. 3 spa hpep ypa ic beo he beop mid me. Vice pu fop sos. zip f pme azne® pelan papon pe pu mendeyc } pu foplupe. ne mihveyt pu hi? fopleoyan, Eala hu ypele me d5op maneze populd menn mid— Sam 1c ne mot pealban mmpaaxzenna peopa.® Se heofen mot bpenzon leohze dazay. 4 eft } leoht mid peoycpum behelian.® } zeap moc bpenzan blorman." 4 py lean zeape ere xeniman.!! yeo yee moc bpucan smylcpa ypa. 3 ealle xepceapcta motan heopa zepunan and heonpa pillan bepitizan butan me anum. Ie ana eom benumen minpa peapa Jj eom xetozen co Fpemdum peapum. Suph Sa unzepyloban zicyungze” populd monna. Suph pa zicpunza hi me habbap benumen miner naman pe 1c mid pibce habban yceolde. pone naman ic yceolde mid puhte habban. ‘p 1c pepe pela y peoppreipe. ac hie hme habbap on me zenu- men. J hie’® me habbad zerealdne!* heona plencum +) zecehhod co heopa leapum pelum. ‘) ic ne mot mid mmum Sseapum minna Senunza fulzanzan. ypa ealla odSpa xerceapca mocton !- Da mine peopay ymbdon [ipdomay. 3 Upercay. 7 pose pelan. mid pam piopum peey on yymbel min pleza. mid pam peopum ic eom ealne pone heofon ymbhpeoprende. 3 pa nipemeycan ic
ve
! Boet. lib. ii, prosa 2.—Vellem autem pauca, &e. : |
' Cott. ma. ? Bod. mupcay. 5 Cott. ple. ‘ Cott. Oyrigne J unlepedne. —-* Bod. pa. ® Bod. asnan, 7 Cott. hi na. 5 Cott. peapa. ® Cott. behehzan. Cott. blorceman. " Bod. 5eane sem- man, % Cott. unsepylledan sicyunsa. 18 Cott. hine: 4 Bod. seheldene.
§ 111. BOETHIUS. 21
— § IL. I am still desirous that we should discourse further
concerning worldly goods. Why didst thou, just now, up- braid me that thou hadst lost them on my account? Why dost thou complain against me, as if thou, for my advantage, wert deprived of thine own; either of thy riches or thy dig- nity P both of which formerly came to thee from me, when they were lent thee. Let us now speak before such judge as thou wilt; and if thou art able to prove that any mortal man possessed anything of this kind as his own, I will give thee again all that thou canst say was thine own. I received thee ignorant and uninstructed, when thou first camest to man’s estate, and then taught and instructed thee, and im- parted to thee wisdom, whereby thou obtainedst the worldly possessions which thou now sorrowing hast lost. Thou mayest therefore be thankful that thou hast well enjoyed my gifts. Nor canst thou say that thou hast lost aught of thine own. Why complainest thou against me? Have I in any wise de- prived thee of those thy gifts which came to thee from me? All true wealth and true dignity, are mine own servants, and wheresoever I am, they are with me. Know thou for truth, if the riches which thou art lamenting that thou hast lost them, had been thine own, thou couldest not have lost them. O, how unjustly do many worldly men act towards me, in that I may not govern mine own servants! The heaven may bring light days, and again obscure the light with darkness: the year may bring blossoms, and the same year again take them away. The sea may enjoy calm waves; and all creatures may keep their custom and their will, except me alone. I alone am deprived of my manners, and am allured to manners foreign to me, through the insatiable covetousness of worldly men. Through covetousness have they deprived me of my name, which I should rightly have. This name I should rightly have, that I am wealth and dignity: but they have taken it fgom me, and in their pride they have given and drawn me to their false riches; so that I may not, with my servants, exercise my employments as all other creatures may. My servants are wisdom, and virtues, and true riches. With these servants was always my pastime; with these servants I am encompassing all the heaven, and the lowest I bring to the highest, and the highest to the lowest ; that is, I bring humility
22 BOETHIUS. “CHAP. VII.
zebpenze ec pam hehycan. 7 a hehycan wt pam nipemeyran. —
peer iy $l 1c xebpenze eapmodneyye on heofonum. 3 pa heofon-
lean z05 zt pam eapmedum. Ac ponne ic upzefape mid mmum |
peopum. ponne fopyeo pe pay ycypmenbdan populd. ypa ye eapn ponne he up zepic bugan pa polenu pcoypmendum pedepum fH
him 8a ycopmay d5epian ne mahan:-” pa ic polde. la Mod. f —
pu pe fone up co uy. zip Se lyyce. on pa zepad H pu ere mid up
4
pa eoppan yecan pille pop zodpa manna peapye?- Pune part ~
pu mme peapay. hu zeopne ic yymble pay ymbe zodpa manna peapre:- [aye pu hu ic zepand ymbe Lpeoror peapre Cpeca cyninzey. pa pa hine Lipur Pepya cynmz xepanzen hepbe 9 hme yopbzpnan polde. pa hme man on # fyp peapp pa alypse
ic hme mid heofonlcon pene. Ac pu pe foptpupudeyt Fop
pmnpe pihcpiyneyye 4 fop pmum zodan pillan pendert per pe nan puhc unpihclicey on becuman ne mihte. ypelce du polderc 6a lean eallpa pmpa zodena peopca on piyye populde habban :- Pu mihteyc pu yiccan on middum zemenum pice. } pu ne yceoldeyct p ice zepolian ‘) oSpe men:- Pu mihtere Su beon on mide piyye hpeapfunza. ‘p pu eac mid eanefope® yum eorel ne zefeldeyc + Ppac pmzad pa leoppyphcan oppey be piyye ponuld. bucon miylica* hpepfunza piyye populde :- Ppaet ap pe ponne. ‘} pu pep mid ne ne hpeappize:- Ppa pecyre pu hu ze hpeaprian.> nu ic yiemle mid Se beo:- De par peor hpeap- yunz betepe. foppam Se Siyya populd yeelda co pel ne lyyce. and pet pu pe eac becpe na zelerde :-°
§ IV." Deah Sem feohzicyepe cume ypa fela pelena. fra papa yondconna beop be prrum yeechpum. odSe papa pceoppena pe peoycpum nihcum yemap. ne foplet he peah no pa peopunza. ‘H he ne yeopize hip eopmda. Deah nu Lod zerylle Sapa pelezna monna pillan ze mid zolde. xe mid yeolppe. ze mid eallum Seoppyppneyyum, spa Seah ne bip ye’ Supyc zerylled heopa ziv- yunza. ac yeo zpundleare rpelzend herp ypipe manezu perce holu on co zadpianne.® Ppa mez pam pedendan zyctyepe zenoh popzizan. ypa him mon mape yelp. ypa hme ma lyyc #-
§ V." Pu pilc pu nu andpypdan pem populd yelpum zip hi cpedan? co Se. Ppt picye pu uy. la Mod. hpi mppayc pu pip uy.
m Boet. lib. ii. metrum 2.—Si quantas rapidis, &e.
n Boet. lib. ii. prosa 83.—His igitur, &e.
1 Bod. ‘pb bet. 2 Cott. Sepisan ne meson. 3 Cott. nehpeapyode. “Bod. bucan niyclice, 5 Cott. hpeappigen. © Bod. hpeapyungs yelba co pel selyyce J ‘} pu eac betepa ne seleydeyc. 7 Bod. he ne beos, 8 Bod manexza peycehola co sadpienne, = ® Cott. cpedad,
§ Iv. v. BOETHIUS. 23
to the heavens, and heavenly blessings to the humble. But when I ascend with my servants, then look we down on this stormy world, like the eagle, when he soars above the clouds in stormy weather, that the storms may not hurt him. In like manner, I am desirous, O Mind, that thou shouldest
! ascend to us, if thou art willing: on the condition that thou
wilt again with us seek the earth for the advantage of good men. Dost thou not know my manners? how careful I always was concerning the wants of good men? Knowest thou how mindful I was of the necessity of Croesus, the Grecian king, when Cyrus, king of Persia, had seized him, and would burn him? When they cast him into the fire, I delivered him with heavenly rain. But thou, on account of thy virtue, wast over-confident ; and thoughtest that because
_ of thy good intention nothing unjust could befal thee: as if
thou wouldest have the reward of all thy good works in this world! How couldest thou dwell in the midst of the common country, without suffering the same as other menP How ‘couldest thou be in the midst of this changeable state, with- out also feeling some evil through adversity ? What else do the poets sing concerning this world, but the various changes of this world? What is there peculiar to thee, that thou shouldest not change therewith? Why carest thou how it may change, when I am always with thee? This change was to thee more tolerable, because thou didst not too much desire these worldly goods, and because thou didst not, more- over, place greater confidence in them.
§ LV. Though to the covetous man come as many riches as there are grains of sand by the sea-cliffs, or stars which in dark nights shine; he nevertheless will not cease from com- plaints, so as not to lament his poverty. Though God fulfil the wishes of wealthy men with gold, and with silver, and with. all precious things, nevertheless the thirst of their avarice will not be satisfied, but the unfathomable gulf will have very many waste holes to gather into. Who can give enough to the insane miser ? The more any one gives to him, the more he covets.
§ V. How wilt thou now answer worldly goods, if they say to thee: Why blamest thouus,O Mind? why art thou angry
24 BOETHIUS. _ OHAP. VIII.
on hpam abulzon pe Se:- Ppaet Se onzan lyycan upe. nay uy* pin. pu yecyo? uy on psec yecl piney pceoppendery. pa pu pilnodere to uy par zoder pe pu co him yceolbeyt. pu epyc® f pe habban pe beypicenne. ac pe mazan cpepan ma ‘ pu habbe uy beypicen. nu uy puph pie luyc 3 puph pme zicyunza onycuman yceal
etd hes nt ec — tn dp A ee OT
ealpa zeycearca ycrppend ;- Nu pu eapz yeyliizpa ponne pe.
xzpep ze Fop pmum aznum unpihe luycum. ze eac poppam pe
pe he mocton ron pe fullzan upey peippendery pillan. poppam de —
he upe pe onlenbde zgcep hiy bebodum co bpucanne. nallay* pmpe unpihe zicpunza zepill co pulppemmanne;:- Andpypde unc nu. cped ye Viydom. ypa spa pu pille. prc zeanbitizap pmpe ondypope ;-
CAPUT VIIL.°
DA cped } Mod. 1c me onzice ezhponan yeyltizne. ac ic eom mid peer laper sape spa yprpe ofppycced 1c me® zeand- pypoan ne mez. Da cpep ye Piydom efv. Det ip nu zit pmpe unpihcpiyneyye ‘P pu eapc fullneah fonpoht. Ac ic nolde } pu pe foppohceyc. ac ic polde de pceamobde ypelcey zedpolan. pop- pam ye ye pe hme yoppencp. ye bip opmod. Ac ye ye pe hme yceamap. ye bip on hpeopyunza. Ing pu nu zemunan pile eallpa papa appyppneyya pe pu sop piyye populde hepderc prsdan pu zpeyc zebonen pepe od pipne deez. zip Su nu arelan® pilc ealle 6a blipneyya pip pam unpocneyyum. ne meht pu fulleape cpedan } pu eapm ye J unzeyeliz. poppam ic pe xrnzne’ undepfenz uncybne j unzelepedne. j me to beapne xenom. j co mmuin cyhcum zecybe. Ppa mez ponne auht oppey cpepan buran Su pepe ye zepelizerca. Sa pu me pepe ep leor ponne cup. 7 ep pon pe pu cupeyc® minne ctyhc 3 mine peapay. J 1c Se yeonzne xelepde ypelce ynycpo ypylce manezum oppum ieldpan ze- piccum ofcozen iy. J 1c pe Zefypppede mid mmum lapum co pon ‘P pe mon co dSomepe® xzecear. Ing Su nu foppam cpiye ‘p pu zeyehz ne pie } pu nu nazye pa hpilendlican anpyppneyya 4 pa blipneyya pe pu ep hapderc. ponne ne eanc!? pu peah unze- yelz. foppam pe pa unpocneyya. pe pu nu on eapc. ypa ice!! ofepzap. ypa pu cpiyc ‘P pa bhiyya zp oydon. Venye pu nu Pp pe anum pyllic hpeaprung. pillic!? unpocney on becumen. 7 nanum
© Boet, lib. ii, prosa 3.—Tum ego, speciosa quidem, &e,
1 Cott. naley. 2 Cott. peep. 5 Bod. pile. ‘ Cott. naley. 5 Bod. me. 6 Cott. avellan. 7 Cott. Seonene. 8 Cott. cube.
* Bod. me, ™ Cott. neanc. ™ Bod. elce. 1 Catt. bellecu hpeanyuns 4 pillicu.
CHAP, VIII. BORTHIUS. 25
with us? in what have we offended thee? Indeed thou wast desirous of us, not we of thee! Thou didst set us on the seat of thy Maker, when thou didst look to us for that good which thou shouldest have sought from him. Thou sayest that we have betrayed thee; but we may rather say that thou hast betrayed us, since through thy desire, and through thy covetousness, the Maker of all creatures will abhor us. Thou art therefore more guilty than we, both on account of thine own wicked desire, and also because, through thee, we cannot perform our Maker’s will. or he lent us to thee, to be en- joyed according to his commandments, not to fulfil the desire of thine evil covetousness. Answer us now, said Wisdom, as thou wilt: we wait for thine answer.
CHAPTER VIII.
TueEN said the Mind, I perceive myself every way guilty; but I am so greatly oppressed with this loathsome sorrow, that I cannot answer you. Then said Wisdom again: It is still thy fault that thou art almost despairing. But I am unwilling that thou shouldest despair: I would rather that thou wert ashamed of such error; for he who despairs is dis- tracted; but he who is ashamed is in repentance. If thou now wilt call to mind all the honours, in respect of this world, which thou hast had since thou first wert born, until this day ; if thou wilt now reckon all the enjoyments against the sor- rows; thou canst not very easily say that thou art miserable and unhappy. For I took charge of thee unexperienced, and uninstructed ; and adopted thee as my child, and inured thee to my discipline. Who can then say aught else, but that thou wert most happy, when thou wert beloved by me ere known; and sooner than thou knewest my discipline and my manners: and | taught thee young such wisdom as is to many other older minds denied: and improved thee with mine instruc- tions, until thou wert chosen a judge? If thou now sayest, that thou art not happy, because thou hast not the temporary honours and the enjoyments which thou formerly hadst, still thou art not unhappy: for the sorrows wherein thou now art, will in like manner pass away, as thou sayest the enjoyments formerly did. Thinkest thou now, that to thee alone such change and such sorrow happen, and that the like could
26 BOETHIUS. CHAP. IX.X.
oppum mode ypelc ne onbecome. ne ep pe. ne wprep pe!- Oppe penyc pu } on enizum menniycum mode meze auht feeycpeedlicey beon bucon hpeaprunza. oppe zip hic on eenezum ~ men enize hpile reyclice punap. se deap hic hupu apippep! } | hic beon ne mez pep hic ep per. Ppec yyndon da populd yelpa oppey bucon deaper cacnunz. foppam ye dSeap ne cymsd © co nanum oppum pinzum butan p he } li apyppe.? rpa eac pa populd yalpa cumap co pam® Mode co pam pet hi hic beniman py pe him leogayc bip piyre populde.  beop ponne ponne hie him spamzepicap. Leyeze. la Mod. hpeepep pe becepe Smee. nu nauhc populdpices* feycer 3 unhpeappiender beon ne mex. hpepep pe pu hy fopyeo. 3 pmey azener poncey hi foplece bucon yane. pe pu zebide hponne hi pe sopziendne foplecan :-
CAPUT IX
DA onzan ye Viydom yinzan and z1S$o0be Sur. Donne yeo yunne on hadpum heorone beophtoyt yemep. ponne adeortpiap ealle yceoppan. foppam Se heopa beophrney ne beod nan beophcney pop hipe. Donne smylce blapep yupan peycan pmd. ponne peaxap ypipe hpape relder blorman. ac Sonne ye yteapca _ pind cymp noppan earcan, ponne copeoppp he ypipe hnape pepe poyan plice. ypa oft pone to ymylcon ye Sep noppan pmbder yyc onycypep. Eala } nan puhe nip feyce pcondendey peoncey a puniende on populde :-
CAPUT Xt
DA cpep Boecuy. Eala Piybom. pu pe eapt modup’ eallpa meexena. ne mez 1c na pipepepan ne andyacizan ‘p pe® pu me wp yederc. foppon pe hic ip eall yop. foppam ic nu hebbe onzicen ‘} pa mme yelpa ¥ yeo opropzney. Se 1¢ ep pende P zeyelpa beon yceolban. nane yelpa ne pint. fopdam he ypa hpebdlice zepicep. ac ) me herp eallpa ypipoyt zedpefed ponne ic ymbe ypele ymealicoyt pence. ‘p 1¢ nu ypeotole onzicen habbe. ) pec ip seo meyce unyeld on pip andpeapdan lie. -) mon zpeyo peoppe’ zereeliz. 3 epcep pam unzeyeliz. Da andypopede ye fiydbom 3 yeo Leyceadpiyner 3 cpap. Ne meaht pu no mid
P Boet. lib. ii. metrum 3.—Cum polo Phebus, &e.
4 Boet, lib, ii. Prosa 4.—Tum ego, vera inquam, &e,
' Cott. arepped. 2 Cott. ayeppe. 3 Cott. to pon. 4 Cott. nan puhr populdhcey, 5 Cott. modup, ® Cott. andracizian bey be, 7 Cott. yy.
OHAP. IX. X. BOETHIUS. 27
happen to no other mind, either before thee, or after thee ? Or thinkest thou that to any human mind there can be any thing constant, without change? Orif it for a time to any man firmly remain, death at least will take it away, so that it may not be where it before was. What are worldly goods, ‘but an emblem of death? For death comes for nothing else, but that it may take away life. So also worldly goods come to the mind, in order that they may deprive it of that which is dearest to it in this world; that is, when they depart from it. Say, O Mind, whether thou judgest more wisely, seeing that naught of worldly power can be constant and unchange-
|) able? Whether thou despisest them, and of thine own choice
canst relinquish them without regret, so that thou canst abide it when they leave thee sorrowful ?
CHAPTER IX.
Tren began Wisdom to sing, and sung thus: When the sun in the serene heaven brightest shines, then become dark all the stars, because their brightness is no brightness by reason of her. When the south-west wind gently blows, then grow very quickly field flowers; but when the stark wind cometh from the north-east, then does it very soon destroy the rose’s beauty. So oftentimes the north wind’s tempest stirs the too tranquil sea. Alas! that there is nothing of fast-standing work ever remaining in the world!
CHAPTER X.
TuEN said Boethius: O Wisdom, thou who art the mother of all virtues, I cannot gainsay or deny that which thou hast said to me, because it is all true: for I have now learned that those my felicities, and the prosperity, which I formerly thought should be happiness, are no happiness because they so speedily depart. But this has most of all troubled me, when I most deeply think about that which I have clearly learned, that it is the greatest infelicity of this present life, that any one is first happy, and afterwards unhappy. Then auswered Wisdom and Reason, and said: Thou canst not with
28 BOETHIUS. OHAP. X.
yope zeczelan pine pypS and pme zerzelpa ypa ypa pu penye. fop | pam leayum ungerelpum! pe du ppopayc. hic ip learunz } pu | penyct pect pu yeo unzereliz:- Ac zp Se nu FP ypa ypipe— xedpefed J xeunpocyad herp. } ce pu foplupe pa leayan ze- ~ yelpa. ponne mez ic de openlice xzepeccan. pu ypucole ongzityc pet ce pu zc heyyc pone meycan del pmpa? xerelpa ~ pe pu ep hepdeyc:- Sexe me nu hrepep pu mid prhce mexze yeopian® pina unyelpa. rpelce pu eallunza haebbe roplopen pma seyeelpa. ac pu heyyc zit zepund zehealden eall } deoppyppoyte pet te pu pe beronzod hapdert:- Ju mht pu ponne menan ) pypre J p lappe. nu pu } leogne hayyt zehealden:- Ppaec pu payc P seo duzup ealley moncynney. ¥ pe ye meyta pegpp- yerpe. xtc leorap. p iy Simmachuy pm ypeon.* Pp he ip zie hal 3 zepund. j} hefp elcer zodey zenoh. foppon ic pat p pu nahe’ ne ropylapodeyc pu pm azen feoph fop hime ne yeal- oeyc. zp pu hme zerape on hpilcum eapfopum. foppam ye-pen iy Piydomer 4 Upeepca full. 7 zenoz opropy nu zie elcer eopplicey exer. ye iy ypipe yapiz fop pmum eapfopum J fon pmum ppecyipe:- Pu ne leogap pm pip eac. pey ilcan Sim- — machuyer® dohzep. 3 yio 1p ypipe pel xepad J ypipe xemecperc, yeo heey ealle oppu pip ofeppunzen mid clenneyye. eall heope x05 1¢ Se mez mid Feaum popdum apeccan. ‘p 1p p heo ip on eallum peapum hiepe faedep xelic. reo hofap nu pe. pe anum. foppam Se hio nanpuhc eller ne lupad bucan pe. wlcer xoder heo herp zenoh on pip anbdpeapdan hye. ac heo hit harp eall popyepen ofep pe anne.’ eall heo hic onyrcunap. pop- pam pe heo pe wenne nefp. pay aner hipe ip nu pana, pop pmpe efpeapdneyre heope pmcd eall nauhc’  heo herp. fop- pam heo iy fop pmum lugum cpmod*® 7 fulneah dead pop ceapum J cop unpocneyye:. Ppa pille pe cpepan be pmum cpam!? yunum. pa sme ealbopmen J zepeahtepar. on pam ip, yplocol pio zifu 4 ealla pa 5ugupa hiopa feedep 7 heopa eolldpan"! peedep. spa ypa xeonze’” men mazon Zelicorce beon ealbum monnum. Dy ic pundprze hp: pune mexze onzitan pet pu eant nu zc pipe xereliz. nu pu zc hofoye and eapc hal;. Ppac pec ip plo merce wp deadlicna manna pec he hbban and sien hale. j pu heyc nu xzec co eacan eall P ic pe zp cealde :- Ppeec ic pac ‘P ‘Pip xIT Seoppypppe ponne monney hf. foppam manezum men if leofpe Sez he ep self ypelce zp he zereo hiy * Cott. unyelbum. * Cott. bapa. 4 Cott. oman, * Cott. ppiop. 5 Cott. auh, ® Cott. Simachey. 7 Cott. enne, 8 Cott. nohz. 9 Cott. opmod. © Cott. cpem, n Cott. eldpan. 2 Cott. grunge.
OHAP. X. BOETHIUS. ; 29
truth accuse thy fortune and thy happiness, as thou supposest,
on account of the false unhappiness which thou art suffering.
It is a deception when thou imaginest that thou art unhappy.
But if it has so much troubled thee and made thee sad, that thou hast lost the false happiness; then may I plainly tell thee, that thou well knowest that thou hast still the greatest part of thy felicities, which thou formerly hadst. ‘ell me now, whether thou canst with justice complain of thy mis- fortunes, as if thou hadst altogether lost thy happiness, since thou hast yet kept entire everything most precious, which thou wast anxious about? How canst thou, then, lament the worse, and the more unworthy, when thou hast retained the more desirable? Thou knowest, however, that the orna-: ment of all mankind, and the greatest honour, yet lives; that is Symmachus, thy father-in-law. He is yet hale and sound,
and has enough of every good; for I know that thou w ouldest not be unwilling to give thine own life for him, if thou wert to see him in any difficulties. For the man is full of wisdom and virtues, and sufficiently free, as yet, from all earthly fear. He is very sorry for thy troubles, and for thy banishment.
How! is not thy wife also living, the daughter of the same _Symmachus P and she is very “prudent, and very modest.
She has surpassed all other wives in virtue. All her excel- lence I may sum up to thee in few words: that is, that she is in all her manners like her father. She now lives for thee, thee alone: for she loves nothing else except thee. Of all good she has enough in this present life, but she has despised it all, beside thee alone. She renounces it all, because she has not thee. Of this alone she feels the want. Because of thy absence, everything which she has seems naught to her. Therefore she is through love of thee, wasted, and almost dead with tears and with grief. What shall we say concern- ing thy two sons, who are noblemen and counsellors; in whom is manifest the ability and all the virtues of their father, and of their grandfather, so far as young men may most resemble old men? Therefore I wonder why thou canst not understand, that thou art, as yet, very happy, since thou still livest and art hale. This, indeed, is the greatest possession of mortal men, that they live and are hale; and thou hast yet in addition, all that I have already mentioned
80 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XI.
pig J lp beapn ypelcende:. Ac hpi cilayc! pu ponne co ©
pepenne bucon andpeopce:- Ne meahz pu nu zit pmpe pypde
nauht oppican ne pin lg no zecelan. ne eapc pu no eallunza ©
co nauhte zed5on ypa spa pu pense. mip pe nu gic nan uma- bependlic boc zecenze. foppam pe pm ancop? ip zc on eop-
pan feyc. See pint Sa ealdopmen. Se pe ep ymbe spyecon. pa — pe ne lecap zeoptpupian be piy anSpeapdan lige. 3 efe pina —
azna tpeopa. J yeo zodcunde luru. 7 ye tohopa. pa ppeo pe ne lecap xeopctpepan be pam ecan lire. Da andypopobe ‘ unpote Mod J cpep. Eala pepan pa ancpar ypa tpume® 4 ypa puph- puniende ze yop Lode ze pop populde. rpa spa pu yexyc. ponne mihte pe micle py ep* zepolian ypa hpet eapfopneyya spa up on -become. eall hie up pyncad py leohcpan %a hpile pe pa ancpay® yaeyce beop. ac pu miht peah onzicon hu pa mme?® yeelpa and ye min peopdycipe hep fop populde ip oncepped ;-
CAPUT XI*
§ I. DA anbyponote ye Piydom J yeo Lerceadpiyner 3 cpeep. Ic pene peah } 1c hpec hpezanunzey’ pe upahore of pepe un- potneyye J pulneah zebpohce wc Sam ilcan peoppycrpe Se pu ep hapbderc. bucon pu zit co full yy peer pe pe lered§ ip. f pe pop py placize. Ac 1c ne mez adpeohan® pme yeofunza pop pam lyclan pe pu foplupe. foppam pu pimle mid pope 3 mid un- pocneyye menyc Zip pe wmiey pillan pana bip. Seah hic lycler hpeec yie. Ppa pay eppe on dip andpeapdan lire. oppe hpa ip nu. odde hpa pypp zet epcen upon piyye populde. } him nanpuhe pid hip pillan ne sie. ne lycley ne miceley. Sprpe neapepe renc!? J pipe heanlice!! pa menniycan zeyeelpa. foppam opep cpexa. vise hie nefpe co nanum men ne becumap. odde hi pep nepfpe feyclice ne puphpuniap ypelca ypelce hi ep co coman, Dee ic pille hep be efcan ypeocolop xepeccan. pe picon p yume mzzon habban eller populd pelan zenoz.!? ac hi habbad peah yceame pey pelan. zip hi ne beod ypa wdele on zebypdum ypa hi polbon;- Sume beop ypise xpele 4 pidcupe on heopa zebypbum. ac hi beop mid padle 7 mid henpe!® ofppycce 4
® Boet. lib. ii, prosa 4.—Et illa, Promovimus, inquit, &e.
' Cott. tiolayc. 2? Cott. yoppon bin ancep, * Bod. pume. 4 Cott. 1e8, 5 Cott. oncpar. ® Cott. muna. 7 Cott. hp hpusununser. 8 Cott. alyyed. 9 Cott. adpeosan. 10 Cott. neappa pinc. 1 Cott, heanhica. '* Cott. » monise habbaS elcey popold pillan Senos. 1 Cott. henbe.
iS. I. BOETHIUS. 31
to thee. But I know that this is even more valuable than man’s life: for many a man would wish that he himself should die, rather than behold his wife and children dying. Why toilest thou then in weeping without a cause? Thou canst not yet blame thy fortune, nor upbraid thy life: nor | art thou altogether brought to naught, as thou thinkest. ~ No unbearable misery has yet befallen thee, for thine anchor is still fast in the earth: that is, the noblemen whom we before mentioned. They suffer thee not to despair of this present life: and again, thine own faith, and the divine love and hope; these then suffer thee not to despair of the ever- * Jasting life. Then answered the sorrowful Mind, and said: O, that the anchors were so secure, and so permanent, both for God, and for the world, as thou sayest! then might we the more easily bear whatsoever misfortunes come upon us. They all seem the lighter to us, so long as the anchors are fast. But thou mayest, nevertheless, perceive how my felici- ties, and my dignity here, in respect of the world, is changed.
CHAPTER XI.
§ I. Turn answered Wisdom and Reason, and said: I think, however, that I have, in some measure, raised thee up from this sorrow ; and almost brought thee to the same dig- nity which thou before hadst. Only thou art yet too full of what thou hast relinquished, and art therefore grieved. But I cannot endure thy lamentations for the little that thou hast lost. For thou always, with weeping and with sorrow, mournest, if there be to thee a lack of anything desired, though it be of something little. Who was ever in this present life, or who is now, or who shall be yet after us in this world, to whom nothing against his will may happen, either little or much? Very narrow, and very worthless, are human enjoyments: for either they never come to a man, or they never constantly remain there such as they first came. This I will hereafter more clearly show. We know that some may have enough of all worldly wealth; but they have nevertheless shame of the wealth, if they are not so noble in birth as they wish. Some are very noble and eminent on account of their birth, but they are oppressed and made sad
:
32 BOETHIUS. CHAP, XI. :
xeunpocyote. } him pape leogpe } hi peepan unzpele ponne — ypa eapme. zip hic on heopa anpealbe pepe:- Maneze beop — peah ezpep ze full wpele ze full pelize. 7 beop peah full | unpoce. ponne hi opep tpeza odde pip habbap yee xzemzc. oppe _ him zemece nabbap:.! Manize habbap zenoz xeyelilice® ze- > pipod. ac Jor beapnleyce. eallne pone pelan de hi gegademizap hi lefad* ppeemdum co bpucanne. and hi beop foppam un- — pote:- Sume habbad beapn zenoze. ac da beop hpilum unhale. - oppe yrele 7 unpeonp.* odSe hpape zeranap. } da eldpan fop- pam znopniap ealle heopa populd;- Foppam ne mez nan mon on piyye andpeapdan lire eallunza zepad beon pip hip pypd. peah he nu nanpuhz ealley nebbe ymbe to sopzienne. } him mez co yopze. Sac he naz hpec him copeapd bip. hpzepep pe xo0d pe yrel. pon ma pe pu piyceyt. J eac pet P he ponne xeryellice bpycp. he ondpec p he yeyle fpoplecan. Getec me nu syumne mann papa pe Se zerelezoyc pmce. 7 on hi yelgpille ry pprpoye zepicen. 1¢ pe zepecce ypipe hpape Su onzicyt ‘} he bip fon ypipe lyclum pmzum ofc ypipe unzemetlice xedpered. zip him zenix puhz bid pip luy pillan. oppe pip hip xepunan. peah hic nu lycley hpeec reo bucon he co elcum men mee xzebeacman f he ipne on? hiy pillan:- Pundpum lycel mez xedon pone eallpa zeyahiercan mon hen fop® populde. } he penp peec up xerelpa sien odde ypipe xepanode oddSe mid ealle roplopene:- Du penyc nu P pu yeo spipe unzereeliz. 4 1c pac } manexzum men Suhce } he pepe co heoponum aharen zip he enizne! del heepbe papa pmpa xeyelpa pe Su nu zec heepyo:-® Ge pup- pum yeo ycop pe pu nu on here eant. 4 pu cpiyc P pm ppec- ycop yy heo 1p pam monnum epel pe pep on xebonene peepan. J eac pam Se heona pillum pep on eapdizap:- Ne nanpuhe ne by6 ygel. ep mon pene ‘P hic yrel yeo. J peah hic nu hepiz yeo and pipeppeand. peah hic bip xeralp zip hic mon luychice ded and zedSyloilice apaepnp +. Feapa yient to pam xeyceadpire. zip he pypp on unzepyloe. p he ne pilnize® hip yeelpa peoppan onpende?+ [ip ypipe matnize bicepneyye ip xemenzed yeo ypecney pire populde. peah heo hpam pynyum!? Synce. ne maz he hie no habban!! zip heo hine leon onzinp:- Pu ne iy hic peep ypipe ypeocol hu hpepflice pay populoyeelpa pmc. nn hi ne
bmw «
1 Cott. nabbad oSbe him semexec oSbe Semede nabbad. 2 Cott. seyellice. 3 Bod. lead. 4 Bod. untpeope. 5 Cott. sebecnan } heiepne on. © Cott.on. 7 Bod. @mne.  * Cott. seheeyc. 9 Bod. hepilnige. 10 Cott. pynruma. Cott. sehabban.
ST, ALBERT’S COLLEGE LIBRARY
$1. BOETIIIUS. 33
by indigence and poverty, so that it were more desirable to them to be unnoble, than so poor, if it were in their power. Many are, indeed, both full noble and full wealthy, and are nevertheless very unhappy, when they have either of these things; either when they have wives as yoke-fellows with them, or have not yoke-fellows. Many have married happily
} enough, but for want of children, they leave all the riches
which they amass to strangers to enjoy, and they are therc- fore unhappy. Some have children enough, but they are sometimes unhealthy, or evil and worthless, or soon depart, so that the parents therefore mourn all their life. Hence no man can, in this present life, be altogether suited in respect of his fortune. Though he have nothing at all to sorrow about, this is able to make him sorrowful, that he knows not what is about to happen to him, whether good or evil, any more than thou knewest; and moreover he fears, that what he then happily enjoys, he may lose. Show me now any man of those who appear to thee the happiest, and who is most distinguished for the enjoyment of his desires. I tell thee at once, that thou mayest observe that he is often immo- derately troubled for very trifling things: if anything hap- pens to him against his will, or contrary to his custom, though it be ever so little; unless he may give his nod to every man to run at his will. Wonderfully little can cause the happiest man of all, here in respect of the world, that he should think that his happiness is either much lessened, or entirely lost. Thou now thinkest that thou art very miser- able: and I know that to many a man, it would seem that he were exalted to the heavens, if he had any part of thy felicities, which thou hast still. Moreover, the place wherein thou art now detained, and which thou callest thy place of exile, is the country of the men who were born there, and also of those who by their own will dwell there. Nothing . is evil, until a man thinks that it is evil: and though it be now heavy and adverse, yet it will be happiness, if he acts willingly, and patiently bears it. Scarcely any one is so pru- dent when he is in impatience, as not to wish that his happi- ness were destroyed. With very much bitterness is. the sweetness of this world mingled. Though it seem pleasant to any one, he will be unable to hold it, if it begin to fly from him. Is it not, then, very evident, how inconstant D
34 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XT,
mazon Sone eapman zeryllan. poppam he yimle pilnad hpey —
hpuzu! pey pe he ponne ner. ne hie pam sepylbegum j pam semecpeycum yimble ne puniap :-
§ IL Pp yece ze ponne ymbucan eop pa let Se xe on mnan eop’ habbap puph pa zodcundan muht zerec:- Ac ze nycon hpec ze dop. ze yint on zedpolan:- Ac 1c eop ie mid
wbhe
yeapum popdum zepecan® hpec ye hpor ip eallpa zerelpa pip — pey ic pac pu pile hizian pon ep pe pu hine onziceyt P yy ponne | z00:-* Muiht pu nu onzican hpepep pu auht pe Seonpypppe ~
habbe ponne Se yylpne:- Ic pene peah } pu pille cpepan pu nauht bdeoppypppe nebbe. Ic pac mp pu nu herbde? fullne
anpeald Smey yelper. Sonne hepderc Su hpec hpexa® on pe —
yelpum Sey pe Su nefpe pmum pillum alecvan poldeyc.’ ne peo pypd pe on xeniman ne mihte:- Fopdam ic Se mindzize pu onzice Secce nan zeyelp my on piyye andpeapdan lire. Ac onzet pec nauht nip betepe on piype andpeapdum lire. ponne yeo zeyceabdpiyney. foppam pe heo puph nan Sinz ne mez pam men lopian. pop py ip betene pet peoh pat te neefpe lopian ne mez. ponne pe mez J yceal. Pu ne 1p pe nu xenoh ypeotole xeyeed pect yeo pypd pe ne mez nane zeyelpa yellan. poppam pe ezpep ip ungeyct ze seo pypd. xe yeo Zepelp. foppam pnt
ypipe cedbpe 7 ypipe hpeoyende par xerelpa:- Ppaec ele papa — pe pay populd zeyelpa herp. opep cpeza oppe he pac pet he ©
him fpompeapde beop. odSe he hic nav. zip he hit ponne nat. hpelce zeyelpa herp he wc pam pelan. zip he bip ypa dypiz 7 ypa ungepiyy.® } he pac pican ne mez. zp he hit Sonne pac.
ponne ondpec he him  heo lopan. 3 eac zeapa pat p he lu 7
alecan yceal. Se pinzala exe ne let nenne? mon zepelizne beon:- Ing ponue hpa ne pecp hpapep he pa zeyzlda hebbe. pe he nabbe pe he Sonne herp. hpaet pec Sonne beop fop lycla yelpa. od5e nane, pet mon ypa eape fpopletan mez ;- Ie pene nu ic pe hapbe wp zenoz ypeotole zepeht be manezum cacnum ‘) te monna yapla yc undeaplice J ece.'° 7 p ap xenoz ypeocol ) ce nanne mon Sey cpeozan ne peapf p ealle men zeendiap on pam deape. 4 eac heopa pelan. py 1c pundpuze hpi
men sien ypa unzerceadpire ‘Pp hie penan ‘} piy andpeapde lig .
meeze pone monnan don zeyelizne pa hpile pe he leofad. ponne
® Boet. lib. ii. prosa 4.—Quid igitur, 0 mortales, &e.
1 Bod. hpe hpes. 2 Cott. 10p. 3 Cott. Zepeccan. 4 Bod. ongicyt be ip bone 505. => Bod. neydeyc. § Cott. hpusu. 7 Cott. nolder. § Cott. unpiy. © Bod. none. 10 Cott. undeadlica J eca.
§ 12. BOETHIUS. 55
worldly goods are; when they are not able to satisfy the poor, inasmuch as he always desires something of that which he has not; neither do they always dwell with the patient and moderate.
§ II. Why seek ye, then, around you the happiness which ye have placed within you by the divine power? But ye know not what ye do: ye are in error. But I can, with few words, show you what is the roof of all happiness: "for which I know thou wilt strive until thou obtainest it: this, then, is good. Canst thou now discover whether thou hast anything more precious to thee than thyself? I think, though, thou _ wilt say that thou hast nothing more precious. I know, if thou hadst full power of thyself, thou wouldest then have something in thyself, which thou never, with thine own con- sent, wouldest relinquish, nor could Fortune take it from thee. Therefore I advise thee, that thou learn, that there is no happiness in this present life. But learn that nothing is better in this present life than reason: because man cannot by any means lose it. Therefore that wealth is better, which never can be lost, than that which may, and shall be José. Is it not, now, clearly enough proved to thee, that Fortune cannot give thee any happiness? because each is insecure, both Fortune and happiness; for these goods are very frail, and very perishable. Indeed, every one who possesses these worldly goods, either knows that they are about to depart from him, or he is ignorant of it. If, then, he is ignorant of it, what happiness has he in riches, when he is so foolish, and so*unwise as to be ignorant of this? Butif he knowsit, then he dreads that they may be lost, and also is well aware that he must leave them. Continual fear suffers not any man to be happy. If then any man cares not whether he have that wealth, which he may not have, even when he has it; truly that is for little happiness, or none, which a man may so easily lose. I think, moreover, that I had formerly with sufficient clearness taught thee by many arguments, that the souls of men are immortal and eternal: and it is so evident that no man need doubt it, that all men end in death, and ~ also their riches. Therefore I wonder why men are so irra- tional as to think that this present life can make man happy whilst he lives, seeing that it cannot, after it is ended, make
yp 2
86 BOETHIUS. CHAP, XII. XIII.
hic hime ne mez eyctep pyy lige eapmne! zedon:- Ppaze pe xepiylice picon unpim Sapa monna pe 6a ecan zeyelda yohran nallay duph } an pec hi pilnodon Sey lchomlican bdeadep. ac
eac manezpa yaplicpa pica hie zepimodon pid San ecan lige. H-
pepon ealle pa halizan Maycypar :- CAPUT XII.‘
DA onzan ye /iyd5om zliopian. 4 zeoddode pur. ecte pet .
ypell mid leope. } he wp yede 3 cpp. Se pe pille perc hur cimbpian. ne yceall he hic no yetcan upon pone hehycan cnol. J ye Se pille xodcundne f/1yd5om yecan. ne mezz he hine pip ofepmetca. J efc ye pe pille peep huy tumbpian. ne serve he hit on yondbeophar. Spa eac zp pu Viydsom timbmian pille. ne rete
Su hme uppan pa zicpunza. fopdam spa spa pzende yond ponne.
pen ypylzp. rpa ypylzp yeo xzicpunz pa dSpeorendan pelan per middanzeapdey. fopdam hio hiopa pimle bid Supytezu. ne mez huy nahz lanze ycandan on Sam hean munce. zi hit full un- zemeclic pmd xeytent. nefc pet p ce on Sam yizendan yonde ycent yon ypiphcum pene. spa eac  menniyce Mod bid un- depecen 3 apezed of ny ytede. ponne hit ye pmd ytponzpe xe- ypinca aytypod. odSe se pen unzemechicey ymbhozan:- Ac ye pe pulle habban pa ecan zeyrzlpa. he yceal pleon pone ppecnan plice piper middaneapder. J trmbpian hur Moder on pam peeycan yoane eadmecza. roppam Se [pyc eapdad on pepe dene eabmoodneyye. J on pam zemynde Pipdomer. foppam simle ye
~~
pa mon eall hiy lip lec on zepean unonpendendlice 3 opyoph. |
ponne he yopyihp ezSep ze pay eopplican z0d ze eac pa yrlu. 7 hopap co pam copeandam. ‘/ mt pa ecan. foppam Se Lod. hine zehelc eezhponan. ymzallice pumiende. on hip Moder ze- yelpum. Seah pe ye pind. papa eapfopa. 7 yeo pmgale zemen. pyya populd yelpa. him onblape :-
CAPUT XIII."
DA ye //iyd5om pa jy reo Lerceadpyner pir leod puy arunzen hepdon. Sa onzan he eft yeczan? ypell 3 pur cpep. Me Smep nu p pic mazen ymealicop pppecan J diozolpan popdum. fop- pam ic onzice P mim lap hpec hpuzu mzed on pin ondze. J
t Boet. lib. ii. metrum 4.—Quisquis volet perennem, &c
u Boet. lib. ii, prosa 5.—Sed quoniam rationum, &c. 1 Bod. eapm. ? Cott. pecsean.
CHAP. XII. XIII. BOETHIUS. 87
him miserable. But we certainly know of innumerable men who have sought eternal happiness, not by this alone, that they chose the bodily death, but they also willingly submitted to many grievous torments on account of the eternal life: those were all the holy martyrs.
CHAPTER XII.
TuEn began Wisdom to sing, and sung thus,—he prolonged with verse the speech that he before made, and said: He who will build a firm house, must not set it upon the highest hill; and he who will seek heavenly wisdom, must not seek it with arrogance. And, again, he who is desirous to build a firm - house, should not set it on sand-hills. So also if thou art -
_ desirous to build wisdom, set it not on avarice. For as
thirsty sand swallows the rain, so avarice swallows the perishable riches of this middle-earth, because it is always thirsty after them. A house cannot long stand on the high mountain, if a very violent wind press on it; nor has it that which may stand on the thirsty sand for excessive rain. Thus also the human mind is subverted, and moved from its place, when the wind of strong afflictions agitate it, or the rain of immoderate care. But he who wishes to have eternal happi- ness, should fly from the dangerous splendour of this middle- earth, and build the house of his mind on the firm rock of : humility. For Christ dwells in the vale of humility, and in the mind of wisdom. Therefore the wise man ever leads all his life in joy, unchangeable and secure, when he despises both these earthly goods, and also the evils; and hopes for the future, which are eternal. For God preserves him every- where, perpetually dwelling in the enjoyments of his mind: though the wind of troubles, and the continual care of these worldly goods, blow upon him.
CHAPTER XIII.
Wuewn Wisdom and Reason had thus sung this lay, then began he again to make a speech, and thus said: Methinks that we may now argue more closely, and with profounder words; for I perceive that my doctrine, in some degree,
38 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XIII.
pu zenoh pel unbepycenyc } 1c pe co yppece. Ledenc nu hper pmey azney yeo ealpa piyya populd whta 7 pelena. odde hpxet pu pep on aze unandepzildey. zip pu him yceabdpiylice! eeprep- rpypayc. Ppeec heyyc Su we pam zum pe du epic fH yeo pypd eop zIpe. and et pam pelum.? Seah hi nu ece pepon. Sexe’ me nu hpepep ye pin pela Smey pancey spa Seope yeo pe cop hip —
)
aalethd Adam db *
azenpe zecynde. hpzpep ic S¢ yecze peah hit ay of hip agenpe ~ zecynde nay of pipe. zip hic ponne hiy azenpe xec\nbde ip nay —
of Smpe. hpi eapc Su ponne a py bectepa sop hiy zode.* Sexe me nu hpec hiy pe deopayc® pice. hpepep pe zold be hpzet 1¢ pac peah gold. Ac peah hic nu zod° seo 7 deone.’ peah bip hhyeatizpa 7+ leoypendpa ye de hit relp. Sonne re pe hic zadepap J on oppum peafap. ze eac pa pelan beop hhyeatizpan 9 leopceelpan ponne poune, hie mon yelp. ponne hie beon ponne hi mon zadpap 7 healc.® Ppec seo zicpunz xzedep heope zic- yepay lape wzpep ze Lobe ze monnum. ¥ pa cyyta zedop pa yimle leoy cele 7 hhyeatize jy peoppe expep xe Lobe xe mon- num %e hie lupap. Nu } feoh ponne ezpep ne mez beon xe
mid pam Se hic yelS ze mid pam pe hit mmp.° nu ip poppem >
zle peoh bevene 3 Seoppypppe zeyeald ponne zehealden. Ing nu eall prey middaneapdey pela come co anum men. hu ne pepon ponne ealle oppe men pedlan bucan anum.!? Genoh ypeorol Set ip. p ce z05 pond 3 x05 hhya wlcey monney bip betena 4 deoppa.'! ponne zniz pela. hpac f popd zerylp eallpa!? pana
eapan pe hic zehepp. 7 ne bip peah no dy leyye mid pam pe hic * rppicp. hip heopvan oiezelneyre hic zeopenad.’® 3 per odper ©
heoptan belocene!* hic puphyepp. 3 on pam Whe pep be- cpyx ne bid hic no xzepanod. ne mez hic mon mid speopde oyylean, ne mid pape zebindan. ne hic neefpe ne acpild. Ac pa eoppe pelan. peah hi ealne pez eoppe ym.” ne pmep eop no py papop!® heopa zenoh, 7 peah ze hie ponne oppum monnum
yellan ne mazon, ze no pe ma mid par heopna pedle 7 heopa —
zicpunze xeryllan. Seah pu hie ymale*’ cobwle spa duyc. ne miht pu peah ealle men emlice'® mid zehealdan. 7 Sonne pu ealle nepeclbe heyyc. ponne biyt Su Se yelp pedla, Sme peer pepalice’® pelan piyyer middanzeapbdey. Sonne hi nan mon fullice habban ne mez. ne hie nanne mon zepeltzian ne mazon. bucon
1 Cott. serceadpiylice. 2 Cott. pelan. % Cott. Sexe. * Cott. so0de. 5 Cott. Siopuyz. 6% Bod. sold. 7 Cott. Siope. 8 Cott. hilz. % Cott. mon eld. 10 Cott. buzon him anum. 1 Cott. dSioppa. 2 Cott. ‘aleey. 13 Bod, 15elneyye hic openad. 14 Cott. belocena. 1 Cott. nd eop sien. 16 Cott. hpabop. 17 Cott. ypa pmeahce. 1 Cott. emnlice. ! Cott. pepelice.
BOMAP. XIII, BOETHIUS. 39
enters into thy mind, and thou understandest well enough what I say unto thee. Consider, now, what is thine own of all these worldly possessions and riches; or what of great price thou hast therein, if thou rationally examinest it. What hast thou from the gifts and from the riches, which thou sayest fortune gives you, even though they were eternal ? Tell me now, whether in thy judginent, this thy wealth, is so precious to thee from its own nature. But I say to thee that it is from its own nature, not from thine. If it, then, is from its own nature and not from thine, why art thou ever the better for its good? Tell me what of it seems to thee most precious: whether gold, or what? I know, however, gold. But though it be good and precious, yet will he be - more celebrated and more beloved, who gives it, than he who gathers, and takes it from others. Riches, also, are more honourable, and more estimable when any one gives them, than they are when he gathers and keeps them. Covetous- ness, indeed, makes misers loathsome both to God and to men:
and liberality always makes them estimable, and famous, and ' worthy, both to God and to the men whom they befriend. Since, then, wealth cannot be both with those who give it, - and with those who receive it; all wealth is therefore better and more precious given than held. If even all the wealth of this middle-earth should come to one man, would not all other men be poor, except one? It is sufficiently evident that the good word and good fame of every man is better and more precious than any wealth: for this word fills the ears of all those who hear it, and yet is not the less with him who speaks it. His heart’s recess it opens, and the locked heart of another it penetrates, and in the way between them it is not lessened, nor can any ove with sword slay it, nor with rope bind, nor does it ever perish. But these your riches, if they were always yours, there does not the sooner seem to you enough of them; and if ye may not give them to other men, ye never the more therewith satisfy their want and their de- sire. Though thou divide them as small as dust, yet thou canst not satisfy all men equally: and when thou hast divided all, thou wilt then be poor thyself. Are the riches of this middle-earth worthy of a man when uo one can fully have
;
40 BOETHIUS, CHAP. XIV.
hie opepne z250n co pebdlan. Ppepep! nu zimma plice eoppe— eazan co him zezio. heopa to pundpianne. spa ic pac p hie? Sop. hpat yeo* duzus ponne pey plicer pe on pam* zimmum — bid. bip heopa ney eoppe.” py 1c eom ypipe unzemeclice — ofpundpod hpi eop pince pepe unzerceadpiyan zepceapre z0d° ~ becepe ponne eopep agen zod. hpi ze spa unzemeclice pundpizen papa zimma. odde enizey papa deadlicena Sinza Se zercead- — pyyneyye neefp. ropdam hie mid nanum pyhte ne mazon zeeap- nizan ze heopa pundpizen. peah hie Loder zercearra sien. ne — yinc hi no pip eop to metanne. foppam pe odep cpeza oppe hic nan z05 my fop eop yelpe. odde peah fon lycel z0d pip eop co metanne. co ypipe pe hepepiap’ uy yelpe. ponne pe mape lupiap® } pe undep uy iy on upum? anpealde. ponne up relre. 065e Sone Dpihten Se uy zepceop. J uy ealle Sa zod fopzear. Ppepep Se nu licizen’® pezepu lond :-
CAPUT XIV.”
§ I. DA antypopodse } Nod pepe Lerceadpiyneyre J cpxd. Ppi ne yceolde me heian fexzep land. hu ne ip fee ye Feezepeyca deel Loder xepcearca. ze full ofc pe paexmap!! pmylcpe pe. 3 eac pundjuap pey plicer pepe sunnan and pey monan J eallpa papa yceoppena, Da andypopode ye Pipdom and yeo Lercead- piney pam Mode y pur cpep. Ppt belimpp pe heopa fexep- neyye. hpepen’* Su duppe zilpan p heopa fexepnery pm pie. nere neye. hu ne parc pu ‘ pu heopa nanne ne zepophterc.!* ac zip Su ziulpan pille. zilp Loder. Ppepep pu nu fezeppa bloyc- meena peznize on eaytpan ypelce pu hie zepcope. hpapep pu nu ypelcey auht pypcan maze, odde zepophter habbe. neye nere. ne 50 pu rpa.' hpepep hic nu Smey xepealder pie P ype hep- feye yle ypa peliz on paeycmum. hu ne pat ic ‘P hic 1p no piney zepealdey. Pp eapc pu donne oneled mid ypa idele zepean. odde hp: lugayct Su pa ppemdan xod ypa ungemetlice. ppelce hi sien pm aznu.’® Venyc pu maze seo pypd pe xedon pet pa pmz Sine azene!? pen pa pe heopa azene!® zecynd pe zebyoon!” ppembde. neye neye. niy hic no pe xecynde P ce pu hi aze. ne him nip zebypbde ‘} hi Se folzien. ac pa heofencundan ping pe ypc”? ze-
Vv Boet. lib. ii, prosa 5.—Quid ni? Est enim, &e.
1 Bod. J)pep. 7 Cott. hi. % Cott. ro. 4 Cott. bem, 5 Cott. eopep. 6 Cott. 505 peb. 7 Cott. heppad. * Cott. ma lupaS. © Cott. uppum. 10 Cott. heen. 1 Cott. paexema’d. 1 Cott. to hiopa yesepneyya. & Bod. hpep. M4 Cott. nan ne pophteyt. 1 Cott. norpa. 1 Bod. yen bine get nu. 17 Cott. agnu. ' Cott, agnu. 1 Bod. gedon, * Catt. rendan.
DAGE BOETHIUS. 41
them? nor can they enrich any man, unless they bring another to poverty. Does the beauty of gems attract your eyes to them, to wonder at them? I know that they do so. But the excellence of the beauty which is in gems is theirs, not yours. Wherefore I am excessively astonished why the _ good of the irrational creature seems to you better than your own good: why ye so immoderateély admire gems, or any of the insensible things which have not reason: for they with no justice can deserve that ye should admire them. Though they are God’s creatures, they are not to be compared with you. For either it is no good for yourselves, or at least for _ little good, compared with you. We too much despise our- - selves when we love that which is beneath us, in our own power, more than ourselves, or the Lord who made us, and gave us all good things. Do fair lands delight thee ?
CHAPTER XIV.
§ I. Tuen answered the Mind to Reason, and said: Why should not fair land delight me? Is not that the fairest part of God’s creatures? Full often we rejoice at the serene sea, and also admire the beauty of the sun, and of the moon, and of all the stars. Then answered Wisdom and Reason to the Mind, and thus said: What belongs to thee of their fairness P Darest thou to boast that their fairness is thine? No, no. Dost thou not know that thou madest none of them? But if thou wilt glory, glory in God. Dost thou rejoice in the fair blossoms of Easter, asif thoumadest them? Canstthou then make anything of this kind, or hast thou any part in the work? No, no. Do not thou so, Is it through thy power that the harvest is so rich in fruits? Do not 1 know that it is not through thy power? Why art thou then inflamed with such vain glory ? or why lovest thou external goods so im- - moderately, as if they were thy own? Thinkest thou that fortune can cause to thee, that those things should be thy own, which their own natures have made foreign to thee? No, no. It is not natural to thee that thou shouldest pos- sess them; nor is it their nature, that they should follow thee. But heavenly things are natural to thee, not these earthly. -
Hf
49 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XIV. —
cynde. ney per eopplican. Day eopplican peycmar pint zeycea- — pene necenum! co anbdlirene. 3 pa populd pelan yynt zepceapene co biypice pam monnum pe beop neatenum? zelice. } beop un- ~ puhcpiye 3 unzemecreyce. to pam hi eac becumap ofcoyc. Lap — pu ponne Sez zemec habban pille. 7 Sa nyd peapre pican pille. | ponne iy pect mete Jj Spyne J clapay and col co ypelcum — cpefce ypelce pu cunne f Se iy xecynde 7 P Se ip puht co - habbenne. Ppele ypemu iy Se H pec pu pilnize piyya andpeap- — dena zeyeelpa ofep xemez. ponne hie napep® ne-mazon ne pm — zehelpan. ne heopa yelgpa. On yprpe lyclon hepa hep seo xe- cynd zenoz. on spa miclum heo herp xenoz ypa pe ep yppeecon. Ing pu heope mane yeleyz. opep tpeza od6e hit pe depap. odde hit pe peah unpynyum bip. odde unzecere.* od5e ppecenlic eall pu nu ofen xemec deyc. Ing pu nu ofep xemevt icyc. oppe opincyt. odde clapa pe ma on heyye? ponne pu pupfe. seo ofepninz® pe pupp oppe co yape. odSe co pletcan. oppe co un- Zepiyenum. oppe co plio. Ing pu nu penyc } te pundophlce zenela’ hpele peoppmynd sie. Sonne celle 1c pa peoppmynd pem® pyphcan pe hie pophce. ney na pe.’ ye pyphea ip Lod. pey cpere ic pep hepize on. Penyc pu pet yeo menzio pmpa — monna pe meze don zeyelizne. neye neye. ac xf hie yrele pimt Sonne yint hie pe pleolicpan ¥ zeypicnerulpan xe heed ponne Ze » nepo.!° ronpam yrele peznay beop yymle heopa hlapopdey fiend. Tng hi ponne zode beop 3 hlapopd hole 4 uncpizealde hu ne beop } ponne heopa zodey. ney pmey. hu miht pu ponne pe aznian heopa zod. zp pu nu pey zUpyc. hu ne zlpyc pu ponne © heopa zobdey. neey pmey ¢-
‘§ IL.” Nu pe ay zenoh openlice xecyped pet ce nan papa oda pin my. pe pe ap ymbe yppeecon. J pu ceohhodeyc!! p hi pine beon yceoldan. Ing ponne piyye populde plice 3 pela to pilnienne my. hpeect mupenay’ pu ponne eftep pam pe pu fop- lupe. odSe to hpon faznayc Su pep pe pu ep heepdeyc.! zip hic © peexep iy. Pip of heopa agnum zecynde. ney of Smum. heopa pezep hic ip. ney pm. hpec peeznayc’® pu ponne heona faezepey. hpeec belimpp hiy co pe. ne pu hit ne zerceope. ne hi pme azene ne sent, Inp hi nu zobe pint 7 feezepe. ponne pepon hi ypa ze-
w Boet. lib. ii. prosa 5.—Ex quibus omnibus, &e.
1 Cott. nycenum. 2 Cott. bioS neacum. * Cott. napbep. * Cott. unzeceye.  ° Cott. clabe ma on hehyz. & Cott. yo oyepime. © 7 Cott. sepepela. * Bod. pa. 9 Cott. nealley be. 1 Cott. and lyase bonne
yune hi be pholicpan 7 serpmmcrulpan herd bonne neyd. © Cott. tioh- hodey. 12 Cott. beep heyy. 18 Bod. yasnay.
§ 11. BOETHIUS, 43
These earthly fruits are created for the food of cattle; and worldly riches are created for a snare to those men who are ° like cattle, that is, vicious and intemperate. To those, more- over, they come oftenest. But if thou wouldest have the measure, and wouldest know what is needful; then is it, meat and drink, and clothes, and tools for such craft as thou knowest, which is natural to thee, and which is right for thee to possess. What advantage is it to thee, that thou shouldest desire these present goods beyond measure, when they can neither help thee nor themselves ? With very little of them nature has enough. With so much she has enough, as we before mentioned. If thou givest her more, either it hurts
thee, or it at least is unpleasant to thee, or inconvenient, or dangerous,—all that thou dost beyond measure. If thou- beyond measure eatest, or drinkest, or hast more clothes on thee, than thou needest, the superfluity becomes to thee
either pain, or loathing, or inconvenience, or danger. If: thou thinkest that wonderful apparel is any honour, then ascribe [ the honour to the artificer who made it, not to thee. The artificer is God, whose skill I therein praise. Thinkest thou that the multitude of thy men can make thee happy ? No, no. But if they are wicked and deceitful, then are they more dangerous, and more troublesome to thee, had, than not had: for wicked thanes are always their lord’s enemies. But if they are good and taithful to their lord, and sincere, is not that, then, their good, not thine? How canst thou, then, appropriate to thyself their good? If thou boastest of it, dost thou not boast of their good, not of thine ?
§ II. It is now plainly enough shown to thee that none of those goods is thine which we have already spoken about, and thou didst think should be thine. If, then, the beauty and wealth of this world is not to be desired, why dost thou re- pine on account of what thou hast lost? or wherefore dost thou long for what thou formerly hadst? If it is fair, that is of their own nature, not of thine: it is their fairness, not thine. Why then dost thou delight in their fairness? what of it belongs to thee? Thou didst not make it, nor are they thine own. If they are good and fair, then were they so made; and such they would be, though thou never hadst
ALBERT 5S VEE ie BOETHIUS. CHAP. XIv.
yeeapene. J ypeelce hi polban beon peah pu hi neegpe nahceyc. Penyc du p hi ape 5eoppypppan yseon.! pe hi to pmpe note ze- lende pepon. Ac foppam pe heopa dSypize men pafiap. 7 hi him pincap deope. foppam pu hi zadepayc J helcyt on pmum — hopbde. Ppa pilnayc pu ponne } pu hebbe zt ypelcepe zepeliz- neyye.? Gelier® me nu ic hit Se yecze. nefye Su pep nauht ec bucon pu cilayc* peedle co yhonne. 4 fon py ze@bdepayc*mape ponne pu pupre.® Ac ic pac Seah ypipe zeane. p ce eall } ic hep yppece iy pip pmum pillan. Ac eoppa zerelpa ne ymt no f ze penap pec hi pien. foppam ye pe micel mepre® 3 muylic azan pile. he bepeapr eac micley pulcumey. Se ealda cpide 1p rpipe pop pe mon zefypn cpep. pact ce pa? micler bepupfon. pe micel azan pillap, 3 pa pupfon yspipe lycley. pe mapan ne pillmap ponne senozey. bucan he pilnizen mid ofepinze hiopa zicpunza Ze~ fyllan.*p hi nefpe ne zedop. Ic pac P ze penap pect ze nan zecundelice® x05 ne zeyeelpa on mnan eop yelrum nabbap.? fop- pam ze hi secap bucan eop co pnemdum xeycearcum. ypa hic ip miyhpeopred Pp pem men dincp. peah he ye zodcunbdlice Ze- yceadpiy. ‘H he on him yelpum nebbe yelpa xenoze. bucon he mape Zezadepize papa unzerceadpiyena xercepca ponne he bepupre. odSe him zemeclic yeo. 4 pa unzerceadpiyan neocena!? ne pilmiap naney oppey feoy.!! ac pincp him zenoz on pam pe hi bimnan heona wzenne hyde habbap co eacan pam fodpe pe him zecyndelic bip. Ppsec ze ponne peah hpethpexza zodcunbdlicer on eopeppe yaule habbap. pat ip andzic. 7 xemynd. and ye xe- yceadpiylica pila P hie papa cpeza lyyce. ye pe ponne pay Speo herp. ponne herp he hip yceoppender onlicneyye spa fopp ypa ypa enezu zercearc pypmeyc!? mez hiepe rceppender onlicneyye habban. Ac xe yecap pepe hean zecynde xereelpa and heope peoppreipe co pam nipeplicum 3 co Sam hpeoyendlicum™ pin- zum. Ac ze ne onzicad hu micelne ceonan xe Sop Lode eoppum yceppende. foppam pe he polde pac ce ealle men pepan ealna oppa!* zercearca pealbanday. Ac xe undeppiodap eoppe hehycan medemneyye unde pa eallpa nypemeytan zepcearta. jy mid pam ze habbap zecyped } ce wpcep eoppum aznum bome xe Sop eop yelre pypran ponne eoppe azne! xhta, nu ze penap ‘ eopne nauhc!® pelan sien eoppa xerelpa. 4 ceohhiap } eall eoppe
1 Cott. aby Seoppan pien. *% Bod. selicneyye. 3 Bod. Leler. * Cott. ciolayt. 5 Cott. bypre. 6 Cott. mmiepye. 7 Bod. } ba be. * Cott. secyn- dSelic. 9 Cott, nebben. 1° Cott. neac. ™ Cott. prop. 1% Bod. yupemerc. 13 Bod. hpeopendum. Cott. obeppa. 1 Cott. eoppa asna. 1° Cott. nohz.
§ 11. ' BOETHIUS. 45
them. Thinkest thou that they are ever the more precious, because they were lent for thy use? But, because foolish men admire them, and they to them seem precious, therefore thou gatherest and keepest them in thy hoard. How then dost thou hope to have happiness from anything of this sort ? Believe me now, I say it unto thee, thou hast nought there- from, except that thou toilest to avoid poverty, and therefore gatherest more than thou needest. But nevertheless I very well know, that all which I here speak, is contrary to thy will. But your goods are not what ye think they are: for he who desires to have much and various provision, needs also much help. The old saying is very true, which men for- - merly said; that those need much, who desire to possess much, and those need very little, who do not desire more _ than enough. But they hope by means of superfluity to satisfy their greediness; which they never do. I wot that ye think ye have no natural good or happiness within your- selves, because ye seek them without you, from external creatures. So is it perverted, that man, though he is divinely - rational], thinks that he has not happiness enough in himself, unless he collects more of irrational creatures than he has need of, or than is suitable for him: whilst the irrational cattle are desirous of no other wealth, but think that sufh- cient for them, which they have within their own skin, in addition to the fodder which is natural to them. Whatsoever, then, though little, ye have of divine in your soul, is the un- - derstanding, and memory, and the rational will which delights
in them both. He therefore who has these three, has his
maker’s likeness, as much as any creature can at all have its
maker’s likeness. But ye seek the happiness of the exalted
nature, and its dignity, from low and perishable things. But
ye understand not how great injury ye do to God your creator.
For he would that all men should be governors of all other
creatures. But ye degrade your highest dignity below the - meanest creatures of all: and thereby ye have shown that,
according to your own judgment, ye make yourselves worse
than your own possessions, now ye think that your false
riches are your happiness, and are persuaded that all your
7 - 46 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XIV.9)
populd z0d sien eppan! ze yelre. spa hic eac pypp ponne ze~ ypa pillap :-
§ II.* Dey menniycan hirer zecynd iy P hi Sy anan yeon? — beropan eallum oppum zeycearcum. dy hi hie yelpe onziton hpeec hie yend.> 3 hponan hi yend.* 7 pi hi end’ pypyan ponne ~ nycenu. py li nellap pican hpzc hi pme. o55e hponan hi pint. Dam neactum ip zecynde } hi nycon hpec hi yend.® Ac f ip papa monna unpeap pec hi nycon hpec hie pien. Nu pe ip ypipe ypeocol pec ze beop on zedpolan. ponne ze penap } eng mez mid ypembdum pelum beon xzepeoppod. Li¢ hpa nu bip mid hpelcum pelum zepeoppod 7 mid hpelcum dSeoppyppum ehcum zexypepod.” hu ne belimpp ye peopspreipe ponne to pam pe hine zepeopdad. peec iy co hemanne hpene pihctlicop. Ne See ne beod on py faeexeppe peec mid eller hpam zepenod bip. peah pa zepenu feezpu sien. pe hit mid zepenod bid. zip hic ep yceondlic pey. ne bip hic on py fezeppe. Vite pu foprop nan Z06 ne depap pam pe hic ah. Pp du payt nu P 1c pe ne leoze. J eac payt pet pa pelan ofc dSepiap pam pe hie azan on manezum pinzum. Jj on pam ypiporc pet te men peoppad ypa upaharene fon pam pelan. P ofc ye eallpa pypperca ¥ ye eallpa unpeoppeyca mon penp P he pie ealler pay pelan pyppe Se on pyye populde ip. zip he pyce® hu he him tocuman mihcte. Se pe micele pelan harp. he him ondpet monizne feond.® zip -he nane wha nepde, ne poppce he him nanne’? ondpedon. Tip pu nu pepe pezpepende. 7 hepderc micel zold on pe. 7 pu tonne become on peor yeeole.'! ponne ne pendeyc pu pe dimer yeopey. zip Su ponne yspelcey nanpuht nepdeyc. ponne ne popr- ceyt Su Se nanpuhc ondpedan,. ac meahceyt pe xan pinzende pone ealdan cpide pe mon Zepypn sanz. pet ye nacoda pex- yepend him nanpuht ne ondpede. ponne Su Sonne opropnz pepe. J Sa peopar Se Fpom zxepiten pepon. ponne mihteyt pu biymepian pay andpeandan pelan. y mihcey't cpepan. Eala ‘p hic iy 505 J pynrum mon micelne pelan aze.'? nu ye nepfpe ne pypp opyopz Se hime unbdepfehp :-
x Boet. lib. ii. prosa 5.—Humane.quippe nature, &e.
1 Cott. dioppan. *% Cott. me. * Cott. ren. * Cott. pen. 5 Cott. pmo. 6 Cott. yen. 7 Cott. seapod.  * Cott. pyre. 9% Cott. ¢ynd. 1 Cott. nenne, 1" Cott. bioy ycole. 1% Cott. heebbe.
} § 11. BOETHIUS. 47
worldly goods are superior to yourselves. So indeed it is, when ye so will!
§ ILI. It is the condition of the life of men, that they then only are before all other creatures, when they themselves know what they are, and whence they are: and they are worse than cattle, when they will not know what they are, or whence they
- are. It is the nature of cattle that they know not what they °
are; but it is a fault in men, that they know not what they are. It is therefore very plain to thee, that ye are in error, when ye think that any one can be made honourable by ex- ternal riches. If any one is made honourable with any riches,- and endowed with any valuable possessions, does not the honour then belong to that which makes him honourable ? That is to be praised somewhat more rightly. That which is - adorned with anything else, is not therefore fairer, though
— the ornaments be fair, with which it is adorned. If it before
was vile, it is not on that account fairer. Know thou, as-
suredly, that no good hurts him who possesses it. Thou
knowest that I lie not to thee, and also knowest that riches
often hurt those who possess them, in many things: and in
this chiefly, that men become so lifted up on account of riches, - that frequentiy the worst man of all, and the most unworthy
of all, thinks that he is deserving of all the wealth which is
in this. world, if he knew how he might arrive at it. He who
has great riches, dreads many an enemy. If he had no pos- - sessions, he would not need to dread any. If thou wert travelling, and hadst much gold about thee, and thou then shouldest meet with a gang of thieves, then wouldest not thou be anxious for thy life? If thou hadst nothing of this kind, then thou wouldest not need to dread anything, but mightest go singing the old adage which men formerly sung, that the naked traveller fears nothing. When thou then wert - safe, and the thieves were departed from thee, then mightest thou scoff at these present riches, and mightest say, O, how good and pleasant it is, that any one should possess great wealth, since he who obtains it is never secure!
‘ ; . 48 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XV. XVE. |
CAPUT XV
i DA yeo Lerceadpiyney Sa pip ypell apeed heerde. pa onzan be ymzan 7} puy cpep. Cala hu zereliz yeo popme eld par pip muiddan zeapdey. pa elcum men puhte zenoz on pepe eoppan peycmum. Neepon pa pelize hamay. ne miyctlice ypormercais, ne Spincay. ne Sioppypppa hpzzla hi ne zipndan. foppam hr pa
zit nepan. ne hio nanpuht ne zeyapon. ne ne zehepdon. Ne xemodon hie naney fypenluycer. bucon ypipe zemeclice pa ze- cynd beeodan. ealne pez hi eton zne on d5xz. and } pey co zepenney. Tpeopa peycmay hi eton J pypta. naller perp pm hi ne dpuncan. ne nanne pecan hi ne cupon pid hunize menzan. ne yeolocenpa hpezla mis miyclicum bleopum hi ne zmbdon. €Ealne pez hi ylepon ute on tmiopa yceadum. hluceppa pella peecep hi Spuncon. ne zeyeah nan cepa ealand. ne pepop. ne xehepde non mon pa zet nanne yerphepe. ne puppon ymbe nan xepeoht yppecan. ne seo eoppe pa zec bermiten mid ofylexzener monney blobe. ne mon fupdsum zepundod. ne monn ne xereah 6a xec yrel pillende men. nenne peoppycipe nefdon. ne hi non mon ne lurude. Eala } upe vida nu ne mihtan peopSan ypilce. Ac nu manna zicyunz iy ypa bypnente. spa } Fyp on pepe helle. reo 1y on pam munce Se Alcne hatcve. on pam iezlande pe Siciha hacce. ye mune bid yimle yperle bipnente. J ealla pa neah ycopa pep ymbucan fonbepnd. Cala hpec ye popma zitpepe peepe. pe wepeyc pa eoppan onzan bdelfan eyctep xolde. J epcep zImmum, Jj pa Fpecnan deoppuppneyya funde se ep behyd pay j behelod mid Sepe eoppan :-
:
CAPUT XVI."
§ I. DA ye Piydom pa piy leos arunzen herbde. pa onzan he ere ypellan 3 puy cpep. Ppaec mez ic Se nu mape yeczan be pam peopprcipe yj be San anpealde piyye populde. fop pam anpealbe ze eop polbon ahebban up od Sone heoren. zip ze mihcon.’ ‘} iy yoppam pe ze ne zyemunon ne eac ne onzicad pone heofoncundan anpeald 7 pone peoppycipe ye iy eopep azen. J ponan ze comon.” hpaec ye eopep pela ponne 7 ye eopep anpeald pe ze nu peoppycrpe hatad. zip he becymp co pam eallpa pyppercan men. yj co dam pe ly eal, unpeoppoye bip. rpa he nu dyde co piy ican Deodpice. 7 eac® ap to Nepone |
Y Boet. lib. ii. metrum 5.—Felix nimium prior etas, &e.
* Boet. lib. ii. prosa 6.—Quid autem de dignitatibus, &e. ! Cott. meahbzen. 2 Bod. noman. 3 Cott. 1u.
Sr. BOETHIUS. 49
CHAPTER XY.
Wuew Reason had made this speech, she began to sing, and thus said: O, how happy was the first age of this middle- earth, when to every man there seemed enough in the fruits
}) of the earth! There were not then splendid houses, nor } various sweetmeats nor drinks; nor were they desirous of
costly apparel, for they as yet were not, nor did they see or hear anything of them. They cared not for any luxury, but very temperately followed nature. They always ate once in the day, and that was in the evening. They ate the fruits of trees, and herbs. They drank no pure wine, nor knew they how to mix any liquor with honey, nor cared they for silken garments of various colours. They always slept out in the shade of trees. They drank the water of the clear springs. No merchant visited island or coast, nor did any man as yet hear of any ship-army, nor even the mention of any war. The earth was not yet polluted with the blood of slain men, nor was any one even wounded. They did not as yet look upon evil-minded men. Such had no honour; nor did any man
| love them. Alas, that our times cannot now become such!
But now the covetousness of men is as burning as the fire in the hell, which is in the mountain that is called Actna, in the island that is called Sicily. The mountain is always burning with brimstone, and burns up all the near places thereabout. Alas, what was the first avaricious man, who first began to dig the earth after gold, and after gems, and found the dan- gerous treasure, which before was hid and covered with the earth !
CHAPTER XVI.
§ I. Warn Wisdom had sung this lay, then began he again to speak, and thus said: What more can I say to thee, concerning the dignity and concerning the power of this world? For power ye would raise yourselves up to heaven, if ye were able. This is, because ye do not remember, nor understand, the heavenly power and the dignity which is your own, and whence ye came. What, then, with regard to your wealth, and your power, which ye now call dignity, if it should come to the worst men of all, and to him that of all is unworthiest of it, as it lately did to this same Theodoric,
E
pam Layepe. 3 ofc eac co manezum heopa zelicum. Pu ne pile ie ponne don ypa ypa hy 5ydon J zit Sop. ealle’ pa picu pe him > undep beod od5e apep on neapeyce fopylean 7 pophepezian spa rpa ¢ypey liz Se3 Spyne? hep feld. odde ere ye bypnenda yperk Sone munt bepnp de pe hacap AXcne. ye yi on pam ealonde Sicilia. ypipe onlice pam micelan flode Se zu on Noey dazum: pey. Ic pene pec Su meze zemunan ce eoppe eoldpan zu> | Romana pican on Topcpmey dazum pey ofepmodan cynmzey. fop hir ofepmectcum. Sone cynelican naman of Rome bypiz. eepeyc abydon. Ond efc ypa ice pa henecohan. pe hit ep — ucadpipon. hi polbon ert ucadpizan fop hiopa ofepmercum. Ac hi ne mihtan. foppam pe ye eyteppe anpeald papa hepecozena pam Romaniycum pitum zit pypy licode ponne ye eppa Sapa cyninza. Ing hic Sonne eype zepupp. spa hic yprSe yeldan® ze- pypp. pec ye anpeald 7 ye peoppycrpe becume to zo5um men and co piyum. hpec bip Sep ponne hepyppey buton hip zod 7 hip peoppyerpe. peey zodan cyninzey. nay Sey anpealder. foppam Se ye anpealdb nafpe ne bip z0d.° bucon ye x05! pie pe hine heebbe. py® hic bip Sep monney z0d.° nay! Sey anpealder. zp fe anpeald zod!! bip. roppam hic bis. pees te nan man fop hir pice ne cym® co cpefroum j cto medemneyre. Ac fop hip cpefoum 7 yop ny medumneyye he cymp co pice J co anpealde. Sy ne bip nan mon yop hip anpealde na pe betepe. ac pop hip cperz- cum he beop x05" ip he zo0d'* bip. 3 pop hip cpaefpoum he bid anpealdey peoppe. xf he ky peoppe bip. Leopmap foppam Viydom. y ponne ze hine zeleopnod hebben. ne rophoziap’* hme ponne. Donne yecze 1c eop bucon xlcum cpeon. } ze mazon puph hme becuman co anpealde. peah xe no pep anpealdey ne pilmizan. Ne puppon ze no hozian’ on Sam anpealde. ne him eftep ppinzan. zp xe pipe bip 7 xobde. he pile yolzian eop. peah ze hip no ne pilman. Ac sexe me nu hpet eopep Seoppyppeyca pela 4 anpeald pie. pe xe ypipoye zipnap. Ie pac peah pac hic ip pip andpeapda hip y pey bpoymienda pela pe pe ep ymbe ypzecon :-
§ II." E€ala hpapep ze necelican'® men onzicon hpele ye pela ple. J ye anpeald. 3 pa populd zeyelpa.!” Sa pine eoppe hlapopdar
50 BOETAIUS. CHAP. x |
« Boet. lib. ii, prosa 6.—Nonne, o terrena animalia, &e.
‘ Bod. eall. 7 Cott. leg 5e8 Spisne. 3 Cott. ealdpan so. 4 Cott. hine. 5 Cott. yeldon. ® Cott. 500d. 7 Cott. 5008. —§ Bod. beah. © Cott. 500d. lo Cott. ney. 1 Cott. 5005. 12 Cott. 500d. = Cott. m00d. 4 Cott. yophycgas. 15 Cott. hongian. _—16 Cott. mecenlican, 17 Cott. yaelba.
ey 11. -BOETHIUS. 51
and also formerly to Nero the Caesar, and moreover fre- quently to many like them? ‘Will he not then do as they did, and still do? slay and destroy all the rich who are under, or anywhere near him, as the flame of fire does the dry beath field, or as the burning brimstone burneth the mountain which we call Aitna, which is in the island of Sicily ? very like to the great flood which was formerly in Noah’s days. _ I think that thou mayest remember that your ancient Roman senators formerly, in the days of Tarquin the proud king, on account of his arrogance first banished the kingly name from the city of Rome. And again, in like manner, the consuls who had driven them out, these they were afterwards desirous to expel on account of their arrogance (but they could not) ; because the latter government of the consuls still less pleased the Roman senators, than the former one of the kings... Tf, ~ however, it at any time happens, as it very seldom does
happen, that power and dignity come to good men and to
wise; what is there then worthy of esteem, except the good . and the dignity of him, the good king, not of the power? For power never is good unless he is good who possesses it. Therefore if power be good, it is the good of the man, not of the power. Hence it is, that no man by his authority comes - _ to virtues and to merit: but by his virtues, and by his merit, he comes to authority and to power. Therefore is no man for his power the better; but for his virtues he is good, if he be good: and for his virtues he is deserving of power, if he be deserving of it. Learn, therefore, wisdom; and when ye have learned it, do not then despise it. Then I say to you, without all doubt, that ye may through it arrive at power, though ye be not desirous of power. Ye need not be anxious for power, nor press after it. IPfye are wise and good, it will follow you, though ye are not desirous of it. But tell me now, what is your most valuable wealth and power, which ye most desire? I know, however, that it is this present life, and this perishing wealth, which we before spoke about. ;
§ II. O, ye beastlike men, do ye know what wealth is, and power, and worldly goods? ‘They are your lords and your -
B2
52 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XVI.
J eoppe pealdanbay. ney ze heopa. Ing ze nu zerapen hpelce— muy pet pepe hlapopd ofen oppe myy. 3 yecce him d5omap. J nidde! hie eycep zarole. hu punbeplic polbe eop pet pincan,_ hpelce cehheccunze ze polbon per habban, and mid hpeleum hleahzpe ze polbon beon aycyped. hu micle mape ip ponne peep monney lichoma co metenne pid } Mod. ponne yeo muy pip pone mon. pac ze ponne maxon eape zepencan. zp xe hit ze- opne ymbe ymeazan pillap y epceprpyman. $ nanpe puhte lichoma ne beod ponne cedeppa ponne per monner. Dam mazon depian pa leycan fleozan. j pa zneccay mid ypipe lyclum ycicelum him depiap. J eae pa ymalan pypmar. pa Sone mon ze innan ze ucon pepdap.® 3 hpilum fulneah deadne ze- 608. ze fuppum peoy lycle loppe hie hpilum deadne zedep. ypilca puhta him depiap ezpep ze mnan ze ucon. On hpaem mez eniz man oppum deman bucon on hip lichoman. odde efc on heopa pelum. pe ze havap zeyeelpa. ne nan mon ne mez pam zeyceadpiyan Mode zedepian. ne him zedon * hit ne pie hic bip.* Dec ip ypipe ypeocol cto onzicanne be sumum Romaniycum edelmze. ye per hacen Libepruy.® ye pap co manezum picum zepopht. roppam pe he nolde meldian on hip zefepan pe mid him penebon’ ymbe pone cyninz pe hie zp mid unpihce xepunnen herbde.’ pa he pa befopan pone zpaman cyninz xeled pey. j he hme het yeczan hpet hip xefepan pzpon pe mid him ymbe piepedon.® pa fopceap he hiy azene cunzan. and peapp hme Sep mid on Sec neb fopan. roppam hic zepeaps ‘P Sam piyan men com co lore and to pypdsyerpe *H ye unjuhcpiya cynmz him ceohhobde® co pice. Ppeer ip P pe ma  weniz man meze oppum don. pac he ne maze him bon f ilce. 3 zip he ne mxz. opep man mez. e leopnodon eac be pam pelhpeopan Biyipitem. ye peep on Alzipcum, pay leod- hacan zepuna pay he polbe wlene cuman ypipe aplice undepfon. ¥ ypipe ypaylice pip zebepan ponne he him epeyo co com. Ac ere ep he him fpom cepbde. he rceolde beon of- ylezen. 4 pa zecybde"” hic } Epculer Tobey yunu com co him. pa polbe he 50n ymbe hine ypa ypa he ymbe manizne cuman ep Syd5e. polbe hme adpencan on pepe ea pe Niluy hace. pa peapp he yepenzpa ¥ adpencce hime. ypide pyhce be Loder come. ypa spa he manizne odepne ep dyde. Ppeec eac Rezuluy. ye fonemepa hepecoza. da he feahe pid Appicanay. he heerde 1 Cott. nedde. ? Cott. be ce. 3 Cott. pypdas. * Cott. hic jie
pet bes hic ne bis. 5 Cott. Tibepiuy. § Cott. pipedon. 7 Bod. heydon. § Cott. hine yypedon. Cott. tiohhooe. 1 Cott. sebepede.
§ m1. BOETHIUS. 53
rulers, not ye theirs! If ye now saw some mouse that was lord over other mice, and set them judgments, and subjected them to tribute, how wonderful would ye think it! What scorn would ye have, and with what laughter would ye be moved! How much greater, then, is man’s body, compared with the mind, than the mouse_compared with the manP Indeed, ye may easily conceive, if ye will carefully consider and examine it, that no creature’s body is more tender than man’s. The least flies can injure it: and the gnats with very little stings hurt it: and also the small worms which corrupt the man both inwardly and outwardly, and sometimes make him almost dead. Moreover the little flea sometimes kills him. Such things injure him both inwardly and outwardly. Wherein can any man injure another, except in his body?
,
or again in their riches, which ye call goods? No man can:
injure the rational mind, or cause it that it should not be
what it is. This is very evidently to be known by a certain:
Roman nobleman, who was called Liberius. He was put to many torments because he would not inform against his as- sociates, who conspired with him against the king who had with injustice conquered them. When he was led before the enraged king, and he commanded him to say who were his
associates who had conspired with him, then bit he off his -
own tongue, and immediately cast it before the face of the tyrant. Hence it happened that, to the wise man, that was the cause of praise and honour, which the unjust king ap- pointed to him for punishment. What is it, moreover, that any man can do to another, which he may not do to him in like manner? and if he may not, another man may. We have learned also concerning the cruel Busiris, who was in Egypt. This tyrant’s custom was, that he would very honour- ably receive every stranger, and behave very courteously to him when first he came. But afterwards, before he departed from him, he would be slain. And then it happened that - Hercules, the son of Jove, came to him. Then would he do to him, as he had done to many a stranger before: he would drown him in the river which is called Nile. Then was he stronger, and drowned him, very justly by God’s judgment, as he many another before had done! So also, Regulus, the illustrious consul! When he fought against the Africans, he
|
54 BOETHIUS. CHAP XVI. :
yulneah unayeczendlicne pize ofep pa Afpicanay. 6a he hi pa~ yprsoyc fopylazen hepde. pa hec he hi bmdan 7 on balcan— lezan.! pa zebypede hic yprpe hpape } he peapp zebunden mid ~ hipa pacencum. pet pense du ponne hpet zobder ye? anpeald — yle. ponne he on nane piyan hip azner cpefcey ne mez Fop- — ouzan ‘ he pec ilce ypel ne zepayize oppum monnum. pe® he _ zp oppum dye. hu ne iy ye anpeald ponne peep nauht:- § IIT.” Ppac penye pu. zif ye peoppyerpe J ye anpeald aznep— ~ Soncer x05 pepe and hip yelper anpeald heybde. hpeden he - polde pam fopcupescum mannum folzian ypa he nu hpilum* des. Pu ne payc pu } hic nip nauht zecynde ne nauht zepunelic xniz pipeppeapd Sinz bion zemenzed pip oSpum pipeppeapdum. odde enize zepeppedenne pid habban. Ac yeo zecynd hic onycunad pet hie® mazon peoppan tozebepe xemenzed. pe ma® pe pac zod! 5 pec yfel mazon wczzedene bion. Nu Se ip pide openlice zecyped  piy andpeande pice. and pay populd zeyzelpa. J per anpeald of heopa® aznum zecynde 7 heopa azner xe- pealdey nauhc zode ne yienc. ne hiopa yelppa nanne anpeald nabbas. nu hi pillap chypian® on pem pypytan monnum 7 him zepapiap pac hi biod heopa hlapopday. Niy Sey nu nan tpeo. f oye pa’? eallpa ropcupeycan men cumad co pam anpealde j co ~ pam peoppycipe. Ing ye anpeald ponne of hip azenpe zecynde 7 or hip azeney zepealoer zod pape. ne undeprenze he neppe pa yrelan ac pa zoban. Dey ilcan iy co penanne co eallum Sam zeyaldum pe yeo pypd bpenzd piyper andpeapdan lier ze on cpeyoum ze on ehtum. foppam hie hpilum becuma’d co pem foncupeycum. Ppt pe xenoz zeopne picon Set nanne mon pey ne cpeop Sac ye yeo!! ycponz on hip meezene. Se mon ze- y1hd Sec ycponzlic peope pypcd. Ne ponne ma. zip he hpaet bid. ne cpeop neenne mon } he hpxt ne sie. Spa xede5!” eac ye Speam cpeye Pp ye mon bip dpeamene. ¥ ye leece cpepe peer he bip lace. 7 yeo pacu ded" f he bip peccepe. Spa Sed eac ye ze- cynda cpere elcum men. } } x05 ne mez beon pid p yrel zemenzed. ne } yrel prs P xod. Seah he bucu on anum men yien. peah bip ezpep him on yundpon.  zecynd nyle nefpe nanpuht pipeppeapder lecan zemenzan. foppam heopa ezpep
b Boet. lib. ii. prosa 6.—Ad hee, si ipsis dignitatibus, &c.
1 Cott. leosan. * 2? Bod. ye Troder. 3 Cott. bees. 4 Bod. hplcum. | 5 Bod. hi. § Cott. bon ma. 7 Cott. 5008. 8 Cott. bey anpealoer Iiopa. 9 Cott. choyian. 1 Bod. oy bam. ™ Cott. pie. 1% Cott. max. 13 Cott. seOeS.
ST.-ALBERT’S COLLEGE LIBRARY § ur. BOETHIUS. 55
obtained an almost indescribable victory over the Africans. When he had grievously slain them, he gave order to bind them, and lay them in heaps. Then happened it very soon, that he was bound with their fetters. What thinkest thou, then? What good is power, when he who possesses it, can in no wise, by his own strength, avoid suffering from other men the same evil which he before did to others? Is not, then, power in that case naught ?
§ IIL. What thinkest thou? If dignity and power were good of its own nature, and had power of itself, would it follow the most wicked men, as it now sometimes doth? Dost thou not know, that it is neither natural nor usual, that any contrary thing should be mixed with other contrary, or have any fellowship therewith? But nature refuses it that — they should be mixed together; still more that good and evil should be together. Hence it is very manifestly shown to thee, that this present authority, and these worldly goods, and this power, are not good of their own nature, and of their own efficacy, nor have any power of themselves: since they are willing to cleave to the worst men, and permit them to be their lords. There is not indeed any doubt of this, that often the most wicked men of all come to power and to dignity. If power, then, were good of its own nature, and of its own efficacy, it never would be subservient to the evil, but to the good. The same is to be thought with regard to all the goods which fortune brings in this present life, both of talents and possessions: for they sometimes come to the most wicked. We very well know that no man doubts of this, that he is powerful in his strength, who is seen to perform laborious work: any more than if he be anything, any one doubts that he is so. Thus the art of music causes the man to be a musician, and medical knowledge to be a physician, and rhetoric causes him to be a rhetorician. In like manner also the nature of things causes to every man that good cannot be mixed with evil, nor evil with good. Though they are both in one man, yet is each in him separately. Nature will never suffer anything contrary to mix, for each of them rejects the other, and each will be what it is. Riches cannot
56 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XVI
onycunad opep. and ezpen pile beon  } hic bip. ne mez ye pela zedon ‘p ye zicpepe ne pie zicpepe. ne pa zpundleayan zic- yunza zeryllan. ne ye anpeald ne mez zedon hiy pealdend peal-
dendne. Nu ponne nu zle zeyceapc onycunad } f hipe pipep- _
peapo bid. and sprd zeopne uolap } hic him  ppom aycure. hpelce cpa yyn> ponne pipeppeapdpan becpuh him ponne z0d 4
ee) ees
yrel. ne peoppad hi neefpe co yomne zerezed. Be pem pu miht ;
ongzican. zip pa zeyelda Siyey andpeapdan hyer puph hie yelpe |
heopa yelppa zepeald ahton. 3 of heopa aznum zecynde zode
peepon. ponne poldon hi simile on Sam clipian.' Se him zod mid pophze. naley? yrel. Ac pep pap hi zobe beod. ponne beod hi puph py zodan monney x05 zode pe him zo0d mid pypep. J ye bid puph Lod zod. Ing hme ponne yrfel mon herp. ponne bip he yrel Suph pay monney yfel pe him yrel mid dep. 3 puph beorel.® Ppxec zoder iy ye pela ponne. ponne he ne mez pa zpundleayan zicpunza aryllan pey zityener. ode ye anpeald. ponne he ne mez hiy pealdend pealbendne zedon. Ac hime xe- bindap pa pon pinunza* mid heopa unabindendhicum pacentum. peah mon nu yfelum men anpeald yelle. ne zeded ye anpeald hme zobne ne meodumne.® zp he wp ney. ac zeopenad hiy yrel. zip he wp yrel pay. 3 zeded hic ponne ypeocol. zip hic ep ney. Foppam peah he zp yrel polde. ponne nyyce he hu he hic ypa pullice zecypde.° ep he fullne anpeald hepbe. Dev zepypp foppam dyyize pe ze fezmiap pec xe moton yceppan pone? naman. hacan ) yelpa ‘) nane ne beod. ) pet medumney ne ‘beop.® roppam hi zecySad on heopa endunze ponne me endiap. hie nappep ne bios. oppeem nappep ne ye pela.? ne ye anpeald. ne ye peoppycrpe ne beop co penanne ‘ hic peo yope xeyelp pie. rpa hic ip nu hpeeSoyc co yeczanne be eallum pam populd ze- yeelpum’” pe seo pypd bpenzp. P pap nan puht on nip peey co pinmanne yeo. foppam Se Sep nan puhe zecyndelicey oder on ny Sey Se of him cume. ‘p ip on pam ypeocol  h hie prmle to Sam zodum ne Seodas. ne Sa yrelan zode ne zed08 pe hi he oycoyt ToxeSeobap ¢ + § IV.° Da ye fiydom pa piy ypell pur apehc!! heepbe. pa onzean he epc ziddizan 4 pur cpep. Ppaec pe picon hpelce
¢ Boet. lib. ii. metrum 6.—Novimus quantas dederit, &c. 1 Cott. cleoyian. * Cott. nalley, 8 Cott, dSiopul. —* Cott. pelnuxa. . 5 Cott. medbomne. © Bod. acySde. 7 Cott. pone. 8% Cott. nane ‘ nan mebdomney ne bid. 9 Bod. ‘b hie napbep ne ye pela, 1° Cott. paelbum. 1 Cott, apeaht.
§ iv. -BOETHIUS. 57
cause the miser not to be a miser, or satisfy his boundless - desires, nor can authority make its possessor powerful. Since, then, every creature avoids that which is contrary to it, and very earnestly endeavours to repel it, what two things are more contrary to each other than good and evil? They are never united together. Hence thou mayest understand, that if the goods of this present life through themselves, had power of themselves, and were in their own nature good, then would they always cleave to him who did good with them, not evil. But wheresoever they are good, they are good through the good of the good man, who works good with them, and he is good through God. If, then, an evil man has it, it is evil through the man’s evil, who doth evil with it, and through the devil. What good is wealth, then, when it cannot satisfy - the boundless desires of the miser? or power, when it cannot make its possessor powerful, but the wicked passions bind him, with their indissoluble chains! Though any one give to any evil man power, the power does not make him good * nor meritorious, if he before were not: but exposes his evil, if he before were evil, and makes it then manifest, if it before were not. For though he formerly desired evil, he then knew not how he might so fully show it, before he had full power. It is through folly that ye are pleased, because ye can make - a name, and call that happiness which is none, and that merit which is none: for they show by their ending, when they come to an end, that neither wealth, nor power, nor dignity, is to be considered as the true happiness. So is it most as- suredly to be said concerning all the worldly goods that fortune brings; that there is nothing therein which is to be desired, because there is nothing therein of natural good which comes from themselves. This is evident from hence, that they do not always join themselves to the good, nor make the evil good, to whom they most frequently join them- selves.
§ IV. When Wisdom had thus made this speech, then began he again to sing, and thus said: We know what cruel-
58 BOETHIUS. . CHAP. XVII.
pelhpiopneyya. 3 hpilee hpypay. hpilce unprhchemebdu. 5 hpile
man. ¥ hpilce apleayneyye ye unpihcpiya Cayepe Nepon peophce. ye hec et yumum cyppe fopbzepnan ealle Rome buph on anne
|
a
yi5 zypcen pepe biyene pe z10 Tpozia bupz bapn. hime lyyte eac ©
zeyeon hu yeo bupne. 7 hu lanze. 7 hu leohte be pepe opeppe. —
J ee he hez oyylean ealle pa piyeycan pican Romana. ze fup- —
pon hiy azene mobdop. 3 hip azene bpodep. ze pupSon hiy agen
pip he ofyloz mid ypeopde. 3 fop Syllecum ney he napuht xe-
unpocyod. Ac per py blippa 7 razenode pey. Ond peah betpuh — Syllecum unpihtum ney him no py ley undepseod eall per
middan zZeapd Fpom eay Tepeandum 0d peycepeapdne. and eft —
Fpom yupepeapdum od noppepeapdne. eall he pay on hip anpealde. Venyc pu } ye zodcunda anpeald ne mihte afyppan pone anpeald pam unpihcpiyan Kayepe. and him pepe puhhunze zeyteonan. zip he polde. Inye la zeye. 1c pac fp he mihce zip he polde. Eala eap hu heriz zeoc he beylepte on ealle pa pe on hip cidbum libbende pepon on eopdan. 7 hu ofc hi speopd paepe beyyled on unycyldizum blode. Pu ne par pep zenox ypeotol
ye anpeald hiy azeney Soncey zod ney. pa ye x0d ney pe he co
com ;- CAPUT XVII.4
DA ye /iydom pa piy leop! arungen heerbe. Sa zerpizobe” he. ‘J pa andypopede pet Mod and puy cpap. Cala Lerceadpiyney. hp Su payc P me nepfpe yeo Zicyunz J seo yemexp Sire
eopdlican anpealdey pop pel ne licode. ne 1c ealley pop ypipe ne —
zipnde piyyer eopplican yncey. bucon la® 1c pimode peah and- peonicer to pam peonce pe me beboden pay to pypcanne. ‘p pay ‘H 1c ungpacodlice* 3 zepryenlice mihce yceopan 3 peccan pone anpeald pe me bereyc pay. Ppaec Su payt P nan mon ne mez nenne cperc cySan. ne nenne anpeald peccan ne ytiopan bucan’ colum 4 anbpeonce, ‘Hh bid elcey cpeycer andpeonc p mon Sone cpeyt bucon® pypcan ne mex. ‘ brp ponne cynmzer
andpeope’ 3 hi col mid co picpanne. ‘} he heebbe hip land full —
mannod.® he yceal hebban zebedmen. 3 fypdmen.® 7 peope-
4 Boet. lib. ii. prosa 7.—Tum ego, scio, inquam, &e.
1 Cott. ho’. 2 Cott. serusode. * Cott. bucan cola. * Cott. un- ypacoShce. 5 Bod. bucum. ° Cott. bucan. 7 Bod peone andpeope. 8 Cott. monnad, 9 Cott. pyepdmen.
~ OHAP. XVII. BOETHIVS. ‘ 59
‘ties, and what ruins, what adulteries, and what wickedness, and what impiety, the unrighteous Cesar, Nero, wrought. He at one time gave order to burn all the city of Rome at- once, after the example that formerly the city of Troy was burned! He was desirous also to see how it would burn, and how long, and how light, in comparison of the other: and besides gave order to slay all the wisest senators of the Ro- mans, and also his own mother, and his own brother! He moreover slew his own wife with a sword. And for such things he was in no wise grieved, but was the blither, and re- joiced at it! And yet amid such crimes all this middle-earth was nevertheless subject to him, from eastward to westward, and again from southward to northward: it was all in his power. Thinkest thou that the heavenly Power could not take away the empire from this unrighteous Cesar, and cor- rect this madness in him, if he would? Yes, O yes, I know that he could, if he would! Alas! how heavy a yoke did he lay on all those who in his times were living on the earth! and how oft his sword was stained with innocent blood! Was it not then sufficiently evident, that power of its own nature was not good, when he was not good to whom it came P
CHAPTER XVIL.
Wuen Wisdom had sung this lay he was silent, and the Mind then answered, and thus said: O Reason, indeed thou knowest that covetousness and the greatness of this earthly power never well pleased me, nor did I altogether very much vearn after this earthly authority. But nevertheless I was desirous of materials for the work which I was commanded to perform ; that was, that I might honourably and fitly guide and exercise the power which was committed to me. More- over, thou knowest that no man can show any skill, nor ex- ercise or control any power, without tools and materials. That is, of every craft the materials, without which man cannot exercise the craft. This, then, is a king’s materials and his tools to reign with: that he have his land well peopled; he must have prayer-nien, and soldiers, and work-
te
60 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XVIII. —
pene
men. }pect pu payt pecce bucan diyum colum! nan cyningz hir cpere ne mez cydan. Det iy eac hiy andpeonc. } he habban’ yceal to pam colum pam ppim zefepycipum bipiyce. $ 1p ponne- heopa bipiyc. land cto buzianne. 3 zipca.? 7 peepnu. 7 mete. 7 ealo.” 4 clapay. J ze hpeet pey pe pa ppe zepepreipay behopiap.* ne mez he bucan piyum pay col zehealban. ne bucan pryum | colum nan papa pmza pypcan pe him bebobden iy co pypcenne. Fop py 1 pilnode andpeoncey pone anpeald mid to zepeccenne. — ‘p mine cpeycay y anpeald ne pupden fopzicene 7 fopholene.> Foppam ele cpeyrc y ele anpeald bip yona fopealdod 3 fop- ypuzod.® zip he bip bucan [/ipdome. foppam ne mez non mon nenne cpefe foppbpmzan bucan /iydome. foppam pe ypa hpet ypa puph oypize ze5on bid. ne mez hic mon nefpe co cpepce zepecan.’ $ iy nu hpadoys co yeczanne. # 1¢ pilnode peopprullice co hbbanne pa hpile pe 1c lipede.§ 5 epoep minum liye pam monnum co lefanne. pe xfcep me pepen min Ze- mynd on zodum peopcum -. ®
CAPUT XVIIL-°
§ I. DA diy pa zeyppecen par. pa zerprzode"° } Mod. 3 reo Ley- ceadpipney onzan yppecan 4 puy cpeep. Eala Mod eala!! an yrel iy ypipe co anrcumianne.! -} ay f p ce yprpe pmeallice™® 5 ypipe heyizlice beypicp ealpa papa monna Mod pe beod** on heona xecynde zeconene J} peah ne beop cto pam, hpofe ponne zit cumen fulppemedpa meezena. ip ponne pilnung leayer zilpey J unpyhcey anpealdey 7 unzemeclicey hhyan xodpa peopca ofep eall role. roppam” pilnizap monize men!® anpealder. Se hie polbon habban zodne hhyan. peah hi hip unpyppe yien. xe pup- — pum ye ealpa ropcupeyca pilnad pay ylean. Ac ye pe pile piylice J xeopnlice awprep pam hhyan ypypian. ponne onzic he ypipe | hpape hu lycel he bid. 7 hu lene. 7 hu cedpe. 7 hu bedeled elcer zoder. Ing pu nu zeopnlice ymeazan pile and pican pile ymbe ealpe Siyye eoppan ymbhpypre Fpom eaycepeapdan Siyyeyr
© Boet. lib. ii. prosa 7.—Et illa: Atqui hoc unum est, &e.
1 Cott. bryyan colan. 7? Cott. sya. * Cott. ealu. * Cott. behoyisen. 5 Bod. pupde ropsiyen J yopholen. § Cott. poppusod. 7 Cott. se- peccan.  § Cott. lpde. . ° Cott. be eycep me pepen min semynois on sodum peopcum. Bod. eytep me pepen Semyud on Sodum peopcum. 10 Cott. serusode. 1 Cott. ea. *” Bod. yyel ip ppibe to anypceunianne, 13 Bod. yinsanlice. 1 Bod. oS. 15 Cott. yopbon. 1° Cott. populd men.
S I. evel BOETHIUS. 61
men. Thou knowest that without these tools no king can show his craft. This is also his materials which he must have besides the tools; provisions for the three classes. This is, then, their provision; land to inhabit, and gifts and weapons, and meat, and ale, and clothes, and whatsoever is _ necessary for the three classes. He cannot without these
preserve the tools, nor without the tools accomplish any of those things which he is commanded to perform. Therefore I was desirous of materials wherewith to exercise the power, that my talents and power should not be forgotten and con- cealed. For every craft and every power soon becomes old, and is passed over in silence, if it be without wisdom: for no man can accomplish any craft without wisdom. Because whatsoever is done through folly, no one can ever reckon for _ craft. This is now especially to be said; that I wished to live honourably whilst I lived, and after my life, to leave to the men who were after me, my memory in good works.
CHAPTER XVIII.
§ I. Wun this was spoken, the Mind remained silent, and Reason began to speak, and thus said: O, Mind, one evil is very greatly to be shunned; that is, that which very con- tinually and very grievously deceives the minds of all those men, who are in their nature excellent, and nevertheless are not yet arrived at the roof of perfect virtues. This, then, is the desire of false glory, and of unrighteous power, and of unbounded fame of good works among all people. Many men are desirous of power, because they would have good fame, though they be unworthy of it: and even the most wicked of all are desirous of the same. But he who will wisely and diligently inquire concerning fame, will very soon perceive how little it is, and how slender and how frail, and how destitute of all good. If thou wilt now studiously in- guire, and wilt understand concerning the circumference of all this earth, from the eastward of this middle-earth to the
62 ; ROETHIUS. CHAP. XVIII.
middanzeander oS peycepeandne. 4 fpam ysupepeapdum od! ©
noppepeapone. ypa spa pu leopnodeyc on pape bec pe Aycpolo-
zum hazce. ponne miht du onzican } he y eall pip Sone ©
heofon to meccanne ypilce an lycel ppicu’ on bpadan bpebe.
oppe pond beah on yeilde. efprep piypa monna® dome. Pu ne — payc pu pect pu leopnoderc on Pcolomeur bocum. ye phat — ealley piyer muiddanzeander zemet on anpe bec. Sep pu miht ~
on zeyeon P eall moncynn ¥ ealle necenu ne noztizad napep*
neah feoppan deley Siyye eoppan pey pe men zefapan® maxon. foppam pe hy hic ne mazon eall zebuzian. yum fop heto. pum
fon cyle. 7 pone mzycan del hiy herp ye opeprecen. Do nu of Sam feoppan Seale on prnum Mode eall pat peo yee hip oppecen herp. J eall Sa pceapd Se heo hm onzenumen hey). 5 eall $ hiy yermar J mopay zenumen habbad. 3 eall } on eallum
Seodum peycey lizep. Sonne miht Su onzican pecce per ealler —
niy monnum ponne mape lefed to buzianne. buton ypelce an lycel capepcum.® Ip $ ponne fon dypihe xerpine } xe pmnap eoppe populd co Son P xe pilmap eopepne hhyan unzemeclice co zebpedanne’ orep ypelene capepcun® ypelce pec ip petce men buziap pire populde fulneah ypilce an pyica® pop pet odep. Ac hpec pumedlicey odSe muicellicer odSe peopprullicer herp ye eopep zilp pe ze pep buziap'? on pam fifcan dele healyum lonber 4 unlondey. mid sae. mid penne. 7 mid ealle. ypa hic iy'! zeneapped. To hpon pilmze ze Sonne co unze- meclice pet ze eopepne naman cobpebdan ofep Sone ceopan deel. nu hip mape mip mid yee. mid penne. mid ealle:.
§ IL.f Gepencap eac ‘ on'? Siyum lyclum peappoce. pe pe zp ymbe yppeecon. buziap ypipe maneza Seoda. J miychca.” 5 ypipe unzelica wzpep ze on yppece. xe on Seapum. ze on eallum yidum. eallpa papa peoda pe ze nu pulmiap ypipe unxe- mectlice } xe yeylon eopepme naman ofep cobpebdan. p xe neppe zedon ne mazon. foppam!* heopa sppeec ip cobeled on cpa 3 hund yeorontiz.® 4 xzle papa ypppeca ip codezled on maneza Seobda.'? 4 pa sme colezena 3 codelda mid pe. J mid pudum. 7} mid muncum. 7 mid faennum. j mid monezum J m1d miyclicum™ peycenum. 7 unzepepum londum. ‘pf hic supdum
f Boet. lib. ii. prosa 7.—Adde quod hoe ipsum, &e.
1 Bod. oy. *% Cott. lyclu ppice. *% Bod. biypa mona. 4 Cott. nomad yupbum napep. ° Cott. seyepan. © Cott. cauepcun. 7 Cott. tobpe- danne. * Cott. cauencun. 9% Cott. ppice. 1 Bod. hogiad. ™ Bod. hip. 2 Cott. pec ce. 1 Cott. ypibe miplica. 14 Cott. popbon. 1 Bod. on hun-yeoyontis. 10 Cutt. piod. 1 Cott. miyplicum,
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 63
westward, and from the southward to the northward, as thou - hast learned in the book which is called Astrologium; then mayest thou perceive that it is all, compared with the heaven, like a little point on a broad board, or the boss on a shield, according to the opinion of wise men. Dost thou not know what thou hast learned in the books of Ptolemy, who wrote of the measure of all this middle-earth in one book? Therein thou mightest see that all mankind, and all cattle, do not occupy anywhere nigh the fourth part of this earth, which ren are able to go over. For they cannot inhabit it all; some part for heat, some for cold; and the greatest part of it the sea has covered. Take, then, from this fourth part, in thy mind, all that the sea has covered of it, and all the shards which it has taken from it; and all that fens and moors have taken of it, and all that in all countries hes waste ;. then mayest thou understand, that, of the whole, there is not more left for men to inhabit, than as it were a small enclosure. It is, then, in foolish labour that ye toil all your life, because ye wish beyond measure to spread your fame over such an en- closure as that is which men inhabit in this world; almost like a point compared with the other! But what of spacious, or of great, or of honourable, has this your glory, when ye therein inhabit the fifth part halved of land and desert? so is it narrowed with sea, with fen, and with all! Wherefore desire ye, then, too immoderately, that ye should spread your name over the tenth part, since there is not more of it, with sea, with fen, and with all!
§ LI. Consider also that in this little park which we before have spoken about, dwell very many natious, and various, and very unlike both in speech, and in manners, and in all the custouis of all the nations, which ye now very immoderately desire that ye should spread your name over. This ye never can do, because their language is divided into seventy-two ; and every one of these lauguages is divided among many nations, and they are separated and divided by sea, and by woods, and by mountains, and by fens, aud by many and various wastes, and impassable lands, so that even merchants
64 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XVIII.
cepemen ne zerapap. Ac hu mez pep ponne yynbeplice aney - picey monney nama cuman ponne dep mon fupdum pepe” _ bupze naman ne zeheopd. ne pepe peode Se he on hampeyt — bip. Dy ic naz sop hpilcon dyyrze ze zeopnad! pH ze pelea eopepne naman tobpedan zeond eallne eoppan. } ze don ne ~ mazon.” ne Fuppum napep neah. Ppec Su parc hu micel Romana pice pay on Mapcuyer Sazum py hepecozan. ye pep oppe naman haven Tulluy. 4 ppiddan Licepo. hpzc he cypse | on sumpe hiy boca. } te 6a zee Romane nama ne com ofep Sa muncar pe Uaucayeay pe hacap. ne pa Sciddear pe on oppe healre papa munca buziap uppum pepe bupze naman ne per polcey ne zeheondon. Ac da he com epeyt to Pappum. J pep. pep ypipe mipe. Ac he pay Seah Sep ymbucan manezum folce ypipe ezerull. Pu ne onzice ze nu hu neana® re eopep hhiya beon pile pe xe pap ymbe ypmcap 3 unpihclice caliad* co ze- bpedenne. Ppec penyco Su hu micelne hliyan 3 hu micelne peopprerpe an Romane man meze habban on Sam lanbe. Sp mon fupsum Sepe bupcze naman ne xzehepde. ne ealler Szey folcey hhya ne com. Deah nu hpele mon unzemetlice 7 unzebdarenlice pilmize P he ycile hi hhyan cobpebdan orep ealle eoppan. he ne mez  foppbpenzan. fonpam pe papa Seoda peapay ym ypipe ungzelica. 7 heopa zerecneyya ypipe miylica.® rpa P ce pec on oSpum lande becyc licap.® paecce } bip hpilum on pam oppum celpypplcoyc. 3 eac miceley pice pyppe. fop- pam ne mez nan mon habban zelic log on zlcum londe. fop- pon pe on elcum lande ne head on oppum licap:.
§ IIL¢ Fop &1 yceolbe ale mon beon on Sam pel zehealden. he on ny azenum eapbde licode. peah he nu manan pilmize. he ne mez fuppum  foppbpingan. foppam Se yeldhponne bip ce auhc manezum monnum aney hpee heixe. pop py pypp oft xober monner lor alezen mne on? Seepe ilcan peode pe he on hampeey'c bip. J eac foppam Se hit ofc fprpe yaplice zebypede puph pa heandyelpa papa ppicepa ‘p hi op heopa yleppe. 7 fon zimeleyce. } fop pecceleyce foplecon unppicen Sapa monna peapay J hiopa dada. pe on hiopa dazum fopemepoyte 7 peoppzeopneyce pepon. 3 peah hi nu eall hiopa hy 7 hiopa dba appicen hepdon. ypa ypa hi peeoldon zip hi Sohton. hu ne fop- — eallbodon Sa zeppicu peah 3 loyodbon Sonecan pe hic pepe. spa
so Bint boner naga aaa
& Boet. lib. ii. prosa 7.—Lrit igitur pervagata, &e. 1 Cott. naz hpelce dypise se sipnad. 7 Cott. naype sedon.  § Cott. neapo. * Cott. tiohad, °° Bod. mipcle. © Cott. heode. 7 Cott. m.
§ ur. BOETHIUS. 65
do not visit it. But how, then, can any great man’s name singly come there, when no man there hears even the name of the city, or of the country, of which he is an inhabitant ? Therefore I know not through what folly ye desire that ye should spread your name over all the earth! That ye cannot do, nor even anywhere nigh. Moreover, thou knowest how great the power of the Romans was in the days of Marcus, the consul, who was by another name called Tullius, and by a third Cicero. But he has shown in one of his books, that, as then, the Roman name had not passed beyond the moun- tains that we call Caucasus, nor had the Scythians who dwell on the other side of those mountains even heard the name of the city or of the people: but at that time it had first come to the Parthians, and was then very new. But nevertheless it was very terrible thereabout to many a people. Do ye not then perceive how narrow this your fame will be, which ye labour about, and unrighteously toil to spread? How great fame, and how great honour, dost thou think one Roman could have in that land, where even the name of the city was never heard, nor did the fame of the whole people ever come? Though any man immoderately and unreasonably desire that he may spread his fame over all the earth, he cannot bring it to pass, because the manners of the nations are very unlike, and their institutions very various; so that in one country that pleases best which is at the same time in another deemed most reprehensible, and moreover deserving of great punish- ment. Therefore no man can have the same praise in every land, because in every land that pleases not, which in another pleases.
§ III. Therefore every man should be well contented with this, that he be approved in his own country. Though he be desirous of more, he cannot, indeed, bring it to pass: because it is seldom that aught in any degree pleases many men; on which account the praise of a good man is frequently con- fined within the same country where he is an inhabitant; aud also because it has often very unfortunately happened, through the misconduct of writers, that they from their sloth, and from negligence, and from carelessness, have left un- written the manners of the men, and their deeds, who iu their days were most famous, and most desirous of honour.
F
66 BOERTHIUS. CHAP. XVIII.
yome ypa pa ppitepay dyd5on. 7 eac Sa pe hi ymbe ppicon. And_ eop Sincp peah } ze hebban ece ape. zip ze mezen on eallpe
eopeppe ponulde zeeapmian $ ze habban zobdne hhiyan efrep — eoppum dazum. Lig pu nu zecvelerc a hpile! piyyey andpeapdan
lier 3 Siypey hpilendlican? pid Seep unzeendodan ligey hpila.
hpe bid-hic ponne:. Tele nu pa lenze* pepe hpile pe pu 6m
eaze on beppenan* meze pip ten purend pmepa. ponne habbap
pa hypila hpec hpuzu onheey. peah hic lycel pre. } ip ponne pet
heopa zzpep herp ende. Tele nu ponne ‘ ten puyend zeana. | :
ze peah pu ma pille. pid } ece J pet unzeendode hy. ponne ne yinyt pu pep nauhe angelicey.” roppam $ cen Surend zeapa. peah hic lanz pince. arcoptap. 7 peey opper ne cymp neype nan ende. foppam hic nip no to metanne ‘} zeendodlice pip } un- xeendodlice. Deah Su nu celle ¢ppom piper middaneapder ypuman 06 pone ende. and meze ponne pa xeap pip ‘} pe neenne ende neyp. ponne ne bip pep nauhv anlicer. Spa bip eac ye hhya papa ropemepena® monna. Seah he hpilum lang pie. 7 pela zeana puphpunize. he bid peah ypipe rcopt to metanne pip pone pe neeppe ne zeendad :.
§ IV." And ze ne peccap peah hpepep ze auht co xode Son pip enezum oppum pinzum buton pid pam lyclan lope per yolcey. J pip pam ycopcan hliyan. pe pe ep ymbe yppeecon. eapnizap’ per J fopreop pa cpefrar eopner inzeponcey. J eoppey andzicey. J eoppe xerceadpiyneyye. and polbon habban eopeppa zodena peonca mede wt Fpaembdpa monna cpiddunze. pilnizad® peep co pepe mede Se xe cto Lobe yceoldon. Ppt pu zehypbeyt pac ce x10 Sazum zelomp. ‘fp an ypipe ply mon J ypipe pice onzan fandizan? aner uppican y hme birpmepobe. yoppam ‘he hine ypa opzellice upahog and bodode Sey p he udpica pape. ne cydSde he hic mid nanum cpefoum. ac mid leayum and ofepmodlicum zlpe."® Sa polde ye piya mon hip fandizan."! hpedep he ypa py pepe ypa he yelp pende p he pepe. Onzan'? hme pa hyrpan. 7 heapm cpiddizan.’® Da ze- hepbde ye uppica ypipe zepyldelice pay prran monney pond yume hpile. Ac y1Sdan he hiy hyrpmyze zeheped hepde. pa peylde** he
» Boet. lib. ii. prosa 7.—Vos autem, nisi ad populares auras, &e.
1 Cott. secveleys ba hpila. 7? Bod. pier bylpendhican. 8 Cott. lengu. 4 Cott. beppeban. 5 Cott. anhicer, © Cott. yopmepa. 7 Cott. eapmiad. * Cott. plma’.  ° Cott. yandian. | Cott. selpe. ™ Cott. randian, 12 Cott. onson. 18 Cott. cpdian, 4 Bod, yealde.
Sv. BOETHIUS. 67
And even if they had written the whole of their lives and of their actions, as they ought if they were honest, would not the writings nevertheless wax old and perish, as often as it was done, even as the writers did, and those about whom _ they wrote? And yet it seems to you that ye have eternal __ honour, if ye can, in all your life, earn that ye may have good fame, after your days! If thou now comparest the duration of this present life, and this temporal, with the duration of the never-ending life, what is it thenP Compare now the length of the time wherein thou inayest wink thine eye, with ten thousand winters; then have the times somewhat of like, though it be little; that is, that each of them has an end. But compare these ten thousand years, and even more if thou wilt, with the eternal and the never-ending life; then wilt _thou not find there anything of like, because the ten thousand years, though it seem long, will shorten: but of the other there never will come an end. Therefore it is not to be com- pared, the ending with the neverending! Ifthou even reckon from the beginning of this middle-earth to the end, and then compare the years with that which has no end, there will be nothing of like. So is also the fame of celebrated men. Though it sometimes may be long and endure many years, it is nevertheless very short compared with that which never ends!
§ IV. And ye nevertheless care not whether ye do any good, on any other account, than for the little praise of the people, and for the short fame which we have before spoken about. Ye labour for this, and overlook the excellences of your mind, and of your understanding, and of your reason, and would have the reward of your good works from the re- port of strangers! Ye desire to obtain then the reward which ye should seek from God! But thou hast heard that it long ago happened, that a very wise man, and very noble, began to try a philosopher, and scoffed at him, because he so arrogantly lifted himself up, and proclaimed this, that he was a philoso- pher. He did not make it known by any talents, but by false and proud boasting. Then the wise man would prove him, whether he were as wise as he himself thought that he was. He therefore began to revile, and speak ill of him. Then the philosopher heard very patiently the wise man’s words for some time. But after he had heard his reviling, he then de-
F2
68 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XIX.
onzean ypipe unzepyldelice.! peah he wp licecce he uppica
pepe. Acrote hine 6a ert hpeepep him puhce } he uppica pepe
de nzpe. Da andrpopode ye piya mon him ¥ cpep. Ice polde
cpepan } pu uppica pepe. zip pu xzepyloiz pepe Jj zerpuzian
muhceyc.? Pu lanzyum peer him ye hliya. pe he zp mid leayun-
zum pilnode. Pu ne fpopbepyc he pa pep pihte foppam anum andpypde. Ppt fopyzod ponne pam beveycum mannum, de ey uy peepon. hi spa yprpe pinodon Sey idelan zilpey® 7 pay hhyan efcep heopa deape. od6e hpet fopycent hic pam pe nu ymbon. Dy pepe elcum men mape Seapry p he pilnode zodpa cpeyca. ponne learey hhyan. Ppec hess he et pam hhyan. zypcep per lichoman zebale 7 pepe yaple. Du ne picon pe P ealle men lichomlice ypelcap. 7 peah reo ysapl bid libbende. Ac yeo yapl feepp ypipe fpeolice* to heoponum. y1ppan heo ontized bip J of pam capcepne py lhchoman onlieyed bip. heo popreop®
ee ealle pay eopdlican pmz. 3 fazenap® per P heo moc
pucan py heorenlican. yippan heo’ bip abpozben ppom pam eopplican. ponne ‘/ Mod him yelpum zepica bip Loder pillan:.
CAPUT XIX!
DA ye //iydom %a pry ppell apehc® hepde. Sa onzan he zidd1an J pur pmzende cped. Spa hpa spa pilmize co habbenne Sone idelan hhyan 7 pone unnyccan zp. behealbe he on feopep- healre hiy hu pidzille Sey heofonery hpealra bip. 7 hu neana pepe eoppan ycede iy. peah heo ur pum pince. ponne mez hme yeamian pepe bpadmze hiy hhyan. foppam he hme ne mez yuppum cobpedan of¢ep pa neanpan eoppan ane. Eala orep- mobdan. hpi ze pilmizen ‘P ze undeplucan mid eoppum ypipan Pp beaplicne zeoc. oppe hpi xe yeon on ypa idelan zerpince. p ze polbon eopepne hhiyan cobpeedan ofep spa maneza Seoda. Deah hic nu zebypize } Sa ucemeyctan S105a eopepne naman upa- hebban 3 on maniz peodire eop hepizen. J peah hpa pexe mid mucelne wpelcundneyre hip zebypda. 7 peo on eallum pelum 4 on eallum plencum. ne se dead peah ypelceyr ne pecp. Ac he fop- ylehp pa epelo. 7 pone pican zelice 4 pone heanan ofypelzp. 7
ypa zeemnec pa pican 7 pa heanan. Ppec pmet nu pep fopeme- |
iBoet. lib. ii. metrum 7.—Quicumque solam mente, &c.
1 Bod. byldelic. 7? Cott. serugian meahte. * Cott. selpey. # Cott.
yprolice. 5 Cott. yopyihs. § Cott. pesnad. 7 Bod. yibsey heo. ® Cott. aneaht.
CHAP. XIX. BOETHIUS. 69
fended himself against him very impatiently, though he before pretended that he was a philosopher, and asked him again,
’ whether he thought him to be a philosopher or not. Then
answered the wise man to him, and said: I would say that thou wert a philosopher, if thou wert patient, and able to be silent. How lasting was to him the fame which he before falsely sought! How did he not immediately burst because of one answer! What has it then availed the best men who were before us, that they so greatly desired vain glory and fame after their death? Or what does it profit those who noware? Therefore it were to every man more needful that he were desirous of good actions than of deceitful fame. What has he from this fame, after the separation of the body and the soul? Do we not know that all men bodily die, and yet the soul is living? But the soul goes very freely to the heavens, after it is set loose and liberated from the prison of the body. It then despises all these earthly things, and re- joices in this, that it may enjoy the heavenly, after it is taken away from the earthly. Then the mind will itself be a witness of God’s will.
CHAPTER XIX.
Wen Wisdom had made this speech, then began he again to sing, and thus singing, said: Whosoever desires to have vain fame and unprofitable glory, let him behold on the four sides of him, how spacious the expanse of the heaven is, and how narrow the space of the earth is, though it seem large to us! Then may it shame him of the spreading of his fame, because he cannot even spread it over the narrow earth alone! O, ye proud, why are ye desirous to sustain with your necks this deadly yoke? or why are ye in such vain labour, because ye would spread your fame over so many nations? Though it even happen that the farthest nations exalt your name, and - praise you in many a language; and though any one with great nobleness add to his birth, and prosper in all riches, and in all splendour, death nevertheless cares not for things of this sort, but he despises nobility, and devours the rich and the poor alike, and thus levels the rich and the poor! What are now the bones of the celebrated and the wise goldsmith, Weland? I have therefore said the wise. because to the
70 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XX.
pan and pey piyan zoléymidey ban pelondey. pop py ic cpeed par — piyan. fop py pam epercezan ne mez nezpe hiy cpere loyizan ne hine mon ne mez donne ep on him zeniman pe mon mez ~ pa yunnan apendan of hiene yrebde. Ppeep sme nu peer pelonder
ban. odde hpa pac nu hpep hi pepon. odde hpep iy nu se ~
fopemepa J ye apzda Rompapa hepecoza. se pey hacan Bpucuy. oppe naman Laypiuy. o63e ye piya J peepcpeeda Lato.
ye pay eac Romana hepetoza. ye pay openlice uppica. Pune
pepan pay zefypn joppzepicene. J nan mon nav hpep bi nu yme. Ppt ip heopa nu co lare. bucan se lycla hhya 7 ye nama mid feaum ycapum appicen. * P zc pypre ip. P pe picon manize Fopemepe J Zemyndpyppe pepar foppxepicene pe ypipe feapa manna a onzic. Ac manize liczzap Seade mid ealle ropzicene. ‘p ye hhya me yupdum cupe ne xedep. Deah ze nu penen JF piman } ze lange hbban ycylan hep on populde. hpzc bid eop ponne Sy bec. hu ne cymd ye dead. peah Se! he lace cume. 7 aded eop of piyye populde. 7 hpec fopytent eop ponne ye zilp. hupu pam pe ye zpceppa deap zezpipp J on ecneyye xeheye :.
CAPUT XX.®
DA re Viydom pa piy leop arunzen hefde. pa onzan he ypellien? 7 puy cpeep. Ne pen pu nop ic co anpillce pmne pip pa pypd. foppam ic hic no yelfe nauht ne ondpede. poppem hic ofc zebypap ‘p yeo leaye pypd naupep ne mesx pam men don ne sulcum. ne eac nenne dem. foppam heo my naney lorey pyppe. foppam heo hipe yelp zecyp  heo nanpuht ne hip. Ac ~ heo onppihd hipe zpelm. ponne heo zeopenap hope Seapar. Te pene peah ‘f pu ne fopycande nu xiv hpet re Se co cpepe. fop- pam hic iy pundophe pee ic yeczan pille. 7 1¢ hic mez uneape mid popdum zepeccan.® ypa ypa ic polde. ‘p ip pet 1¢ pat p ce yeo pipeppeapde pypd byp wlcum men nycpypppe ponne yeo opyopze. Foppam reo opyopze yimle hhp and hcec. mon yeyle penan ‘Pp heo yeo* no yope zeyeel8. ac pio prpeppeande ip sro pope xepeelp. peah hpaem’ pa ne pmce. roppam heo ip peycped 7 zeheec yimle } ce yop bip. S10 opup® up lear 3 beypicp ealle hipe zepepan. poppem hio hic zeeyp yelp mid hipe hpuprrulneyye pec hio bip pipe pancol. Ac yeo pipeppeapde zeber and ze- leped elene papa Se hio hi cozepiec. S10 opep’ xebme ele papa k Boet. lib. ii. prosa 8.—Sed ne me inexorabile, &e. 1 Bod. beah. 7? Cott. ppillan. *% Cott. apeccan. * Cott.1r. § Bod. hpa. 6 Cott. oSpu. 7 Cott. oSpu
CHAP. XX. BOETHIUS. it
skilful his skill can never be lost, nor can any man more easily take it from him than he can turn aside the sun from her place. Where are now the bones of Weland? or who knows now where they were? Or where is now the illus-. trious and the patriotic consul of the Romans, who was called Brutus, by another name Cassius? or the wise and inflexible Cato, who was also a Roman consul? He was evidently a philosopher. Were not these long ago departed? and no one knows where they are now. What of them is now remaining, except the small fame and the name written with a few letters? And it is yet worse that we know of many illus trious and memorable men departed, of whom very few per. sons have ever heard. But many lie dead, entirely forgotten, _ so that fame does not even make them known! Though ye __now think and desire that ye may live long here in the world, what is it to you then the better? Does not death come, though he come late, and take you away from this world? And what then does glory profit you? at least those whom the second death seizes, and for ever binds ?
CHAPTER XX.
Wuen Wisdom had sung this lay, then began he to speak, and thus said: Do not suppose that I too obstinately attack fortune. I myself have no dread of it, because it frequently happens that deceitful fortune can neither render aid to a man, nor cause any injury. Therefore she is deserving of no praise, because she herself shows that she is nothing. But she reveals her fountain when she discloses her manners. I think, nevertheless, that thou dost not yet understand what I say to thee: for what I wish to say is wonderful, and I can hardly explain it with words as I would. It is, that I know that adverse fortune is more useful to every man than - prosperous. For the prosperous always lies and dissembles, that men may think that she is the true happiness. But the adverse is the true happiness, though to any one it may not ‘seem so, for she is constant and always promises what is true. The other is false, and deceives all her followers; for she - berself shows it by her changeableness, that she is very un- stable: but the adverse improves and instructs every one to whom she joins herself. The other binds every one of the minds which enjoy her, through the appearance which she
72 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXI.
moda pe hipe! by:ycp mid pepe hipunza Se hio heer  hio pie — z06. seo piSeppeapde ponne anbmc? 3 zefpeop zle papa pe hio tozepied. mid pam  hio him zeopenap hu ctiedpe* pay and- — peandan zereelpa yinc. Ac seo oprophney zep ycypmelum [ypa pey pmndey yy. |* Sio pipeppeapdner ponne brp prmle uncelu. 7 ppacu arcipped® mid pepe yscypinze hipe azenpe fpecenneyye. Ac pio leaye zerzlp hio uihp on layc neabinza pa pe hiepe coze- peodap ypom peem ysopum® zeyeelpum mid hiepe olecunze.? Seo - pipeppeapdney ponne full ofc ealle pa pe hiepe undeppeodde biop. neadmza zecihp co pam yopum zerelpum. ypa spa md anzle pire zefanzen bip. Dincp pe nu f lycel zeycpeon J lycel eaca pmpa zeyelpa. pecce peor pepe and peoy exeylice pipep- peaponey pe bpinzp. p 1y pec heo yprpe hpape pa Mod. pe ze- Openap Smpa Zetpeoppa Fpeonda. and eac pinpa feonda. pet pu hie miht ype ypucele* cocnapan. Ac pay leayan zeyzelpa ponne hi pe Fpom zepicap. Sonne nimad hi heopa men mid him. 4 lecap pine peapan zetpeopan mid pe. Pu poldeyc pu nu zebyc- zan. pa pu zeyelzoyc pepe 7 pe puhce peo pypd ypipoyc on Smne pillan pode. mid hu micelan® feo polderc pu pa habban zebohc pu ypucole mihvert cocnapan pme fpmd’? 7 pie fynd."* Ie pac peah pu hic polderc habban mid miclan feo™ zebohc ‘} pu hi cuperc pel coycaban. Deah pe nu pmce ‘ pu seoppyppe feoh!® roplopen habbe. pu heyyc peah micle diop- pypppe mid zebohc.  yme xetpeope pmiend. pa pu miht nu cocnapan. 3 payc hpec pu hopa hezyc. Dpec P yy f eallpa | deoppeoppeyce Feoh :.
CAPUT XXI!
DA ye 150m pa pry ypell araed heepde. pa onzan he ziddizan"™* J Sup pmzende cpap. An peeppend iy bucon xlcum cpeon. J ye iy eac pealdend heofoney 4 eoppan ¥ ealpa zepcearta zerepen- licpa J eac unzeyepenlicpa. $ iy God wlmihziz. Sam peopiap ealle pa pe peopiap. ze pa pe cunnon. ze pa pe ne cunnon. ze pa pe hic picon } hie him peopiap. ze pa pe hic nycon. Se ilca ze-
1 Boet. lib. ii. metrum 8.—Quod mundus stabili fide, &e.
1 Bod. hepe. * Cott. onbinc. 8 Cott. cedpa. * Cott. ppa beep pimbdey byy, and Bod. ypebep yimder pyy. The reading within the brackets is a suggestion of the late Mr. Cardale’s, in which I fully concur. 5 Cott. pepu arcepped. 6 Cott. poban. 7 Cott. beepe oliccunse. § Cott. ypeocole. 9 Cott. micle. 1 Cott. ppend. "Cott. end, Catt. micle 710 18 Cott, poh, 4 Cott. 510d1an.
CHAP, XXI. BOETHIUS. 73.
feigns of being good: but the adverse unbinds, and frees every one of those whom she adheres to, in that she discloses to them how frail these present goods are. But prosperity goes confusedly as the wind’s storm ; while adversity is always faultless, and is saved from injury by the experience of her own danger. In fine, the false happiness necessarily draws those who are associated with her, trom the true felicities, by her flattery: but adversity often necessarily draws all those who are subjected to her, to the true goods, as a fish is caught by a hook. Does it then seem to thee little gain, and little addition to thy felicities, which this severe and this horrible adversity brings to thee: that is, that she very quickly lays open to thee the minds of thy true friends, and also of thine enemies, that thou mayest very plainly dis- tinguish them? But these false goods, when they depart from thee, then take they their men with them, and leave thy few faithful ones with thee. How wouldest thou now buy, or when thou wert happiest, and it seemed to thee that fortune proceeded most according to thy will, with how much money wouldest thou then have bought, that thou mightest clearly distinguish thy friend and thy foe? I know, how- ever, that thou wouldest have bought it with much money that thou mightest well know how to distinguish them. Though it now seem to thee that thou hast lost precious wealth, thou hast nevertheless therewith bought much more precious, that is, true friends, whom thou art now able to distinguish, and knowest what of them thou hast. But this - is the most valuable wealth of all.
CHAPTER XXI.
Wuew Wisdom had made this speech, then began he to sing, and thus singing, said: There is one creator beyond all doubt, and he is also governor of heaven and earth, and of all creatures, visible and invisible. He is God Almighty. Him serve all those creatures which serve, both those which have understanding, and those which have not understand- ing: both those which know it that they serve him, and those which kuow it not. The same has appointed un-
ALBERT’S COLLEGE LIBRARS
74 BOETHIUS. CHAP, XXI.
yecte unapendendlicne yido. 4 peapay. 3 eac zecyndelice pibbe eallum hiy zerceapcum pa pa he polde. 4 spa lanze rpa he polse. pa nu yculon pcandan co populde. Dapa unyuillena zercearra ycyping ne mez no peoppan zeycilled. ne eac onpend of dam pyne j of pape endebypdneyye pe him zerec 1p. ac ye anpealda herp ealle hi zepcearca ypa mid his bpidle bepanzene. 3 zet0- gene. J zemanobde ypa } hi naupep ne zeyctillan ne mocon. ne eac ypipop ycyyuan. ponne he him pet zepum hiy pealdledeper cofoplec. Spa herp re elmihciza Lod zeheaponade ealle hiy ze- yceapca mid hip anpealde. pec heopa ele pms pip opep. and peah ppzeped opep hie ne mocon coylupan. ac bid zepepfde ere co pam ilcan pyne pe he zp upnon. 3 spa peoppap efe seeonipade. spa hi hic raziap P Sa pipeppeapdan zepcearca expen xe hie bectpux him pinnap. ze eac peeyce pibbe becpux him heal- Sap. Spa nu yp Sep J paevep. J ya J eoppe. J maneza oppa Ze- yceagca. pe beop a ypa unzedpepa becpux him ypa ypa hi beop. } peah he beopypa zeppzepa peecce no p an ‘} hi mazon zefepan beon. ac py fuppop  heopa fuppum nan buton oppum beon ne mez. Ac a yceal pat pideppeapde } odep prpeppeande ze- meczian. ypa nu heed re elmihceza Lod yprpe zepceadpiplice 7 ypide lmplice zerec ‘P xeppixle eallum hip zepceapcum. Spa nu lenccen } hepreyz. on lenccen hic zpepd. and on hepreyt hic fealpap. J epc yumep J pmncep. on sumepa hit bip peapm. and on pincpa ceald, Spa eac yio punne bpimxzp leohte bdazay. 3 ye mona lihc on nihz. puph pay ilcan Loder miht. Se ilca fop- pypnp peepee pa f heo ne moc pone peopyepold ofepyreppan pepe eonpan. Ac he herp heopa meance ypa zerecce. ‘ he ne moc heone meance zebpaedan ofep pa ycillan eoppan. (15 pam ulcan zepece ip zepeahe ypipe anlic zeppixle pey floder J pay ebban. pa xeyeceney pa he lec ycandan pa hpile pe he pile. Ac ponne ap pe he ‘} zepealdlepep poplaec papa bpidla. pe he pa zeycearca nu mid zebpidlode herp. seo pipeppeapdney. pe pe ap ymbe rppecon. zip he 8a lac coylupan. ponne foplecap hi pa pibbe pe hi nu healdap. 7 pmp heopa zle on opep efcep hip azenum pillan. 7 foplecap heopa zepeppedenne. 3 fopdsod ealne pyyne middaneapd. 7 peoppap him yelfe co nauhce. Se ilea God zezezp mid ypeondpedenne fole cozebdepe. 3 yin hig. yerpay zeyamnap mid cleenlicpe lupe. De zezedepap ypmd J Ze- Fepan p hie xecpeoplice heopa yibbe 3 heopa fpeondpedenne healbap. Eala } ce Sy moncyn pepe zeyeliz. zp heopa Mod
CHAP. XXI. BOETHIUS. 75
changeable customs and habits, and also natural agreement, to all his creatures, when he would, and so long as he would, which now shall stand for ever. The motion of the moving creatures cannot be stayed, nor yet turned from the course aud from the order that is set to them. But the governor has so with his bridle caught hold of, and restrained, and ad- monished, all his creatures, that they neither can be still, nor yet move farther than he the space of his rein allows to them. So has the Almighty God controlled all his creatures by his power, that each of them strives with another, and yet sup- ports another, so that they caunot slip asunder, but are turned again to the same course which they before ran, and thus become again renewed. So are they varied, that con- trary creatures both strive with each other, and also hold firm agreement with each other. Thus fire doth, and water; and sea and earth; and many other creatures, which will ever be as discordant between themselves, as they are; and yet they are so accordant that not only they may be com- panions, but moreover, that even no one of them without another can exist. But ever must the contrary the other contrary moderate. So has now the Almighty God very wisely and very fitly appointed change to all his creatures. Thus spring and harvest. In spring it groweth, and in harvest it ripens. And again summer and winter. In summer it is warm, and in winter cold. So also the sun bringeth light days, and the moon gives light in the night, through the power of the same God. The same warns the sea that it may not overstep the threshold of the earth: but he has so fixed their limits, that it may not extend its boundary over the still earth. By the same government is ordered a very like change of the flood and the ebb. This appointment, then, he allows to stand as long as he wills. But whenever he shall let go the rein of the bridles with which he has now bridled the creatures, that contrariety which we before mentioned, if he shall allow these to be re- Jaxed, then will they forsake the agreement which they now keep, and strive, each of them with other, after its own will, and forsake their companionship, and destroy all this middle- earth, and bring themselves to naught. The same God joins - people together with friendship, and unites families with virtuous love. He brings together friends and companions, that they faithfully hold their agreement and their friendship.
76 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXII,
pepe ypa phe ¥ ypa zeyrcacelod. 7 spa zeendebypd. spa spa pa oppe zercearca yindon:- Pep endap nu seo zpcpe fpporep boc Boeciuyey.! 3 onzmp yeo ppidde. Se Boeciuy pay oppe naman — zehacen” Seuepinuy. ye pey hepecoza Romana :.
CAPUT XXII.™
§ I. DA ye Piydom %a pir leop arunzen heepde. ba heepde he me zebunden® mid pepe pynnrumneyye hi yanzer. f 1c hip per ypipe papiende 4 ypipe luycbepe hme co zehypanne mid mne- peanoum Mode. ¥ pa sulpape* peey ic chipode® co him 5 dur cpep. Eala Piydom. pu pe eapt pio hehyce fporep eallpa peprzpa moda.° hu pu me heyyc afneppodne ezpep ze mid pinpe pmea- lican sppece. ze mid pepe? pynyumneyye pmery yanzey. co pam pu me hegyc nu zenecne® 3 ofepcumenne mid pmpe zercead- piyneyye. ‘) me nu pyncp pecce no an per ic dap unpypd apefnan mez. pe me on becumen ip. Ac peah me zet mape Fpecenney on becume. ne cpipe ic? nefpe ma p hit bucon ze- pyphcum!? pie. roppam ic pac  1¢ mapan 7 heprzpan pyppe pepe. Ac ic polde ymbe pone lecebom papa Smpa lana hpene mape zehypan. peah Su nu hpene xp pederc!! p pu penderc!? p bi polbon me yprpe bicepe pcan. ne ondpede ic hi me nauht nu. Ac 1c heopa eom ypipe zippe expep xe To Zehepenne xe eac co zehealdanne. 4} Se rpipe xeopne bidde pu hi me zelayce. rpa ypa pu me nu lycle ep zehece. Da cpxd ye Vipsom. Ic on- zeac yona pa du ypa pel zerpuzoderc. and spa luyclice zehepderc mine lane.’* } pu poldeyc mid mnepeapdan Mode hi onzicon. 7 ymeazean. foppam ic zeanbidode ypipe pel op ic pyce’* hpeec pu polderc. J hu pu hic undepycanbdan poldeyc. J eac py fuppop ic ciolode ypipe zeopnfullice. P Su hic popycandan mihceyc.!” Ac ic pe pille nu yeczan hpele ye leececpeepe iy mmpe lane Se Su me nu bicyc. Pe ip yprse bicep on mupe 7 he pe cipp on da ppocan ponne Su hip epeyc pandarc. Ac he pepodap'® pyopan he mnap. 4 bip pipe pe on Sam mnope. J pipe spete co bealcecenne :.*
™ Boet. lib. iii. prosa 1.—Jam cantum illa finierat, &c.
1 Cott. epceppe yporyp boc Boeney. 7? Cott. hacen. 3 Cott. sebun- denne. ‘Cott. pulpebe. 5 Cott. cleopode. ® Bod. oma. © 7 Bod. | pinpe. § Cott. apecne. ® Bod. iy. ' Bod. sepypbum. 1 Cott. | pede. Cott. pende. Cott. mmalapa, Cott. pyre. 15 Cott. meahcze. 16 Cott. be pepedad. 17 Bod. belcenzan.
S 1 ‘BOETHIUS. 77
O, how happy would this mankind be, if their minds were as right, and as established, and as ordered, as the other creatures are! Here endeth the second consolation-book of Boethius, ‘and beginneth the third. Boethius was by another name - called Severinus: he was a consul of the Romans.
CHAPTER XXII.
§ I. Wuern Wisdom had sung this lay, then had he bound me with the sweetness of his song, so that I was greatly ad- miring it, and very desirous to hear him with inward mind: and immediately thereupon I spoke to him, and thus said: O, Wisdom, thou who art the highest comfort of all weary minds! how hast thou comforted me, both with thy profound discourse and with the sweetness of thy song! So much hast thou now corrected and overcome me with thy reason- ing, that it now seems to me that not only am I able to bear this misfortune which has befallen me, but even if still greater peril should come upon me, I will never more say that it is without deserving: for I know that I were deserving of more, and heavier. But I am desirous to hear something more of the medicine of these thine instructions. Though thou just now saidst that thou thoughtest that they would seem very bitter to me, I am not now afraid of them, but I am very anxious after them, both to hear, and also to observe: and very earnestly entreat thee that thou wouldest perform to me, as thou a little while ago promisedst me. Then said Wisdom: I knew immediately when thou didst so well keep silence, and so willingly heardest my doctrine, that thou wouldest with inward mind receive and consider it. There- fore I waited very well till I knew what thou wouldest, and how thou wouldest understand it; and, moreover, I very earnestly endeavoured that thou mightest understand it. But I will now tell thee what the medicine of my doctrine is, which thou askest of me. It is very bitter in the mouth, and it irritates thee in the throat, when thou first triest it: but it grows sweet after it enters in, and is very mild in the stomach, and pleasant to the taste.
78 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXIIt. ;
§ IL." Ac Sep Su onzeace hpidpe ic pe nu ceohhie to —
lebdenne.’ ic pac f pu poldeyc ypipe zeopne Sidep fundian. J
Jpipe rpiplice beon oneled mid Sepe Zeyungze. Foppam ic ze- _
henbde ‘f pu zp saederc P pu ypipe xeopnrull pepe hic co zehy-
panne. Da cpep $ Mod. Ppipep pile pu me nu ypipoye laban. — Da andpypde seo Lerceadpiyney and cpep. To peem yopum xe- — yelpum ic tiohhie?  1¢ pe leede. pe® pm Mod ope ymbe peeypep —
J eapmep.* 7 Su’ ne mihteyc zyc pulpihene pez apedian co Sam yopum zeyelpum. foppam pin Mod pey abipzod mid pepe anyie S1yya learena ze) elda. Da cpep } Mod. Ic Se healpize pu me opepe bucon zlcum tpeon hpet pio yope zeyelp pie. Da cpep yio Geyceadpiyney. Ic pile fopluychce fop pmum lufum. Ac ic yceal be yumepe biyene yume anlicneyye pepe piyan pe zecaecan. op pe } pmz cuppe yie. to pam pu pa biyne ypeo- cole zeyceapize. J ponne be pepe anlicneyye papa sopena ze- yelpa pu meze onzican pa yopan zeyelda. 4 poplecan® perce him pipeppeand bip. ym pa leayan zerzlpa. and ponne mid ealley moder zeopnrullan mzepance hizie’ } pu maze becuman co pam zeyelpum pe ece puphpuniap :.
CAPUT XXIII.°
DA ye /iydom pa pi spell apehc® heepde. pa onzan he ert zlddian. J pus cpap. Spa hpa ypa pille yapan peycmbezepne land. av1o eepeyc OF pa popnay. 3 pa Fypyay. J P Feapn. J ealle pa peod pe he zeyio P pam ecepum denizen. ‘ ye hpete meexze SY
bec peaxan. Eac iy Seop biyen co zepencenne. 'p 1p ‘p zleum ©
men pmcd hunizer bio bnead py peopodpa. zip he hpene wp bicepey onbipizp. and ere ymylce pedep bip py pancpypppe. zig hic hpene ep bip pceapce ycopmay. 7 nopdan pinday. J micle penay J ynapay. And pancpypppe bip eac pay dezer leohe op pepe exerlican pioycpo pepe nihve. ponne hit pepe zp nan niht nepe. Spa bip eac micle pe pmrumpe pio sope Zeyeld co habbenne wycep pam eopmpum pyyer andpeapdan hyey. And eac micle Sy ep pu miht pa popan xzepelpa zecnapan and co hiopa cyppe becuman. zip Su apeyc apyptpalayc of Snum Mode
» Boet. lib. iii. prosa 1.—Sed quod tu te audiendi, &e.
© Boet. lib. iii, metrum 1.—Qui serere ingenuum vyolet, &e.
1 Cott. mohisze cto ledanne. * Cott. mohize. % Cott. bep. + Cott. hpeyped jeac mez.  ° Cott. Ac bu. © Bod. roples. 7 Cott. higige. ® Cott. apzxd,
CHAP. XXIII. BOETHIUS. 79
§ IT. But when thou shouldest perceive whither IT now design to lead thee, I knew that thou wouldest very anxiously tend thither, and be very greatly inflained with that desire. For I heard what thou before saidst, that thou wast very de- sirous to hear it. Then said the Mind: Whither wilt thou - now especially lead me? Then answered Reason, and said : I propose that I should lead thee to the true goods, about which thy mind often meditates, and is greatly moved: and thou hast not yet been able to find the most direct way to the true goods, because thy mind was occupied with the view of these false goods. Then said the Mind: I beseech thee that thou wouldest show me, beyond all doubt, what the true happiness is. Then said Reason: I will gladly, for love of thee. But I must, by some example, teach thee some re- semblance of the thing, till the thing be better known to thee; in order that thou mayest clearly view the example, and then, by the resemblance of the true goods, thou mayest know the true goods, and forsake what is contrary to them, that is, the false goods: and then with the anxious thought of allthy mind, strive that thou mayest arrive at those goods, which for ever remain!
CHAPTER XXIII.
Wuew Wisdom had ended this discourse, then began he again to sing, and thus said: Whosoever is desirous to sow - fertile land, let him first draw out the thorns, and the furze, and the fern, and all the weeds which he observes to do injury to the field, in order that the wheat may grow the better. Also, this example is to be considered, that is, that to every ° man honeycomb seems the sweeter, if he, a little before, taste anything bitter. And, again, calm weather is the more agree- able, if it a little before be stark storms, and north winds, and much rain and snow. And more agreeable also is the light of the day, for the horrible darkness of the night, than it would be if there were nonight. So is also the true happiness much - the more pleasant to enjoy, after the calamities of this present life. And, moreover, thou mayest much the sooner discover the true goods, and arrive at the knowledge of them, if thou first rootest out from thy mind the false goods, and removest
80 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXIV.
sow
a leayan zeyzlpa. 3 hi ofacihyc of! Sone zpund. SsSan pu hi —
ponne zecnapan mihc. ponne paz ic } Su ne pilnayc naney opper pmngey ofep pa’. CAPUT XXIV.
§ I. DA he pa piy leod arunzen heybe. pa foplec he pone yanz. J zeypuzote ane hpile. y onzann ymealice pencan on hir mobdey mzepance. and Suy? cpep. Alle deaplic man rpencp hine yelpne mid miychcum® 3 manizpealbum ymbhozum. 3 peah pulniad ealle puph miychce* papay cuman to anum enbe. f if ‘ hi pilmiap puph unzelice eapnunza cuman to anne eadizneyye. iy ponne Lod. ye y fpuma J ende elcer zobdey.® 7 he ip po hehyce zerelp.° Da cpep P Mod. Dec me Syncp ne f hehyte x0.’ petce man ne Supre naney opper zodep. ne eac ne pecce ogep f. San he  hebbe. } iy hpof® eallpa opeppa zoba.® yoppam hic eall o3pu zob'? ucan befehp. 3 eall on mnan him herp. Neepe hic no f hehyce zod."* zip him enix buran pepe. yoppam hic herbe Sonne co pilnianne sumey zoder!? pe hic yelr nzpoe. Da andypapode yio Lerceadpiyney 3 cpap. Deer ip ppipe ypeocol ‘f pac iy plo hehyce zeyeeld. poppam hic ip expep ze hpor ze flop ealler zodey.!® hpac iy } ponne bucon reo yelerce zeyeeld. pe pa oppa zeyeelpa ealle’* on mnan him zezabdenad. 7 hi ucan ymbherp.!> 3 on mnan him zehelc. 3 him naney ne bid pana. ne he naney neoddseapre nafp. Ac hi cumap ealle of him. j ec ealle co him. ypa spa ealle petepu cumad of Sepe ye. J efc ealle cumad co Sepe ye. Nip nan co per lycel zepelm.'° he pa yee ne zerece. and eft of pepe ye he zelenc m on pa eoppan. 3 ypa he bip ymuzende zeond pa eopSan. ob he eft cymp co Sam ilcan wpelme pe he wp uc fleop. 7 ypa eye co Saepe yee’.
§ I1.4 Diy iy nu biyen papa yopena gzeyelda. papa pilniap ealle deaplice men to bezicanne. Seah he Suph miyclice’’ pezar Sencan co cumanne. foppam ezhpelec man hefp zecyndelic z05!* on him yelfum. foppam ele Mod pilnap soper zoder co
P Boet. lib. iii. prosa 2.—Tum defixo paululum visu, &c.
9 Boet. lib. iii. prosa 2,—Est enim mentibus hominum, &e.
1 Bod. of azihd o8. * Cott. pa. % Cott. miphcum.  * Cott. muiylice. 5 Cott. sooder. © Bod. seyelba. 7 Cott. 500d. * Cott. yporp. 9 Cott. so0da. 1 Cott. 5000. 1 Cott. 5006. 1% Cott. Soodeyr. 18 Cott. Soodey. 4 Cott. ealla. 15 Cott. ymbyeh’. 1° Cott. epylm. 7 Cott. muiplice. 18 Cott. 5000.
ES) 1. 11. BOETHIUS. 81
_ them from the ground. After thou, then, art able to discover those, I know that thou wilt not desire any other thing be- sides them.
CHAPTER XXIV.
§ I. Wuewn he had sung this lay, he ceased the song, and was silent awhile, and began to think deeply in his mind’s thought, and thus said: Every mortal man troubles himself with various and manifold anxieties, and yet all desire, through » various paths, to come to one end: that is, they desire, by dif- ferent means, to arrive at one happiness; that is, then, God! He is the beginning and the end of every good, and he is the
highest happiness. Then said the Mind: This, methinks, must be the highest good, so that man should need no other good, nor moreover be solicitous beyond that: since he possesses that which is the roof of all other goods; for it includes all other goods, and has all of them within it. It would not be the highest good, if any good were external to it, because it would then have to desire some good which itself had not. Then answered Reason, and said: It is very evident that this is the highest happiness, for it is both the roof and the floor of all good. What is that, then, but the best happiness, which gathers the other felicities all within it, and includes, and holds them within it: and to it there is a deficiency of none, neither has it need of any; but they all come from it, and again all return to it: as all waters come from the sea, and again all come to the sea? There is none in the little fountain which does not seek the sea, and again, from the sea it arrives at the earth, and so it flows gradually through the earth, till it again comes to the same fountain that it before flowed from, and so again to the sea.
§ II. Now this is an example of the true goods, which all mortal men desire to obtain, though they by various ways think to arrive at them. For every man has natural good in himself, because every mind desires to obtain the true good:
7 82 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXIV.
bezicanne. Ac hic bip amepyied mid Sam lenum zod5um.! fop- — pam hic bid [opdelpe]? papco. foppam sume menn penap f © pec pie yeo yelerce zeyelp. $ mon pie spa pehz } he naney — pmgzer mapan ne pupre. 7 pilniad® hiopa populd wfcep pem. —
Sume men penap } } sie pet hehyce zod.* P he pie hip ze-
fepum hy zefepena peoppoyc. 3 eallon mazene Sey clap. . Sume penap } f hehyce zod° sie on Sam hehycan anpealte. pa —
pumad oSep cpeza. odde him yelre picpian. odde hi co Sapa
picena fpeondycipe zepeodan. Sume ceohhiap } P becyc py pac
mon yeo fopemepe. Jj plomepe. 3 hebbe zodne® hhiyan. chad Sonne pey ezpep ze on sibbe. ze on zepmne. Maneze cellad co meeycum zode’ 7 co meycepe zepelpe f mon sie simle blide on Syye andpeapdan life. 3 fulza eallum hiy lurcum. Sume Sonne da Se pay pelan pilmad. hi hiy pilmad poppam dee hi polbon Sy mapan anpeald habban. he mihzon® py opropzlhcop pyya populd luyca bpucan. 3 eac pay pelan. Manexzz yint papa pe op Sy pilniap anpealder. Se hie polbon opmeece feoh* ze- zadepian. odSe ec pone hliyan heopa naman hi pilmad peer hi xebpeedan °.
§ I11.. On ypelcum. 3 on oppum ypelcum lenum. and hpeo- yendum!? peopprerpum elcer mennipcer moder mzepanc bip
zeypenced mid pepe zeopnrulneyre and mid pepe ciolunza.!! |
penp ponne ‘ hic heebbe yum healic zod!* zeycpyned. Sonne hic herp zepunnen!® py rolcer olecunza. Ond me pincd f hic heebbe zebohc yume ypipe leaylice meppe. Sume ciliad mid micelne zeopnrgulneyye pipa. Foppam ‘p hi puph } maze meye beapna bezican. 4 eac pynrumlice hbban. Da zecpeopan ppeond."* ponne ic recze seo!® peer beoppeonderce Synz eallpa pyya populd zeraelpa. pa ne yme fuppon? cellanne. ac to zodcundum. foppam yeo leaye pypd hi na opp ne bpinzp. Ac ye Lod pe hi zecynbdelice zepceop to xemazum. yoppam Se elcer opper pinzer on pyre populde mon pilnad, odde foppam pe he mez Suph f co anpealde cuman. odde co yumum populd luyce. bucon Sey zetpeopan Fpeondey. pone mon lugap hplum sop lurum 4 fop cpeopum. Seah he him nanpa
® Boet. lib. iii. prosa 2.—In his igitur ceterisque, &c.
1 Cott. so0obum. 2 Cott. ops belpe. Bod. of beelpe. * Cott. pmna’d. * Cott. 00d. 5 Cott. 500d. ° Bod. heah bexode. 7 Cott. xsoode. * Cott. meahte. 9 Cott. poh, 10 Bod. hi peorendum. 1 Cott. aluncsa. Cott. 500d. | Cott.senumen. ™ Cott. secpiepan ypiend. ' Cott. yle. 6 Cott. pupbum.
co populd xobum co”
pS 2irt. BOETHIUS. 83
but it is hindered by the transitory goods, because it is more prone thereto. For some men think that it is the best happi- ness that a man be sorich that he have need of nothing more: and they choose their life accordingly. Some men think that this is the highest good, that he be among his fellows the most honourable of his fellows, and they with all energy seek this. Some think that the supreme good is in the highest power. These desire, either for themselves to rule, or else to associate themselves in friendship with their rulers. Some persuade themselves that it is best that a man be illustrious and cele- brated, and have good fame; they therefore seek this both in peace andin war. Many reckon it for the greatest good and for the greatest happiness, that a man be always blithe in this present life, and fulfil all his lusts. Some, indeed, who desire these riches, are desirous thereof, because they would have the greater power, that they may the more securely enjoy these worldly lusts, and also the riches. Many there are of those who desire power because they would gather overmuch money: or again, they are desirous to spread the celebrity of their name.
§ III. On account of such and other like frail and perish- able advantages, the thought of every human mind is troubled with solicitude and with anxiety. It then imagines that it has obtained some exalted good when it has won the flattery of the people; and methinks that it has bought a very false greatness. Some with much anxiety seek wives, that thereby they may, above all things, have children, and also live hap- -pily. True friends, then, I say, is the most precious thing of all these worldly felicities. They are not, indeed, to be reckoned as worldly goods, but as divine: for deceitful for- tune does not produce them, but God, who naturally formed them as relations. For of every other thing in this world man is desirous, either that he may through it attain to power, or else some worldly lust: except of the true friend, whom he loves sometimes for affection and for fidelity, though he expect to himself no other rewards. Nature joins and
a2
84 : BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXIV. @)| 4 opeppa lena! ne pene. ) zecynd zefehp J zelimp Sa fpiend co- _ zeedepe mid uncodeledlicpe luge. Ac mid Siyyum populd ze- yelpum y mid Sip andpeapdan pelan mon pypcp oftop feond — Sonne fpeond. Be piyan? 7 be manezum pyllecum mez beon © eallum monnum cup. } ce ealle pa lichamlican x05 brd* rop- cuppan Sonne Sepe yaple cpzycay. Ppt pe penad } mon beo ~ py yepeenzpa* pe he bid micel on hy hchoman. yeo faezepney — ponne 3 yeo hpeecney pay hchoman zebliyrap pone mon. J ape. J pro heelu hine zebdep luycbepne:. On eallum piyum hcham- licum’ zerelizneyyum men yecap anfealde eadizneyye pey pe him Smep. foppam pe zzhpelc man ypa hpect ypa he ofep ealle oppe pmz ypipoyc lugap. he ceohhap® } him pie becyz J H bip hiy hehyze z0d.’ ponne he } ponne beziten herp. ponne tihhap® he } he mzze beon ypide zeyzeliz. Ne onyace ic nauht p pa ze- yelpa 7 peo eadrzney sie pec hehyte zo? pryer andpeapdan hirer. poppam Se! wzhpile mann cehhap"! } } Smz becyc pe f he ypipoyc ofep oppu ping lufap. J ponne he tiohhap p he pie ypipe xeyeeliz. zip he P bezican maze. } he ponne ypipoye pillnas :. Pu ne ip pe! nu zenoz openlice xeeopad papa leayena xepelpa anheney. iy ponne wzhca. 3 peopdyerpe. 3 anpeald. and xelp8 J populdluyc. Be pam populdluyce Epicupuy ye uppica yeede. pa he ymbe ealle pay odpa zeyeelpa ymeade. pe pe ep nembdon. pa yeede he } ye lure pepe ‘p hehyce z0d.!* poppam ealle pa oppu z05. pe pe zp nemodon. oleccap pam Mode ¥ hic pev.! ye lure Sonne ana olecp pam lchoman anum ypipoyt :.
§ IV. Ac pe pillad nu zet yppecan ymbe manna xzecynd 7 ymbe heona cilunza. pa nu peah heona Mod 7 heona zecynd | ye abimmad. J hi sien on } ofdele anzen co yrele 7 pidep healde. peah hi pilmiad. peep pe hi cunnon j maxon. pey hehycan zodey.!6 Spa ppa ofepbpuncen man pat he pceolde co hip hure and co hiy peeyce. J ne mez peah Sidep apedian. ypa bip eac pam Mode Sonne hic bid aheprzad mid Sem ymbhozum syye populde, hic bip mid Sam hpilum ofepdpenced 7 xedpelod. co pam!’ } hic ne mez fullpyhe anedian co zode. Ne pyncp peah
® Boet. lib. iii, prosa 2.—Sed ad hominum studia, &e.
! Cott. leana. 2 Cott. pip. 3 Cott. leumlican 5005 bios. —* Cott. ycpencpa. 5 Cott. heumlicum. 6 Cott. ciohha’. 7 Cott. 500. § Cott. tiohha’. ® Cott. 500d. © Cott. by. 1 Cott. sohhas. 12 Cott. ‘p. 13 Cott. sielp. ' Cott. 5000. 1 Bod, yecad. 1% Cott. soobdey. Y Cott. Zedpeald co pon.
§ Iv. BOETHIUS. 85
cements friends together with inseparable love. But with these worldly goods, and with this present wealth, men make oftener enemies than friends. By these and by many such things it may be evident to all men, that all the bodily goods are inferior to the faculties of the soul. We indeed think that a man is the stronger, because he is great in his body. The fairness, moreover, and the vigour of the body, rejoices and delights the man, and health makes him cheerful. In all these bodily felicities, men seek simple happiness, as it seems
‘to them. For whatsoever every man chiefly loves above all
other things, that he persuades himself is best for him, and that is his highest good. When, therefore, he has acquired that, he imagines that he may be very happy. I do not deny, that these goods and this happiness are the highest good of this present life. For every man considers that thing best,
_ which he chiefly loves above other things; and therefore he
persuades himself that he is very happy if he can obtain what he then most desires. Is not now clearly enough shown to thee the form of the false goods, that is, then, possessions, dignity, and power, and glory, and pleasure? Concerning pleasure, Epicurus the philosopher said, when he inquired concerning all those other goods, which we before mentioned ; then said he that pleasure was the highest good, because all the other goods which we before mentioned gratify the mind and delight it, but pleasure alone chiefly gratifies the body only.
§ IV. But we will still speak concerning the nature of men, and concerning their pursuits. Though, then, their mind and their nature be now dimmed, and they are by that fall sunk down to evil, and thither inclined, yet they are desirous, so tar as they can and may, of the highest good. As adrunken man knows that he should go to his house and to his rest, and yet is not able to find the way thither, so is it also with the mind, when it is weighed down by the anxieties of this world. It is sometimes intoxicated and misled by them, so far that it cannot rightly find out good.
86 BOELHIUS. CHAP. XXIV.
pam monnum hi auht meappizen pe pay! pilmiap co bezi- canne } hi mapan ne pupron tilian. Ac penap } hi mzzen eall? par xod® zezabepian cozebdepe. paetce nan buton pepe ze- yomnunza ne sie. nycon ponne nan [opep ]* z05° Sonne eallpa
Sapa deoppypSeycena Simza zezadepunza to heopa anpealde.
he naney Sinzer bucon pam ne pupre. Ac nip nan man f te yumey eacan ne pupge bucon Lobe anum. Pe herp on hiy azenum zenoh. ne Seapp he naner pmzer bucon py pe he on
him yelrum hed. Penyc pu nu f pa dypende® penad Prep |
Smz pie elcer peoppreiper becyt pyppe pet ce hi’ medbemeyte onzicon mazon. neye nee. 1¢ pat ‘p hit nip no co fopyeonne.
Pu mez p yfel beon } ce elcey monney mzepanc penp p ce —
zod® pie. J epcep hizap. 4 pulnap co bezicanne. neye mp hic na yrel. P iy } hehyce zod.° Pp mip nu anpeald co cellanne to yumum Sapa hehycena zoda Siyyey andpeapdan lifer. Ppepep pet nu pie co calianne pachic j unnyc f ce nycpyppoyt ip eallpa
Syya populd pmnza. iy anpeald. hpeepep nu x05! hhya j fope- *
meepney sie!! yop nauhe co cellenne. nee nere. Nip hit nan cyn!? mon ‘ fop nauhc celle. oppam pe wzle mon penp } becyc pie } he ypipoyc lufap. Pu ne picon pe } nan neapepner. ne nan eapfopu. ne nan unpotney. ne nan yap. ne nan heprzney. ny nan zereld. Ppec Supfon! pe nu ma ymbe ba zerelda yppecan. Pu ne pac wle man hpet pa beop. j eac pac ‘} pal# beod $ hehyce zod.!° 7 Seah yecp fulneah xle mon on ypipe lyclum Sinzum 6a yeleycan zeyzlpa. foppam he penp ‘} he he ponne ealle habbe. zip he hers } he Sonne pppoe pilnap co bezicanne. Det iy ponne ‘P hi spiSoye pilmap co bezicanne. pela. 3 peoppyerpe. J pice. J pyre populde puldop. 7 zp. 7 populd lure. Diyrer ealler hi pilmiap. foppam Se hi penap p hie puph pe pmz reylon bezican } him ne pie! naney pillan pana. napep!? ne peoppreiper. ne anpealder. ne fopemepneyye. ne bliyyes py ealler hi pulmap. 3 pel op hi pey pilmad. Seah hi miychice!® hip pilnizen. Be Sam Snzum mon mez ypeotole on- zican ‘p elec mon Sey pilnap } he meze p hehyce zod bezican Seep hi hic zecnapan mihzan. odde on piht pecan cudson. Ac hi hit ne yecad on Sone pibceycan!® pez. hit nip on Sipe populde :-
1 Bod. meappiende bey. 7 Bod. him agen ealle. * Cott. 500d. 4 Bod. heopa. Cott. heopa. % Cott. 5005.  ° Bod. dyresian be. 7 Bod. *. 8 Cott. 500d. 9 Cott. 500d. =” Cott. 5005. ™ Bod. seo. ™ Cott. hiz cyn. 13 Bod. bupye. 4 Cott. hi. 15 Cott. 5006. 6 Bod. yeo. 17 Cott. naubep. 18 Cott. miylice, 1 Bod. pyhtoyrzon.
BS IY. BOETHIUS. 87
Nor yet does it appear to those men that they at all err, who are desirous to obtain this, that they need labour after nothing more. But they think that they are able to collect together all these goods, so that none may be excluded from the number. They therefore know no other good than the col- lecting of all the most precious things into their power, that they may have need of nothing besides them. But there is no one that has not need of some addition, except God alone. He has of his own enough, nor has he need of anything but that which he has in himself. Dost thou think, however, that they foolishly imagine that that thing is best deserving of all estimation, which they may consider most desirable ? No, no. I know that it is not to be despised. How can that be evil, which the mind of every man considers to be good, and strives after, and desires to obtain? No, it is not
evil: itis the highest good. Why is not power to be reckoned
one of the highest goods of this present life? Is that to be esteemed vain and useless, which is the most useful of all these worldly things, that is, power? Is good fame and renown to be accounted nothing? No, no. It is not fit - that any one account it nothing; for every man thinks that best which he most loves. Do we not know that no anxiety, or difficulties, or trouble, or pain, or sorrow, is happiness ? What more, then, need we say about these felicities ? Does not every man know what they are, and also know that they are the highest good? And yet almost every man seeks in very little things the best felicities; because he thinks that he may have them all, if he have that which he then chiefly wishes to obtain. This is, then, what they chiefly wish to obtain, wealth, and dignity, and authority, and this world’s glory, and ostentation, and worldly lust. Of all this they are desirous, because they think that, through these things, they may obtain that there be not to them a deficiency of anything wished; neither of dignity, nor of power, nor of renown, nor of bliss. They wish for all this, and they do well that they desire it, though they seek it variously. By these things we may clearly perceive that every man is desirous of this, that he may obtain the highest good, if they were able to discover it, or knew how to seek it rightly. But they do not seek it in the most right way. It is not of this world.
Le, | .
88 BOETHIUS. CHAP. —
+
CAPUT XXvV.t
DA ye Piybom pa Si spell apd hepde. pa onzan he eo yinzan J Sur cpep. Ic pille nu mid z15$um zecypan hu pun- — cophce Dpihcen pele eallpa zerceagca mid Sam bpidlum hip ~ anpealdey. 7 mid hpilcepe endebypdneyye he zercapolap J ze-— merzad ealle zeycearca. 7 hu he hi hed xeheapopade 7 xehepre mid hiy unanbmbdendlicum pacentum. f ele zerceart bip heald on locen pip hine zecynde. pepe zecynde Se heo to xzerceapen pey. bucon monnum. j sumum enzlum. da peoppap hpilum of hiopa zecynde. Ppt seo leo. Seah ho pel cam ye. J feyce pacencan hebbe. 3 hipe maziycep ypide luprze. and eac ond- pede. zip hic eppe xebypep ‘H heo blodeyr onbiynz5. heo fopzic yona hipe mpan taman. j zemond pey pilban zepunan hipe elopana. onzind ponne pyn 4 hipe pacencan bpecan, 3 abit epeyc hine labceop. and yiddan wzhpeer Sey pe heo zefon mzxz, ze monna. ze neata. Spa Sop eac pudu fuzlay. Seah hi beon pel acemede. zip hi on dam puda peoppap. hi fopreod heopa lape- opay J puniap on heopa zecynde, peah heopa laneopay him Sonne bioban pa ilean meccayr Se hi ep tame mid xepenedon, ponne ne peccap hi papa mecca. zp hi peer puda benuzon. Ac pincp him pynrumpe } him ye peald on cpepe. and hi zehypan opeppa fuzela ycemne, Spa bid eac pam tneopum Se him ze- cynbde bip up heah co ycandanne. peah du ceo hpelene boh of dune co pepe eoppan. ypelce pu bezan mexe. spa pu hme alecyc. spa yppincp he up. 3} ppizad pip hip zecyndey. Spa ded eac yeo yunne. peah heo ofep midne deez onysize 3 luce co pape eoppan. ec heo yecp hipe zecynde. 4 pcizp on pa dezlan pega pp hipe uppyney. 3 spa hie ufopy ufpop. odde hio cymp ypa up ypa hine ypemeyt zecynbde bid. Spa dep ele xepceare. ppizap pip uy xecyndey.  zepazen bip zip hic wppe co cuman mez. Nip nan Zerceart Zeyceapen papa pe ne pilmze ‘p hic pibep cuman meze ponan pe hic wep com. } ip to peeyte J To opropzneyye. Seo payc ip mid Lobe. y pat ip Lod. Ac ele zercearc hpeaprad on hipe yelgpe ypa ypa hpeol. 4 to pam heo ypa hpeaprap ‘Pp heo eft cume pap heo ep pey. 7 beo f ilce } heo zp pay. Sonecan pe heo ucan behpepred pie. } } hio xp pey. 3 50 Hp heo zp pybe :-
t Boet. lib. iii, metrum 2.—Quantas rerum flectat habenas, &e.
| CHAP. XXv. BORTHIUS. 89
CHAPTER XXvV.
Wuen Wisd ym had made this speech, then began he again to sing, and thus said: I will now with songs declare how wonderfully the Lord governs all creatures with the bridles of his power, and with what order he establishes and regulates all creatures, and how he has restrained and bound them with his indissoluble chains, so that every creature is kept within bounds with its kind, the kind that it was fashioned to, except men and some angels, who sometimes depart from their kind. Thus the lion, though she be very tame, and have fast chains, and greatly love, and also fear her master; if it ever happen that she tastes blood, she immediately forgets her new tamer, and remembers the wild manner of her parents. She then begins roaring, and to break her chains, and bites first her leader, and afterwards whatsoever she may seize, both of men and of cattle. So do also wood-fowls. Though they be well tamed, if they return to the woods, they despise their teachers, and remain with their kind. Though their teachers then offer them the same meals with which they before allured them to become tame: they then care not for those meals, so that they may enjoy the wood. But it seems to them pleasanter, that the weald resound to them, and they hear the voice of other fowls. So is it also with trees, whose nature it is to stand up high. Though thou pull any bough down to the earth, - such as thou mayest bend; as soon as thou lettest it go, so soon springs it up, and moves towards its kind. So doth also the sun. Though she after mid-day sink and incline to the earth, again she seeks her-kind, and departs by unknown ways to her rising, and so hastens higher and higher, until she comes so far up as her highest nature is. So doth every creature. It tends towards its kind, and is joyful if it ever may come thereto. There is no creature formed which de- sires not that it may come thither whence it before came, that is, to rest and to tranquillity. The rest is with God, and itis God. But every creature turns on itself like a wheel: and so it thus turns that it may again come where it was before, and be the same that it was before, as often as it is turned round may be what it before was, and may do what it before did. ‘
90 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXVI.
CAPUT XXVI"
§ I. DA ye Piydom pe diy leop aryunzen! hepde. Da ongan he :
ert ypellan 3 pur cpp. Eala hpset ze eopplican men.” peah ze
eop yelge nu 50n neacum zelice rop eoppe dyyize. hpeet ze peah © mazon hpezt hpezo* onzican spelce eop mete be eoppum Fpum-_
ycearce. iy Lod. pone sopan ppuman and pone yopan ende zlcpe xeyeelpe ze onzictap Seah ze hine fullice ne xecnapan.* 7 ypa peah pio zecynd eop tihd co pam anzite. ac eop tihp? ypipe manizpeald zedpola of pam andzice. Lepencad nu chpeepep men mezen cuman co pam sopum zeyezlpum dSuph pa® andpeapdan Zeyelpa. foppam de fullneah ealle men cpepap ‘f ye seo’ ye ze- yelzoyca. ye pe pay eopplican zeyelpa ealle® herp. hpepep nu micel reoh. odde peoppycipe. odde eall per andpeapda pela. meeze senigne mon 60n ypa zerelme p he naney pinzey mapan ne pupre.? neye nere. 1c pat ‘P hi ne mazon. Pp: my hic ponne on py ypipe speocol } Sar andpeandan zod!° ne yin na pa sopan z05.!° ronpam Se hi ne mazon yellan } hi zehacap. Ac hceccap in zeleeycan ne mazon. ponne hi zehacap pam pe bhi lupan pillap pa opan zerzlpa. 3 aleozap him peah ma ponne hi him geleycan. poppam pe hi heona nabbap ma ponne hi heona habban. LGepenc Su nu be %e yrelfum. la Boetiuy hpedep Su zppe auht unpoc pepe da pa pu zereelzoyc peepe.'! odde hpeedSen de eppe eenizery pillan pana pepe da Su meycne pelan hepderc.
o0dde hpapep Sim populd pa eall pape epcep Smum pillan. Da
andypopode Boeciuy and cpeed. Nere la nere. Neey 1c neegpe zie nane hpile ypa emney modey. pay pe 1c Femunan meze. pet ic eallunza pepe opyopz. 1c ypa opropz pane P ic nane zedpe- pedneyye nepbe. ne me nefpe zc ne licode eall } 1c pryyce.!? ne
me nerpe ney ealler ypa ic polde. peah ic hip mipe. Da and- ~
ypopode ye Viybom 74 cpap. Ppi neepe pu ponne zenoz eapm. 4 zenoz unhipy.!> peah pe puhcve } du peliz pepe. Sonne pu open tpeza. odde hepdeyc P pu noldeyc. odd5e nepdeye ‘P pu poldeyz. Da andypapode Boeciuy 4 cpp. Call me peey ppa spa pu peedeyc.
4 Boet. lib. iii, prosa 8.—Vos quoque, O terrena, &c.
1 Cott. aruncsen. 7? Bod. hpe bey peopSlcan men, 4 Cott. hpusu. -
* Cott. oncnapen. 5 Bod. teohS. © Cott. bay. 7 Cott. me. * Cott. ealla. 2 Cott. bypre. © Cott. 5000. ba ba bu Sepelsoye pepe, deest in MS. Bod. 2 Cott. pipre- 13 Cott. unhyor5.
i: i !
I
%
SEY, y
eS 1. BOETHIUS. 91
CHAPTER XXVI.
§ I. When Wisdom had sung this lay, then began he again to speak, and thus said: O ye earthly men, though ye now
~ make yourselves like cattle by your folly, ye nevertheless can in some measure understand, as in a dream, concerning your
origin, that is God. Ye perceive the true beginning, and the true end of all happiness, though ye do not fully know it. And nevertheless nature draws you to that knowledge, but very manifold error draws you from that knowledge. Consider now whether men can arrive at the true goods through these present goods; since almost all men say that he is happiest who possesses all these earthly goods. Can, then, much money, or dignity, or all this present wealth, make any man so happy that he may need nothing more? No,no. I know this, that
§ they cannot. Why, is it not then from this very clear, that | these present goods are not the true goods, because they
cannot give what they promise? But they pretend to do what they are not able to fulfil, when they promise to those
- who are willing to love them, the true felicities, and tell lies _ to them more than they perform to them; for they are de-
ficient in more of these felicities than they possess of them. Consider now concerning thyself, O Boethius, whether thou
wert ever aught uneasy, when ‘thou wert most prosperous ?
or whether there were ever to thee a want of anything de- sired, when thou hadst most wealth? or whether thy life were then all according to thy wish? Then answered Boe-
' thius, and said: No, O no! I was never yet at any time of
so even mind, as far as I can remember, that I was altogether without care: that I was so without care that I had no trouble: nor did all that I experienced ever yet please me, nor was it ever with me entirely as I wished, though I con- cealed it. Then answered Wisdom, and said: Wast thou
not, then, poor enough, and unhappy enough, though it
seemed to thee that thou wert rich; when thou either hadst that which thou wouldest not, or hadst not that which thou wouldest? Tien answered Boethius, and said: All was to
92 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXVI.
a Da cpep ye fiydom. Pu ne bip zlc mon zenoz eapm per Se he nefp. Sonne hic hine lyre habban. Dec iy sop. cpep Boecuy, Da cpep ye Viyoom. Ing he ponne eapm br®. ne he ponne ne bid eadiz. rop py he pilnad $ he habbe f he nes. py he polte zenoz habban. Da cped Boeciuy. Dee iy eall op } pu yexzye. Da cped ye Piydom. Pu ne heyderc pu Sonne Sa eapmpe.! pa pa pupelezoyc pepe. Da andypapode ic and cpep. Ic pat f pu yop yezyc. p 1c hi hepbe. Da epep ye Viydom. Pu ne pmep me ponne nu # ealle pa pelan piyey middaneapder ne maxon zedon.
zenne mon pelizne. spa pelizne } he zenoz habbe and no mapan ~
ne pupre.? 4 ypa peah hi hic zehacap ezlcum pana pe hi herd. Da cpe% ic. Niy nan Smz* oppe ponne f pu pexyc:-
§ ILY Da cpep ye Piydom. Ac hpi ne eapc pu Sonne hip ze- paga. Pu ne miht Su zereon elce dez P da pcpenzpan nmap pa pelan og* pam unycpenzpum. Pp bip eller wlce dz ypele yeorung. } ypelce zeflicu. y zemor. 4 Somar. bucon P ele bic Sexy peaplacey de him on zenumen bip. odde ere oppey zicypap. Da andypapode’ ic. 5 cpap. Genoh pyhce pu ypypayt. ppa hit ap
ypa pu yexzyc. Da cpep he. Fop piyum pmzum bepeapf ele mon.
fulcumey co eacan him yelfum } he maze zehealdan hip pelan. Da cpp ic. Ppa odyeecd peey. Da cpep he. Lip he nauht neefde pey pe he ondpede ‘p he ropleoran ponte. ponne ne Soprte he na mapan fulcumey ponne hy yelper. Da cpeep ic. Sop pa pexye. Da onyac ye fiydom yaplice. 7 cpap. Eala me pmep pipep- peapd ping elcer monney zepunan ¥ elcer monney pillan ° 1¢ nu yeczan pile. ‘p ip. pecce ponan Se hi ceohhiap p bi peylan eadizpan peoppan. ‘P hi peoppap Sonan eapmpan j eapxpan.7 Fopdam zip hi lycley hpect habbap, ponne bepupfon hi P hn oleccan paem efcep fpipe pe enizpe puhte mane habbad. yam hi pypron. ram hi ne pupron. hi pillap peah. Ppeep ip Sonne yeo xemeczunz. odde hpa herp hi. od5e hponne cymp heo. } heo mMeze adpizan pa eopmpo® ppam pem pelezum eallunza. rpa he mape herp. spa he ma monna’ oleccan yceal. Ppepep pa pelzan nu neppe ne hinzpize.’? ne ne pypyce. ne ne cale.!! i¢ pene peab ‘P pu pille nu cpepan } pa pelzan habban mid hpam hi mexen perc eall xebecan. Ac peah pu nu ypa cpepe. hic ne mazon pa pelan eallunza zebecan. peah hi yume hpile meen.
Y Boet. lib. iii. prosa 3.—Atqui hoe quoque, &e,
1 Cott. ypmbe. Cott. pypre. % Cott. papa, ‘Cott. on, 5 Cott. andpypode. § Cott. be. 7 Bod. eaphpan. Cott. ypmpba. ° Bod. mapan. 10 Cott. hingspe. 1 Cott, ka‘e.
Ce
§ 1. BOETHIUS. 93
me as thou hast said. Then said Wisdom: Is nct every man poor enough in respect of that which he has not, when he is desirous to have it? That is true, said Boethius. Then said Wisdom: But if he is poor, he is not happy, for he desires that he may have what he has not, because he wishes to have enough. Then said Boethius: That is all true which thou sayest. Then said Wisdom: Hadst thou not, then, poverty
i when thou wert richest? Then answered I, and said: I
know that thou sayest truth, that I had it. Then said Wisdom: Does it not appear to me, then, that all the riches of this middle-earth are not able to make one man wealthy ? so wealthy that he may have enough, and may not need more? And nevertheless they promise it to every one who possesses them. Then said I: Nothing is truer than what thou sayest.
§ IJ. Then said Wisdom: But why, then, art thou not an assenter to this? Canst thou not see every day, that the stronger take riches from the weaker? Wherefore else is every day such sorrow, and such contentions, and assemblies, and judgments; except that every one demands the spoil which is taken from him, or, again, covets that of another?
7 Then answered I, and said: Thou arguest rightly enough ;
so it is as thou sayest. Then said he: On these accounts
& every man has need of help in addition to himself, that he
may keep his riches. Then said 1: Who denies it? Then
¥ said he: If he had nothing of that which he fears he may be 4 obliged to lose, then he would not have occasion for any more help than himself. Then said I: Thou sayest truly. Then
retorted Wisdom sharply, and said: O, how inconsistent, in every man’s custom and every man’s will, does that thing appear to me, which I will now mention; that is, that from whence they persuade themselves that they shall become happier, they from thence become poorer and weaker! For, if they have any little, then it behoves them to cringe for protection to those who have anything more. Whether they need, or whether they need not, they yet crave. Where, then, is moderation, or who has it, or when will it come, that it may entirely drive away miseries from the wealthy? The more he has, the more men he must cringe to. Do the rich never hunger, nor thirst, nor become cold? But I suppose
) thou wilt say that the rich have wherewith they may remedy ) all that. But though thou say so, riches cannot altogether
94 BOETHIUS. CHAP, XXVII.
yoppam pe hi pculon zlce bez eacan! mon ezlce bez panap. yonpam pe yeo menniyce pesl. pe neepe zerylled ne bip. pilnap” wlce daz hpec hpez pire? populd pelan. zzpep ze peegley. ze mectey. Ze Opyncey. Ze manezpa pinza co eacan pam. yoppanmey my Hew mater yy peliz. } he mapan ne pypre. Ac yeo zitpunz ne cann® zemet. ne nefpe ne bip zehealden on pose nidpeapre. ac pilnap pimle mapan ponne he pupre. Ic nat hpi* ze pulepu- piap pam hpeoyendan pelan. nu hi ne maxon eoppe pebdle eop fpam adon. Ac ze ecap eoppe epm%e® mid pam pe hi eop to cumap :-
§ TIL. Da ye f/iydom pa pir ppell araed hepde. pa onzan he eft ziddian.° 4 pur pmnzende cpp. Ppelc ypemu byp pam pelzan zicyepe P he zezadepize unzepim piyya pelena J zlcey zImcynney xenoz bezice. 7 peah he eprze his land mid Suyend yula. 4 peah eall per middaneand pie hiy anpealbe undeppeoded. ne lev he hiy nanpuhe of py midbdaneapde mid him mape ponne he bpohze hidep +.
CAPUT XXVII*
§ I. TVA’ Smz mez ye peoppyeipe 7 ye anpeald zedon. zip he becymp co pam dypzan. he mez hine zedon peoppne. 4 andpyyn eoppum dSyrzum. Ac ponecan® pe he pone anpeald fop- lec. o58e ye anpeald hme. ponne ne bip he naupep pam dyyezan ne peopp. ne andpyyne. peepep nu ye anpeald hebbe pone peap he ayzipicize® unpeapar. 3 apypcpalize! of picpa manna Mode. j plancize Seep cpercay on. le pact peah ‘Pp ye eopplica anpeald neeppe ne sepp pa cperray. ac hyp and zadpap unpeapay. J Sonne hi zezadpad herp.!! ponne eopap! he hi nalley ne bild. foppam papa picpa manna unpeapay manize men Zeyeop. fop- pam pe hi manize cunnon. and manize him mid beod. foppam pe yimle yeopiap ymbe pone anpeald. 4 hine eac fopyeop. Sonne pe zeyeod P he cymd co Sam pyppeycan. J co pam pe uy un- peoppoyce biop. rop pam pmzum peer z10 P ye piya Caculuy hime zebealz. 3 ypa unzerpezlice ropcped Nonium Sone pican, fop-
w Boet. lib. iii. metrum 3.—Quamvis fluente dives, &e.
x Boet. lib. iii. prosa 4.—Sed dignitates honorabilem, &e.
Cott. yean. 2 Cott. hpey hpuxu byyyer. 3 Cott. con. * Bod. hu. 5 Cott. pedle. © Cott. mdoizan. 7 Cott.cu. § Bod. banecan.
9 Bod. aytype cize. 10 Bod. pyptpalige. 1 ac hyd and sadpad un-
peapay 3 bonne hi sesadpad hers, deest in MS. Bod. 2 Bod. and ponne eopa’d.
|
SNe BOETHIUS. 95
remedy it, though they somewhile may. For it behoves them every day to add, what man every day lessens; because human want, which is never satisfied, requires each day something of this world’s wealth, either of clothing, of meat, of drink, or of many things besides. Therefore no man is so wealthy that he needs not more. But covetousness neither knows limit, _ hor ever is bounded by necessity; but desires always more than it needs. I know not why ye confide in these perish- able riches, when they are not able to remove your poverty from you, but ye increase your poverty whenever they come to you. g TIL. When Wisdom had made this speech, then began he ' again to sing, and thus singing said: What profit is it to the rich miser, that he gather an infinite quantity of these riches, 4 and obtain abundance of every kind of jewel: and though he till his lend with a thousand ploughs; and though all this middle-earth be subject to his power! He will not take with him from this middle-earth any more of it than he brought hither.
CHAPTER XXVII.
_ § I. Two things may dignity and power do, if it come to | the unwise. It may make him honourable and respectable to other unwise persons. But when he quits the power, or the power him, then is he to the unwise neither honourable nor respectable. Has, then, power the custom of extermi- | nating vices, and rooting them out from the mind of great men, and planting therein virtues? I know, however, that earthly power never sows the virtues, but collects and gathers vices; and when it has gathered them, then it nevertheless shows, and does not conceal them. For the vices of great men many men see: because many know them, and many are with them. Therefore we always lament concerning power, and also despise it, when we see that it cometh to _ the worst, and to those who are to us most unworthy. It was on these accounts that formerly the wise Catulus was angry, and so immoderately censured Nonius the rich, be-
96 BOETHIUS. CHAP. 20EEy
pam he hine zemevve yiccan on zepenedum yepidpeene. micel_ y50 mid Rompapum pey pep nane oppe on ne ysecvan.! buon pa peoppercan. Da fopreah ye Caculuy hime rop pi he pep on yiccan yceolde. roppam he hme piyce spipe unzercead- — piyne J ypipe unzemecfeycne. Da onzan ye Laculuy him ppi- gecvan on. re Laculuy pey hepecoza on Rome. ypipe sereeadpiy man. ne fopyape he no pone opepne ypa ypipe. xp he nan pice ~ ne nenne anpeald nerpbe :-
§ IL.Y Ppepep pu nu meze onzican hu micelne unpeoppyerpe ye anpald? bpenzp pam unmedeman. zp he hine unbdeprexp. pop- pam zlcey monney yrel bip dy openne. zip he anpeald herp. Ac zeyeze me nu. ic arcize pe pu Boecruy. hp: pu spa manizpeald yrel hapbdeyc 3 ypa micle unepneyye on pam pice pa hpile pe du hic hepbdeyc. o85e fophp: pu hic epct pmum unpillan® roplece. Pu ne payc pu } hic ney fon nanum oppum pmzum. buton foppam de du noloeyc on eallum Sinzgum beon zeppepe per unpihcpiran cyninzey* plan Deodpicer. foppam pe pu hme on- xeace on eallum pinzgum unpeoppne pey anpealdey. rpipe peeam- - leayne 7 unzeppzepne.” bucon zlcum zodum® peape. roppam pe ne mazon nauht eape yeczan ‘} pa yrelan sien zobde.” peah hi anpeald habban. Ne pupbde pu peah na adpiren ppom Deodpice. ne he Se na ne fopyape. xf Se licode ny dyyrz J hay unpihtpipney ypa pel ypa lip dyrezum dSeoplmzum odyde. Ing pu nu zerape yumne ypipe pryne man. pe hepde pipe xoda® ofephyda. and pepe peah ypipe eapm 4 ypipe unzeyeliz. hpeepep Su poldere cpepan ‘ he pape unpyppe anpealdey 7 peoppyeipey. Da and- ypopede Boecius 3 cpxep. Neye la neye. xp ic hine ypelene zemece.® ne cpepe ic nefpe he sie unpeoppe anpealdey 7 peopprcerpey. Ac elcey me pmep f he pie pyppe pe on piyye populde iy. Da cpp ye Piydom, A#le cpeyc herp hip pun- dopzire. J pa zipe J pone’ peopprerpe pe he haerp. he popzrpp rpipe hpape elcum papal! Se hme lurgad. rpa pa Vipdom ip re hehyca cperc. 7 ye!” herp on him feopep oppe cpeercar. papa iy an peepycipe. opep meczunz.’® pmidde ip ellen. peoppe pibc-
Y Boet. lib. iii. prosa 4.—Atqui minus eorum patebit, &e. |
* Cott. rop bem hic pep ba ypibe micel pido mid Rompapum ‘} bep nane oSpe an neyecon. 7 Bod. ap. * Cott. unpillum. ‘* Bod. binep. 5 Bod. unsepepne. © Cott. soobum. 7 Cott. Zoode. 8 Cott. s00da. ® Cott. mectze. 10 Bod. bayise bone. 11 Cott. beme pe. 12 Cott. he. 13 Cott, Semecsuns.
§ in. BOETHIUS. 97
eause he observed him to sit in an ornamented chair of state. It was a great custom among the Romans that no others should sit therein, except the most worthy. Then Catulus despised him, because he should sit therein; for he knew him to be very unwise, and very intemperate. Then began Ca- tulus to spit upon him. Catulus was a consul in Rome, a very wise man. He would not have despised the other so greatly, if he had not possessed any rule, or any power.
§ I. Canst thou now understand how great dishonour power brings on the unworthy when he receives it ? for every man’s evil 1s the more public when he has power. But tell me now, I ask thee, Boethius, why thou hadst such manifold evil, and such great uneasiness in authority, whilst thou hadst it? or why thou, again, didst unwillingly relinquish it? Dost thou not know that it was for no other reasons but that thou wouldest not in all things be conformable to the will of the unrighteous king Theodoric; because thou didst find him in all respects unworthy of power, very shame- less, and unrelenting, without any good conduct? For we cannot easily say that the wicked are good, though they have power. Yet thou wouldest not have been driven from Theo- doric, nor would he have despised thee, if his folly and his injustice had pleased thee, as well as it did his foolish favour- ites. If thou now shouldest see some very wise man, who had very excellent dispositions, and was, nevertheless, very poor, and very unhappy, wouldest thou say that he were un- worthy of power and dignity? Then answered Boethius, and said: No, Ono! If I found him such, I would never say that he were unworthy of power and dignity. But methinks that he would be worthy of all that is in this world. Then said Wisdom: Every virtue has its proper ex- cellence: and the excellence and the dignity which it has, it imparts immediately to every one who loves it. Thus wisdom -is the highest virtue, and it has in it four other virtues; of which one is prudence, another temperance, the third is for- titude, the fourth justice. Wisdom makes its lovers wise, and
98 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXVII.
piney. Se /ipbom zedep hiy luprenday pire. 3 paepe.! 7 zemet- feeyce. J zepyloize. 3 pubcpiye. 3 elcey zodey? peapar he zeryllp Sone Se hme lugad. } ne mazon don pa pe pone anpeald habbap pyye populde. ne mazon hi neenne cpefe fopzifan pam pe hi®
ye anne
lupiad of hiopa pelan. zip bi hme on heopa zecynde nabbad. Be | pam 1p ypipe ypeocol } pa pican on Sam populdpelan nabbap —
nenne sundop cperc. Ac him bip ye pela ucane cumen. 3 he ©
ne mez ucane nauhe azney habban. Lepenc nu hpepep eniz
mon beo apy* unpeopppa pe hme manize men foppiop.> Zp
ponne eniz mon apy unpeopppa bip. ponne bip ele dyyi man pe® unpeopppa. pe he mape pice herp elcum pyyum men. Be pam iy xenoz speocol. } ye anpeald 7 ye pela ne mez hip pealdend! zebon no py peopppon.* Ac he hme zebdep py unpe- opppan® pe he him cocymp. zig he zp ne dohze. ypa bip eac ye
pela j ye anpeald py pypya. zip ye ne Seah pe hme ah. ezpep
hiopa bip Sy fopcuppa zip hi hi zemecap :-
§ III. Ac ic pe mez eape xepeccan be yumene biyne. ‘} pu muht zenoz speocole onzicon } piy andpeapde lig ip ypipe anhe yceade. 7} on paepe pceade nan mon!) ne mez bezican pa yopan zeyelpa. Pu penyc pu nu. zp hpele pipe pice mon pypp adpifen of hip eande. oppe on hip hlapopder zpende pepp. cymp donne on elpeodiz role. pep pap hme nan man ne can. ne he neenne!! mon, ne fuppum ‘f zedeobe ne can. penyc Su meze hip’? pice hme pep on lande pyppne xedon. Ac ic pat p he ne meex. Ing ponne ye peoppreipe pam pelan zecynbde peepe. 3 hip agen paepe. Oppe ere ye pela paey pelezan azen pepe. ponne ne mihte he hme na’ roplecan. pepe re man on rpeleum lanbde ypelce he pape pe he ahce. ponne paepe hiy pela and hip peopprerpe mid him. Ac foppam pe ye pela 7 ye anpeald hi azgene ne beop. rop py hi hine foplecad.! 4 poppy pe hi nan zecynbdelic zod!° on him yelpum nabbap. op Sy hi lopapypaypayceadu. oppe pmec. peah ye leaya pena and yio pedelre papa Syyixena monna ciohhie re anpeald yie!® § hehyce zod."" Ac hic bip eall opep. ponne pa pican beop open ctpeza. oppe on elpeode.!8 odd3e on hiopa
% Boet. lib. iii, prosa 4.—Atque ut agnoscas veram, &e.
‘Bod. peopbe. 2 Cott. sooder. * Bod. hime. ‘* Cott. abe. 5 Bod. yopyeon. © Cott. 5ymx mon py. 7 Bod. anpeald. 8 Cott. peopSpan. ® Bod. pypran. 1° Cott. popbeem on bem nanmon. 1 Bod. ne enne, ” Cott. hip pela y hiy. 18 Cott. no. “4 Bod, roplecan. 15 Cott, 5000. 16 Cott. J ye pela pie. 17 Cott. 5000. 18 Cott, ellende.
io
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 99
prudent, and moderate, and patient, and just, and it fills him who loves it with every good quality. This they cannot do who possess the power of this world. They cannot impart any virtue to those who love them, through their wealth, if they have it not in their nature. Hence it is very clear that the rich in worldly wealth have no proper dignity: but the wealth is come to them from without, and they cannot from without have aught of their own. Consider, now, whether any man is the less honourable because many men despise him. But if any man be the less honourable, then is every foolish man the less honourable, the more authority he has, to every wise man. Hence it is sufficiently clear that power and wealth cannot make its possessor the more honourable. But it makes him the less honourable when it comes to him, if he were not before virtuous. So is also wealth and power the worse, if he be not virtuous who possesses it. Hach of them is the more worthless, when they meet with each other. § III. But I may easily instruct thee by an example, so that thou mayest clearly enough perceive that this present life is very like a shadow, and in that shadow no man can attain the true felicities. How thinkest thou, then? If any very great man were driven from his country, or goeth on his lord’s errand, and so cometh to a foreign people where no man knows him, nor he any man, nor even knows the language, thinkest thou that his greatness can make him honourable in that land? But I know that it cannot. But if dignity were natural to wealth, and were its own, or again, wealth were the rich man’s own, then could not it forsake him. Let the man who possessed them be in whatsoever land he might, then would his wealth and his dignity be with him. But because the wealth and the power are not his own, therefore they forsake him ; and because they have no natural ood in themselves, therefore they go away like shadows or smoke. Yet the false opinion, and the imagination of foolish men, persuades them that power is the highest good. But it is entirely otherwise. When the great are either among foreigners, or in their own country among wise men; then
100 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXVIII.
azenpe zecyppe! mid zerceadpiyum monnum. ponne bip expep xe pam piyan. ze pam zlpeodezan hiy pela pop nauht. y1odan hi onzicap P hi neepon fop nanum cpefte zecopene.” bucon pop
oyrezey folcey hepmge. Ac pep hi enize puht azney odde ze- cynbdelicer zober an® heopa anpealde hedon. ponne hefben hi
‘p mid him. peah he pec pice foplecen. ne roplecon hi no  ze- cynbdelice z0d.* Ac yrmle him polde > rylzean 7 hi pumle peopye xedon. papon hi on ypelcum lanbde ypelce hi pepon :-
§ IV.* Nu pu mihz onzican ye pela J ye anpeald nenne —
mon ne mazan on ellende peoppne zedon. ic pat peah pu pene pet hi on heopa azenpe cyppe ealne pez mezen. Ac peah pu hiy pene. ic pac } hi ne mazon. Pic pey zeo® zeond ealle Romana meance } hepetozan. J Somepar. j pa mapmhypodar. de } feoh heoldon. pe mon Sam fFepdmonnum on zeape yellan reeolde. and Sa pryercan® pican hefbon mzytne peopprerpe. Nu ponne opep cpeza. odde papa nan nip. oppe hi nanne peoppyeipe nabbap. zip hipa eniz iy. Spa hic bip be elcum papa pinga pe azen x00! 9 zecyndelic nabbap on him yelfum. oppe hpule hic bip co celenne. oppe hpuile hic bip to hepizanne. Ac hpzec pmep pe ponne on pam pelan j on pwm anpealbe pynrumer odde nycpyppey. nu hi naney Smzey zenoz nabbap. ne hi nauht azner zodey® nabbap. ne nauhc puphpuniender heopa pealbendum yellan na mazon ;-
CAPUT XXVIIT.°
DA re Viyoom pa pry ypell apad hefde. pa onzan he ere ziddizan® 4 puy cpep. Deah nu ye unmihcpiya cynmz Nepon hme xzerceyppce mid eallum pam phtezercum paedum. 7 mid
elcer cynney z1mmum xezlenzde. hu ne pey he peah zlcum ~
picum lap ¥ unpeopp. 7 elcey unpeapey J prpenluycer full. Ppeec he peah peoppode hiy deoplinzay mid miclum pelum. Ac hpeez per him py bec. Ppele xerceadpry mon mihte cpepan pet he apy peopppa peepe peah he hine peoppode ;-
4 Boet. lib. iii. prosa 4.—Sed hoe apud exteras nationes, &c.
> Boet. lib. iii. metrum 4.—Quamvis se Tyrio superbus ostro, &e. —.
1 Cott. cydpe. 2 Cott. secopenne. 3 Cott. Soodey on. * Cott. 5005. 5 Cott. 510. © Bod. reyzan. 7 Cott. 5005. ® Cott. Sooder. » Cott. sieddian.
CHAP. XXVIII. BOETHIUS. 101
either to the wise, or to the foreigners, is his wealth for naught, when they learn that they were chosen for no virtue, but “through the favour of foolish people. But if they in + their power had anything of proper or natural good, then would they have that with them, even if they should lose the power. They would not lose the ‘natural good, but that would always follow them, and always make them honourable, let them be in whatsoever land they might.
§ IV. Now thou mayest understand that wealth and power cannot make any man honourable in a foreign country. I wot, however, thou mayest think that they always can in their own country. But though thou mayest think it, I know that they cannot. It was formerly, through all the territories of the Romans, that consuls, and judges, and the treasurers, who kept the money, which they were every year to give to the soldiers, and the wisest senators, had the greatest honour. But now, either none of these exists, or they have no honour, if any one of them exists. So it is with respect to every one of those things which have not in them- selves proper and natural good. One while it is to be cen- sured, another while it is to be praised. But what of de- lightful or of useful appears to thee, then, in wealth and in power, when they have enough of nothing, nor have anything of proper good, nor can give anything durable to their pos- sessors P
CHAPTER XXVIII.
Wuen Wisdom had made this speech, then began he again to sing, and thus said: Though the wicked king Nero decked himself with all the most splendid clothes, and adorned him- self with gems of every kind, was he not, nevertheless, to all wise men, loathsome and unworthy, and full of all vice and debauchery? Yet he enriched his favourites with great riches: but what was to them the better? What wise man could say that he was the more honourable, when he had en- riched him ?
102 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXIX.
CAPUT XXIXx.¢
§ I. DAye /iydom pa piy leop arunzen heebde. Da onzan he ert ypellizan' 4 puy cpep. Ppepep pu nu pene p pey cynmgery xe- yeppeoen. 3 ye pela. jy ye anpeald. pe he zipp iy Seoplnzum. meze enizne mon zedon pelizne odde pealbendne. Da and- ypopede ic J cpep. pophpi ne mazon hi:- [Ppec ip on Siyye andpeapdan lire pynrumpe 3 becepe Sonne peey cynimzey folzap. 3) hip neapeyc. 7 yrddan pela 3 anpeald:- Da andypopede se Viyoom and cped. Seze me nu. hpepep pu wefppe zehypdeyc H he anzum papa. pe ep uy pepe. eallunza puphpunode. odde penyc Su hpepep hme zniz papa ealne pez habban mzze pe hine nu heyd. Pu ne payc du f ce ealle bec pmt fulle® pana biyna papa monna pe ep uy pepan. and ele mon pat pana de nu leopop } manezum cyninze onhpeapf ye anpeald J ye pela. 08 peec® he ert peapp pebdla. Eala ea iy $ ponne roppeopprullie pela pe naupep ne mez ne hine yelgne zehealdan. ne hip hlagopd. co Son } he ne puppe* mapan fulcumey. odde i beop bezen yophealden. Pu ne iy } peah yeo eoppe hehyte gerelp pana cyninza anpeald. j peah zip pam cyninge znizey plan pana bip. ponne lyclap ‘p hip anpeald. j ecp hy epmpa. fop py bip pmle 6a eoppe zeyelpa on sumum pmzum unzerelpa.? Ppaec pa cyninzay. peah hi manezpa® Seobda’ pealdan.* ne pealdap hi peah eallpa papa pe hi pealdan polbon. Ac beop foppam rprpe® eapme on heopa Mode. foppy hi nabbap yume papa pe ln habban poldon. roppam ic pat Pp ye cynmz pe zicpene bip. ph he hap mapan'’ epmpe ponne anpeald. foppam cpeep xeo pum cyninz pe unpihclice penz co pice. Eala hpaec p bid xzerpehz mon Se him ealnepez ne hanzad nacod ypeopd ofep pam hearde be ymalan ppede. spa rpa me!! yimle zic!? dyde. Pu pincp pe nu hu pe ye pela y ye anpeald heize. nu hy nefpe ne bip bucan eze. Jj eappopum. J sopzum. Ppaec pu payo pet ele cynmz polse beon” bucan Sirpum. 3 habban Seah anpeald zip he mihcve.
© Boet. lib. iii. prosa 5.—An vero regna Regumque, &e.
1 Cott. ppellan. ? Cott. yulla. 3 Bod. odbe ‘p. * Cott. bypre. 5 Cott. unpelba. © Cott.memig sep. 7 Cott. hoda, * Cott. pealoen. 9 Bod. ypa. 10 Cott. mapon. N Bod. ne. ” Cott. sic yymle. 13 Cott. bion.
§1 BOLKTHIUS. 103
CHAPTER XXIX.
§ I. Wuzy Wisdom had sung this lay, then began he again to speak, and thus said: Dost thou think that the king’s familiarity, and the wealth and the power which he gives to his favourites, can make any man wealthy or powerful? Then answered I, and said: Why cannot they? What in this present life is pleasanter and better than the king’s ser- vice and his presence, and moreover wealth and power? Then answered Wisdom, and said: Tell me, now, whether thou hast ever heard, that it always remained to any one who was before us? or thinkest thou that any one who now has it, can always have it? Dost thou not know that all books are full of examples of the men who were before us, and every one knows concerning those who are now living, that from many a king power and wealth go away, until he afterwards becomes poor? Alas! is that, then, very excellent wealth, which can preserve neither itself nor its lord, so that he may not have need of more help, lest they should both be lost ? But is not this your highest felicity—the power of kings? And yet if to the king there be a want of anything desired, then that lessens his power, and augments his misery. There- fore these your felicities are always in some respects infeli- cities! Moreover kings, though they govern many nations, yet they do not govern all those which they would govern; but are very wretched in their mind, because they have not some of those things which they would have: for I know that the king who is rapacious has more wretchedness than power. Therefore a certain king, who unjustly came to empire, for- merly said: O, how happy is the man to whom a naked sword hangs not always over the head by a small thread, as to me it ever yet has done! How does it now appear to thee? How do wealth and power please thee, when they are never with- out fear, and difficulties, and anxieties? Thou knowest that every king would be without these, and yet have power if he
104 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXIX,
Ac ic pat $ he ne mez. Dy ic pundpize. pophp: hi zilpan yrelcer anpealder. Ppepep Se nu Since } ye man micelne anpeald hebbe 4 ne ypipe zereelz. peyimle pilnad Sey de he bezican ne mxz. odde penyc Su f ye yeo! ypipe xerehz. pe simle mid micelum? pepede repp. od5e eft ye pe ezpep ondper. ze Sone de hine ondpxt. ze Sone pe hme na® ne ondpxt. Ppepep pe nu pmce } ye mon micelne anpeald hebbe. de him yselpum pincp } he neenne neebbe. ypa spa nu manezum men pincp f he nenne nebbe bucon he hebbe manizne man pe him hepe.*
ate tee
} > :
7 4 3
rid @
wel be
Ppeec pille pe nu mane’ rppecan be pam cyninze J be hiy rol- |
zepum. bucon®  xlc zerceadpiy man mez pican } hi beop full
eapme ¥ full unmihzize. Pu mazan pa cynmzay opracan odde —
fophelan hiopa’ unmihce. ponne hi ne mazan® nenne peopp- yeipe foppbpinzan bucon heona pezna fulcume :-
§ IL.4 peer pille pe nu eller eczan be Sam? Sexnum. buton p P pep ofc zebypep P hi peoppap bepearode ezlcpe ane. ze yuppum pey feoper. ppam heopa!? leayan!! cynmze. Ppaec pe picon $ ye unpihcpiya cyninz Nepon polde hacan hy azenne meziycpe. J hip poyceppeedep acpellan. peey nama pay Seneca.
ye py udpica. Da he Sa onfunde ‘f he Sead beon pceolde. Sa — bead he ealle!? hip ehca pip hip feope. pa nolde ye cynimz pep —
onron. ne him hiy feoper xeunnan. da he pa p onzeat. pa xe- cear he him pone bdeap him mon oflece blober on pam’ eapme. J pa 5yde mon spa. Ppeec pe eac zehepdon } Papmianur per Anconmure Sam Kayepe ealpa hip 5eoplmza® beropzoyc. J ealley hip polcer meeycne anpeald!® hepbe. Ac he hine het xe- bindan and yiddan ofylean. Ppa ealle men picon p ye Seneca pey Nenone. } Papmianur Ancome pa peoppercan. 7 pa leo- yercan. J meeycne anpeald'’ hepdon. ze on hiopa hmebde. ze
bucon. 7 Seah bucon elcepe yeylde pupdon fopdsone. Ppaec hi
pinodon bezen eallon mzzene'* } pa hlapopday naman ypa hpeec ypa hi hapdon 4 lecon hi hbban, ac hi ne mihcon! bezican. foppam papa cynmza peelhpeopner pay cto pam heand  heopa*® eapmecco ne mihton nauhe fopycandan. ne hupu
4 Boet. lib. iii. prosa 5.—Nam quid ego de Regum familiaribus, &e. 1 Cott. pie. 2 Cott. micle. ® Cott. no.  * Bod. hine. 5 Cott.
ma nu. 6 Cott. bucan. 7 Cott. heopa. * Cott. mason. ® Cott. bem. 1 Cott. ppom hiopa. ™ Bod. leoran. Cott. ealla. 18 Cott. hine. “ Cott. bem. 6 Cott. Syplinga. '6 Cott. meycu anpald, 7 Cott. anpald. 18 eallon mesene, desunt in MS. Cott. 18. Cott,
muihzen, 0 Cott, hiopa,
e611. BOETHIUS. 105
might. But I know that he cannot: therefore I wonder why they glory insuch power. Does it seem to thee that the man has great power, and is truly happy, who always desires that which he cannot obtain? Or thinkest thou that he is really happy who always goes with a great company? Or again, he who dreads both him that is in dread of him, and him that is not in dread of him? Does it seem to thee that the man has great power who seems to himself to have none, even as to many a man it seems that he has none, unless he have many a man to serve hm? What shall we now say more concerning the king, and concerning his followers, except that every rational man may know that they are full miser- able and weak? How can kings deny or conceal their weak- ness, when they are not able to attain any honour without their thanes’ assistance ?
§ II. What else shall we say concerning thanes, but this, that it often happens that they are bereaved of all honour, and even of life, by their perfidious king? Thus we know that the wicked king Nero would hate his own master, and kill his foster-father, whose name was Seneca. He was a philosopher. When, therefore, he found that he must die, he offered all his possessions for his life, but the king would not accept of it, or grant him his life. When he learned this, he chose for himself the death, that they should let for him blood from the arm; and they did so. We have also heard that Papinianus was to Antoninus the Cesar, of all his favourites the most beloved, and of all his people had the greatest power. But he gave order to bind, and afterwards to slay him. Yet all men know that Seneca was to Nero, and Pa- pinianus to Antoninus, the most worthy and the most dear ; and they had the greatest power, both in their court and elsewhere, and nevertheless, without any guilt, they were destroyed! Yet they both desired, most earnestly, that the lords would take whatsoever they had, and let them live, but - they could not obtain it: for the cruelty of those kings was so severe, that their submission could naught avail, nor in- deed would their high-mindedness, howsoever they might do,
; 106 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXX.
heopa ofepmecra. 5y5on ypa hpepep spa hy! 5yd5on. ne dohte— him 6a nappep Seah hi rceoldon pet reoph alecan. poppan? re pe hip ep cide ne ciolap. Sonne bip hiy on 71d untilad.? Pu heap Se nu ye anpeald* y ye pela. nu Su zehyped hepyc pet hme man? nappep® bucon’ eze habban ne mez. ne foplecan ne mot peah he pille. oppe hpet popycod yeo menizu papa ppeonda pam seonlnzum® papa cynmza. o83e hpec fopyctenc heo enzum men. roppam? 8a fpiend cumap mid Sam!” pelan. 3 epc mid pam pelan zepicaS. bucon ypipe reapa. Ac pa ppynd!! pe hme ep pop pam!? pelan lufiap. pa zepicap epc mid pam pelan. 3 peoppap Sonne co feondum. bucon pa feapan pe hime zp fon lupum™* 7 fop ctpeopum luredon pa hine polbon Seah lupien peah he eapm pepe. pa him puniap. Ppelc iy pypya pol od5e e2nzum men mape dapu ponne he hebbe on hip zefeppaedenne and on hip nepeyce feond on fpeondey anlicneyye :-
§ IIL.* Da ye fiydom pir ypell apehc'* hepbde. pa onzan he eye yinzan J puy cpep. De pe pille pullice anpeald azan. he yceeal cian epeyc f he hebbe anpeald hy azeney mobdey. j ne pie TO unzepiyenlice undeppeod hiy unpeapum. 3 ado of hy Mode un- zepiyenlice ymbhozan. poplete pa yeopunza hiy eopmpa. Deah he nu picpize ofep eallne middan zeapd. ppom eaycepeapdum 05 pertepeapdne. pom Indeum. iy ye ypupeayt ende pryyey middaneapbdey. op pac land pe pe hacad Thyle. pac ip on pam nopppeyc ende Siyyey middaneapdey. pap ne bip nappep ne on yumena niht. ne on pmepa deez. peah he nu py ealley pealde. nefp he no pe mapan anpeald, zp he hy mgzepancey anpeald nerp. and zip he hme ne papenap pip pa unpeapay pe pe ep ymbyppeecon |.
CAPUT XxXxf
§ I. DA ye Piydom pa pay ficce apunzen hepbde. pa onzan he ert yeczan spell 4 cpep. Ip p unzepiyenlic puldop diye populde 4 ypipe lear. be pam! pay xeo!® pmzende yum yceop. Sa he
© Boet. lib. iii, metrum 5.—Qui se volet esse potentem, &c.
f Boet. lib. iii. prosa 6.—Gloria vero quam fallax sepe, &e.
1 Cott. bi. 2 Cott. popbem 3 Bod. unlod. ‘4 Cott. anpald. 5 Cott. mon. § Cott. napbep ne. 7 Cott. bucan. § Cott. Sioplmsum, 9% Cott. yopbon. 10 Cott. bem. 0 Cott. yprend. 12 Cott. bem. ™ Bod. luum, M4 Cott. apeaht. 15 Cott. beem. 16 Cott. 510.
PS. T, BOETHIUS. 107
have availed them either, but they were obliged to lose life. For he who does not take timely care for himself, will at _ length be destitute. How doth power and wealth now please thee, now thou hast heard that a man neither can have it without fear, nor can part with it though he wish? What did the crowd of friends avail the favourites of those kings, ¢ -or what avails it toany man? For friends come with wealth, and again with wealth go away, except very few. But the friends who before, for wealth’s sake, love any one, go away _ afterwards with the wealth, and then turn to enemies. But _ the few, who before loved him for affection and for fidelity, _ these would, nevertheless, love him though he were poor. |) These remain to him. What is a worse plague, or greater 4 hurt to any man, than that he have, in his society and in his _ presence, an enemy in the likeness of a friend ?
~ § ILI. When Wisdom had made this speech, then began he «again to sing, and thus said: Whosoever desires fully to pos- } sess power, ought to labour first that he may have power over {his own mind, and be not indecently subject to his vices; also 4 let him put away from his mind unbecoming anxieties, and # desist from complaints of his misfortunes. Though he reign over all the middle-earth, from eastward to westward, from India, which is the south-east end of this middle-earth, to the island which we call Thule, which is at the north-west end of } this middle-earth, where there is neither night in summer nor } day in winter; though he rule even all this, he has not the t more power, if he has not power over his mind, and if he does } not guard himself against the vices which we have before spoken about.
CHAPTER XXX.
§ I. Wuerw Wisdom had sung this song, then began he again to make a speech, and said: Worthless and very false is the glory of this world! Concerning this a certain poet
108 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXX,’
r fopyreah pir anpeande lip. he cpap,! Eala puldop® pyre populte. ea. pophpi’ de hacan* d5ypize men mid leaype cemne puldop. nu pu nane eapz.’ roppam® pe ma manna herp micelne zilp.? 7 micelne® puldop. 4 micelne peoppycipe. pop Syyizer folcer penan. ponne he hebbe yop hi zepyphcum. Ac zereze® me nu hpet
unzepiyenlicpe pie ponne p. odde pophp:'® hi ne!! mazan heopa®
ma yceamizan Sonne fazman.!® donne hi zeheopap } him man
on lihp. Deah mon nu hpone zodpa!4 mid pihte hepize. ne yceal —
he na de papop!® co unzemeclice peexnian peey folcer popda. Ae pey he yceal paznian.!6 $ hi him yod on yeczzap. Deah he nu peey paeznize } hi hiy naman bpebdan. ne bip he no pe papop!? ypa bpad rpa!’ he ceohzap.!® ponpem hi hme ne maxon to- bpebdan zeond ealle eoppan. peah hi on sumum lande meen. yoppam peah he yeo”? anum zeheped. Sonne bip he oppum unheped. peah he on Sam lande seo mzpe. Sonne bip he on oppum unmepe.”? roppeem ip Sep folcer hhya elcum men fon nauhc co habbenne. foppem hic” co zlcum men” ne cymp be hiy zepyphcum. ne hupu nanum ealne pez ne puniap.*# Tepenc nu expert be Sam zebypdbum. zp hpa per zlpp.*> hu idel 3 hu unnyc ye zulp*® bip. roppam se ele mon pat f ealle men of anum fedep comon 7 of anpe medep. OdSe epc be Sey folcey hlyan 3 be heopa hepinze.*? 1c nav*§ hpet pe Sep peezniap.”? Seah Sa nu fopemepe yeon.? Se folcipce men hepizaS. Seah beop*? pa fopemeppan® 7 pibtlicpan to he- pizenne. pa Se beop®® mid cpefeum zepyppode.** foppam® Be nan mon ne bip mid pihte pop opper x0de. ne pop hip cpeepoum no Sy meppa ne no Sy zehepedpa®® zp he hine rel neefp :- Ppepep Su nu beo apy fexeppa pop opper manner Feezepe. bip men ful lycle py bec peah he xzodne faedep habbe. zip he yelp co nauhte ne mez. Foppam ic lepe } Su fezenize opeppa manna zodey*? 4 heopa epelo co pon ypipe ‘P du ne cilize Se
1 Cott. ba cpx’d he. 2 Cott. pulbup. 5 Cott. rophpy. * Cott.
hacen. ° Cott. nan neapc. © Cott.popbem. 7 Cott. sielp. Cott. |
micel, ® Cott. pexe. ” Cott. yophpy. 1 Bod, hine. Cott. hn | % Cott. hiopa. 18 Cott. pesmian. " Cott. so0dpa. 15 Cott. no by | hpepop. 16 Cott. pee'snian. 17 Cott. by hpwpbop. 18 ypa, deest in
MS. Cott. 9 Cott. uhhad. 2 Cott. pe. 21 Bod. leeyre. 22 Bods |
hi. Cott. he. 23 men, deest in MS. Cott. 24 Cott. punas. 2 Bod.
selps. 26 Cott. sylp. 27 Bod. hepige. 28 Bod. pat. *9 Bod.
yesinad. % Cott. ren. 3! Cott. biod. %* Bod. yopemepan. 3 Cott.
bio’. 4 Cott. Sepuppode. 35 Cott. yopbeem. 36 Cott. hepedpa.
87 Cott. 500dey.
|
| eg BOETHIUS. 109
| formerly sung. -When he contemned this present life, he said: O glory of this world! Alas! why do foolish men call thee with false voice, glory, when thou art none! For man more frequently has great renown, and great glory, and great honour, through the opinion of foolish people, than he has _ through his deservings. But tell me now, what is more un- suitable than this: or why men may not rather be ashamed of themselves than rejoice, when they hear that any one belies them? Though men even rightly praise any one of the good, __ he ought not the sooner to rejoice immoderately at the people’s _-words. But at this he ought to rejoice, that they speak truth ~ of him. Though he rejoice at this, that they spread his name, it is not the sooner so extensively spread as he persuades him- self; for they cannot spread it over all the earth, though they may in some land; for though it be praised in one, yet in another it is not praised. Though he in this land be cele- brated, yet is he in another not celebrated. Therefore is the people’s esteem to be held by every man for nothing; since it comes not to every man according to his deserts, nor in- deed remains always to any one. Consider first concerning birth: if any one boast of it, how vain and how useless is the boast; for every one knows that all men come from one father and from one mother. Or again, concerning the people’s esteem, and concerning their applause. I know not why we rejoice at it. Though they be illustrious whom the vulgar applaud, yet are they more illustrious and more rightly to be applauded who are dignified by virtues. For no man is really the greater or the more praiseworthy for the excel- lence of another, or for his virtues, if he himseif has it not. Art thou ever the fairer for another man’s fairness? A man -is full little the better though he have a good father, if he himself is incapable of anything. Therefore I advise that thou rejoice in other men’s good and their nobility, so far only, that thou ascribe it not to thyself as thine own. Be-
i 110 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXI.
yelfum azney. foppam! de elcey monney x05? J hir epelo biop ma on Sam Mode. Sonne on pam? rleyce. Det an 1c pat pealg zoder* on pam epelo. } manizne mon yceamap } he peoppe? pypra Sonne hiy eldpan peepon. 7 poppem hizap ealle® magne he polde papa becycena sumer Seapey J hiy cpeepcay xefon °-
§ IL Da ye Piydom %a Sip rpell apehc’ heyde. Sa onzan he
ymzan ymbe # ilce 7 cpep. Ppt ealle men hepdon zelicne Fpuman. foppam hi ealle coman of anum fedep J of anpe |
mebdep, ealle hi beop zit zelice acennede. my } nan pundop. foppam Se an Lod ip febdep eallpa zeycearca. roppam he hi ealle xeyceop j ealpa pele. Se yelp pape punnan leoht. 4 Sam monan. ¥ ealle cunzla zerec. Pe zepceop men on eoppan. ze- zadepode Sa yaula y Sone lchoman mid hiy pam anpealde. 7 ealle menn zerceop emn epele on dSape ppuman zecynde. Ppt ofepmodize ze Sonne o¢ep Oppe men fFop eoppum zebypd5um bucon anpeopce. nu ze nanne ne mazon metan unepelne. ac
ealle yinc emn edele, mip ze pillad pone ppuman yeeare ze-
pencan. 3 Sone yerppend. J yippan eopep® elcer acennedneyye. Ac pa pyht zpelo bid on pam Mode. ney on pam fleyce. ppa ypa pe ep yeedon. Ac ele mon Se allunza undeppeoded bid unpeapum. foplec hip pceppend. 4 by ppuman yeearc. J hip xpelo. J Sonan pypp aneepelad op } he pypp unepele :-
CAPUT XXXI.4
§ I. DA ye iydom 8a diy leop!” apunzen hepde. pa onzan he et yeczan ypell. ¥ pu cpap. Ppa zodey"? mazan pe seczan on pa leepchican unpeapay. foppam ypa hpa ypa hi poplecan pile. he. yceal zepolian miccle neapaneyye 4 manize Zeapfopu. foppam yeo ofenpyll yimle pec unpeapay. j Sa unpeapay habbap orep- peapre hpeoprunza. 3 reo hpeoprung ne beop na butan onze J bucon neaponeyye. Eala eap hu maneza adla. 7 hu micel pap. J
hu micele!? peccan. 7 hu micle unpotneyye ye herp. Se pone |
ponpillan herp on Sire populde. 7 hu micele ma penyc Su f hi
& Boet. lib. iii. metrum 6.—Omne hominum genus, &e.
h Boet. lib. iii. prosa 7.—Quid autem de corporis voluptatibus, &e.
1 Cott. yopbaem. 2 Cott. 500d. 3 Cott. bem. * Cott. So0dep. 5 Cott. poppe. 6 Bod. eallon. 7 Bod. sebeon. 8 Cott. apeahz. * Bod. et Cott. eopper. '© Cott. ho’. 1 Cott. Zoodey. 12 Cott. micla.
’
§ i. BOETHIUS. Lit
cause every man’s good, and his nobility, is more in the mind than in the flesh. This only, indeed, I know of good in nobility ; that it shames many a man, if he be worse than his ancestors were; and therefore he strives with all his power to reach the manners of some one of the best, and his virtues. i
§ IT. When Wisdom had finished this speech, then began he again to sing about the same, and said: Truly all men had a like beginning, for they all came from one father and from one mother: they are all, moreover, born alike. That is no wonder, because one God is father of all creatures; for he made them all, and governs them all. He gives light to the sun, and to the moon, and places all the stars. He has created men on the earth, joined together the soul and the body by his power, and made all men equally noble in their original nature. Why do ye then lift up yourselves above other men, on account of your birth, without cause, since ve can find none unnoble, but all are equally noble, if ye are willing to remember the ereation, and the Creator, and more- over the birth of every one of you? But true nobility is in the mind, not in the flesh, as we have before said. But every man, who is altogether subject to vices, forsakes his Maker, and his first origin, and his nobility, and thence becomes de- graded till he is unnoble.
CHAPTER XXX].
§ I. Wuew Wisdom had sung this lay, then began he again to make a speech, and thus said: What good can we say of the fleshly vices? For whosoever will yield to them shall suffer great anguish and many troubles. For intemperance always nourishes vices, and vices have great need of repent- ance, and repentance is not without sorrow and without anguish. Alas! how many diseases, and how great pain, and how great watching, and how great sadness, has he who pos- sesses wicked lust in this world! And how much more
| 112 BOETHIUS. CHAP. ek |
: reylon habban erzvep piyye populde eblean heopa zeeapnunza.!
ypa ypa pip acenp beapn 3 ppopap? micel eapropu. epcep pam de heo ep micelne lust puph ceah. fop py ic nac* hpet pa- populd lurcay mypezer* bpenzap heopa® lupizendum. Tnp nu hpa® cpip } ye seo’ zereliz. ye Se hiy populd luycum® eallum— yulzeep. hp: nyle® he cpepan eac } Sa nycenu yeon zepelize.!? poppam” Se heopa’ pilla co nanum oppum pinzum nip adenod, —
buton to zipepneyye J TO ppeenneyye. Spipe xepunrum™ hic bip ~
mon pir hebbe'* y beapn. Ac peah manize beapn beop ze-— yopyned’’ co heopa’™® eldpena foppypde. foppam pe maiz pip ypelc’” ron hipe beapne ep heo hic foppbpinzan’® meeze. J pe
leopnodon eac } hpilum zebypede ypipe unzepunelic 3 unge-
cynoelic yrel. } Sa beapn zecpeopedon becpuh him J pepedon
ymbe Sone feeden. ze fuppon.!®  pypye per. pe xeheopdson””
xeo xeapa on ealdum ypellum. yum yunu ofyloze hiy faedep.
ic nat humeca. buton pe picon P hic unmenniyclic”’ dzed pez.
Ppec wlc mon mez pican hu hepiz yopz men beop seo zemen hiy beapna. ne Seapr ic Se Seah P yeczan. fopnpam Su hic heepye apandad be®® pe yelrum. Be pape heepezan”® zemenne beapna.
cpep min mezycep Eupipidey. ‘P hplum zebypede Sam heapd- yeelezum.** $ him pepe becepe pact he beapn nezfde donne he heepde :-
§ Ili Da ye Viydom Sa pir ypell apehc herde. Sa onzan he efc ziddian.2> 4 pus pmzende cpep. Pper ye yrela pilla un- puhcheemebder zedperd pulneah elcer hbbender monney Mod. - Spa ypa yeo beo yceal loyian. ponne heo hpet yppinga ycingp. rpa yceal elce yapl poppeopdSan efrep Sam unpihthemebe. bucon se mon hpeopye to zobe :-
i Boet. lib. iii. metrum 7.—Habet omnis hoe voluptas, &e,
1 Cott. eapnunga. «. 2 Cott. beapneacen pip bnopa’. 3 Bod. pat. * Cott. mypgzer. 5 Cott. hiona. Shpa, deest in MS. Cott. 7 Cott. ple. § Bod. luycar. 9 Cott. nele. 0 Cott. nevenu pien sepeleszu. Cott. ropbem. | Cott. hopa. 1 Cott. pynrum. 14 Cott. habbe. 15 Cott. 5ercpuned. 18 Cott. hiopa. 17 Cott. ropypile. 18 Cott. bpensan. 19 Cott. upbum. 2 Cott. hepdon. °1 Cott. unmen- niyelicu. 2 Bod. ayunden bi. 3 Cott. hipezan. 4 Cott. heapd- yelsan. *% Bod. seddian.
wily ALBERTS COLLEGE LIBRARY ee _ BOETHIUS. 113
 thinkest thou they shall have after this world, as the re- tribution of their deserts P even as a woman brings forth a child, and suffers much trouble, after she formerly has ful- filled great lust. Therefore I know not what joy the worldly lusts bring to their lovers. If any one say that he is happy who fulfils all his worldly lusts, wherefore will he not also say _ thatthe cattle are happy, for their desire is extended to no other things, but to gluttony and to lust. Very pleasant is it that a man have wife and children. But nevertheless many children are begotten for their parents’ destruction. For many a woman dies by reason of her child, before she ean bring it forth. And we have also learned that formerly a most unusual and unnatural crime happened, that the children conspired together, and lay in wait for the father. And moreover, what was worse, we have heard, long ago in ancient histories, that a certain son slew his father. JI know not in what manner, but we know that it was an inhuman deed. Besides, every one may know, how heavy trouble to a man is the care of his children. I need not, however, say that to thee, for thou hast experienced it of thyself. Con- cerning the heavy care of children, said my master Euripides, that it sometimes happened to the unhappy, that it would be better for him that he had not children, than that he had.
§ II. When Wisdom had ended this speech, then began he again to sing, and thus singing, said: Alas! the evil desire of unlawful lust disquiets the mind of almost every living man. As the bee shall perish when she stings anything angrily, so shall every soul perish after unlawful lust, unless the man turn to good.
LI4 BOETHIUS. CHAP.
CAPUT XXXII¥
§ I. DA se Piybom %a pir leop arunzen heerbe. pa onzan he — et ypellizan! 3 Suy cpep. Foppam nip nan cpeo } pay and-—
peanda pela amepp J lec? Sa men de beop acihte co pam
yopum zeyzlpum. 3 he nenne ne mez zebpunzan® pep he him xehec. P iy et Sam hehycan zode.* Ac ic Se mez mid feaum popdum xereczan hu manezpa yrela Sa pelan ymet zepylde. Ppeec pu Sonne mene mid pepe zIcpungze pey fFeoy. nu pu hic” na hu eller bezican ne mihc. buton pu hic fopytele. ode ze- pearize. odSe abepecize. 7 pep pep hic Se pexp’ ponne panap hic oppum. Du polderc nu beon® popemepe on peoppyeipe. ac zip pu} habban pile. ponne ycealc pu oleccan ypipe eapmlce an ypipe eadmobdlice pam’? pe pe cto pam xerulcumian meeze. Ing pu 6e pilc 50n manezpa bectepan J peopppan. Sonne yceale pu Se lecan aney pypran. Pu ne ip } Sonne yum dzl epmpa.§ peec mon ypa peepelice? yeyle culpian co Sam! pe him zifan reyle. Anpealdey pu pinay. ac Su hine nzfpe opropzne ne be- zicyc. fop elpeodexum.  zec'? ma fop Smum azenum monnum J mazum.”? Inlper pu zipneyc. ac pu hine ne miht habban opropzne. foppam Su ycealc habban yimle hpet hpex’® pipep- peapder 3 unzeceyer.’* Du polderc nu bpucan unzemeclicne ppeenneyye. ac Se pillap Sonne yopyeon Loder’ peopar. roppam™ pe pm pepize!® fleye hapap pm anpeald. naler pu hy. Pu mez mon eapmlicop zebeepon. ponne mon hine undeppeode!” lip penezan fleyce. 3 nelle hiy zepceadpiyan yaule. Ppeepep ze nu reon’® manan on eoppum lichoman Sonne elpend. odSe pepengz- pan!® Sonne leo od8e feapp. odSe ypipcpan ponne tizpiy  dSeop. J Seah pu pepe eallpa monna fezpoye on plice. and ponne | polderc xeopnlice apcep Piybome ypypizan. oppeec pu fullice- pihc onzeace. Sonne mihceyc”? pu ypeocole onzicon ‘f ealle $a
k Boet. lib. iii. prosa 8.—Nihil igitur dubium est, &e. 1 Cott. ppelhan. 2? Cott. mypd 4 lec. % Cott. mese bpmgan. 4 Cott. soode. 5 Bod. peax. °% Cott. bion. 7 Cott. bem.  ° Cott. ypmba.
© Cott. pepelice. 10 Cott. beem. 1 Cott. sic. 2 Cott. maesum. 13 Cott. hpugu. 1 Cott. unszeteyer. 1 Cott. soode Loder. 8 Cott. pepie 17 Cott. undeppiede, 18 Cott. sien. 19 Bod. pcenspa.
20 Cott. meahveyt.
00 fief t per
8 is BOETHIUS. a fs
CHAPTER XXXII.
§ I. Wuew Wisdom had sung this lay, then began he again _ tospeak, andthus said: Therefore there is no doubt that this - present wealth obstructs and hinders those men who are in- _ tent upon the true felicities; and it can bring no one where it promised him, that is, to the highest good. But I can in afew words declare to thee with how many evils these riches are filled. What meanest thou, then, by covetousness of money; when thou no how else canst ¢ acquire it, unless thou steal it, or take it by force, or find it hid: and wheresoever it increases to thee, it decreases to others? Thou wouldest, then, be illustrious in dignity P But if thou wilt have this, then must thou very meanly, and very humbly, flatter him who is able to help thee thereto. If thou wilt make thyself greater and more honourable than many, then must thou suffer thyself to be inferior to one. Is not this, then, some- what of misery, that a man must so anxiously cringe to him who has the power of giving to him? Of power thou art desirous? But thou never obtainest it without danger, on account of foreigners, and still more on account of thine own men and kindred. Of glory thou art desirous? But thou canst not have it without eare: for thou shalt have always something adverse and inconvenient. Thou wouldest, then, enjoy immoderate lust? But then thou art desirous to _ despise God’s servants, inasmuch as thy vile flesh has the ‘} mastery of thee, not thou of it. How can any man conduct ‘) himself more wretchedly than when he subjects himself to his vile flesh, and will not to his rational soul? If, then, ye were oreater in your body than the elephant, or stronger than the lion or the bull, or swifter than the tiger, that wild beast ; and if thou wert of all men the fairest in beauty, and then wouldest studiously seek after wisdom, until thou couldest perfectly understand it; then mightest thou clearly perceive
12
116 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXII, .
mezno J pa cperpcar. 8e pe wp ymbe yppecon. ne mt co pipmecanne! pip Sepe yaple cpefca enne. Ppet nu ipdom ip an anlepe cpxyct pepe yaple. J Seah pe picon ealle } he pie” becepa ponne ealle 5a oppe cpzrfcay. Se pe ep ymbe yppzecon °-
§ II! Behealdap nu Sa pidzilneyye. 3 pa feyeneyye. J Sa hpebfepneyye pyyer heofener. Sonne mazan ze onziton PH he iy ealler nauhc pip hiy ceoppend to mecenne J pip hiy pealdend.
Ac hpi ne leve ze eop ponne appeocan. } xe ne pundpien J ne |
hepizen } te unnyccpe i. wy per eopplica pela. ypa ypa pe heoron iy becepa and healicpa J peezeppa Sonne eall hiy mmungz. bucon monnum anum. ypa iy pey monney hchoma betepa 7 Seoppypppa donne ealle hiy whca. Ac hu micele pmep pe Sonne yeo yapl becene 7 deoppypppe Sonne ye lichoma. Ale xerceare iy to apianne be hipe anbdefne.® 3 pymle po hehyce Jpipoye foppeem* ip ye zodbcunda anpeald® co apianne. 7 co pyndpianne. 3} co peoppianne ofep ealle® oppa xepceapra. Se plice per lchoman ip ypipe flonde.’ 4 ypipe cedpe. and rprpe anlic eoppan blopcmum. Deah nu hpa yeo® ypa feexep. ppa ppa Alcibiader ye edelinz pay. xf hpa bip ypa peeapprene® he meze hine Suphyeon. ypa ypa Ajnycoceley ye udpica peede peer deop pepe. P mihce zle puht puphyeon. ze cpeopa. ze Fuppum ycanay. pec Seon pe hacad lox. zip Sonne hpa paepe ypa pceanp- ylene he mihce Sone cnihc Suphyeon"’ Se pe ep ymbe ypppe- con. Sonne ne puhce he him no mnon" ypa peexep spa he ucan puhce. peah Su nu hpam fezep pince. ne bip hic no py papop™ ypa. ac seo unzerceadpiyney heopa eazena hi mypp’ } hi ne mazon onzicon p hi pe yceapiap ucan. ney mnan. Ac zepencap nu ypipe xeopnlice 4 xerceadpiylice ymeap! hpele pay fleepclican zod! pien, J Sa zerelpa pe xe nu unzemeclice pilmap. Sonne mazon xe ypeocole onzeocan } pay lchoman fezen 3 hip ycepeon 8a mazon beon afeopped'® mid pneopa daza_ ferpe. Foppam ic pe pecce eall } 1c pe zp pehce.'” poppam ic polde
pe openlice zeneccan on bam ende Siyer capiculan. fe ealle — pay andpeandan zod!8 ne mazon xeleycan heopa lupiendum }
1 Boet. lib. iii. prosa 8.—Respicite cceli spatium, &e.
1 Cott. mecvanne. 2 Cott. ip. 5 Bod. and eyne. 4 yymle pio hehyce ppiboyt yopbeem, desunt in MS. Bod. 5 Cott. anpald. 6 Cott. ealla. 7 Bod. rlopende. § Cott. pie. 9 Cott. pceappyiene. 1° Cott. puphpion. 1 Cott. mnan. ” Cott. hpebop. 13 Bod. easan hi ameppas. M4 Cott. pmeaxea’. 15 Cott. 5008. 16 Cott. pepenszo meg bion arypped. 17 Cott. peahte. —-!8 Cott. 500d.
|
7
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 117
that a.l the powers and the faculties which we have before spoken about, are not to be compared with any one of the faculties of the soul. Indeed, wisdom is one single faculty of the soul, and yet we all know that it is better than all the other faculties, which we have before spoken about. ~-§ II. Behold now the amplitude, and the firmness, and the swift course of this heaven. Then may ye understand that it is absolutely nothing, compared with its creator, and with its ruler. Why then suffer ye it not to warn you, that ye should not admire and praise that which is less perfect, that is, earthly wealth P Even as the heaven is better, and higher, and fairer than all which it includes, except men alone; so is man’s body better and more precious than all his possessions. But how much thinkest thou, then, the soul better, and more precious than the body? very creature is to be honoured in its measure, and always the highest in the greatest degree. Therefore is the heavenly power to be honoured, and to be _ admired, and to be adored above all other things. The beauty _. of the body is very fleeting, and very frail, and very like the flowers of the earth. Though any one be as fair as Alcibiades, the noble youth, was: if any one be so sharp-sighted, that he can see through him, as Aristotle the philosopher said that wild beast was, which could see through everything, both trees, and even stones, which wild beast we call lynx; if, then, any one were so sharp-sighted that he could see through the youth whom we have before spoken about, then would he not appear to him so fair within as he outwardly seemed. Though thou seem fair to any one, it is not the sooner so; but the imperfection of their eyes hinders them, so that they cannot observe that they behold thee outwardly, not inwardly. But consider now very carefully, and inquire rationally, what these fleshly goods are, and these felicities which ye now im- moderately desire. Then may ye evidently perceive that the fairness of the body, and its strength, may be taken away by three days’ fever. I therefore say to thee all that I have be- fore said to thee, because I would clearly prove to thee, in the conclusion of this chapter, that all these present goods cannot perform to their lovers that which they promise them,
& i 118 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXII. hi him zehacap. } ip $ hehyve zod! } hi him zehacap. Deah hi nu Zexzadepizen ealle Pay andpeapdan z0d.? nabbap hi no de papop fullppemod z05° on pam. ne hi ne mazon zedon heopa — lupienday ypa pelize spa ypa hi poldon :- :
§ III.™ Da ye fiydom 6a piy ypell anehc hefde. pa onzan he eft ziddizen. J pus ymzende cpp. Eala pa. hu hepiz 3 hu ppe-— cendlic } yz iy Se Sa eapman men Zebdpelap 7 alec of pam
pihcan peze. ye pez iy Lod. Ppepep ze nu yecan zold on
cpeopum. ic pat Seah ‘P ze hic pep ne yecap. ne pmbde ze hic no. foppam de ealle men picon } hic pep ne peaxt. de ma pe zimmay peaxap on pmnzeapdbum. Ppepep ze nu yetcan eopep nett on Sa hehycan dune. Sonne ze fiycian pillap. ic pac Seah p xe hic pep ne yeccap. Ppepep ze nu eopep hunday and eopep nec uc on da ye ladon. donne ze hunzian pillap. ic pene peah ) ze hi Sonne yeccon up on Sunum. J imnon pudum. Ppec P iy pundoplic pec xzeopnyulle men piton } hi yeulon yecan be yee panope. 3 be aa ofpum ezpep xe hpice z2mmap. ze peade. j elcey cynney zumcyn. 3 hi picon eac on hpelcum pecepum Jj on ezhpelcpa ea mupum hi yeulun yecan piyeap. J ealne piyyne andpeapdan pelan hi picon hpeep bn pecan peulun, 7 pone ypipe unappocenlice yecap. Ac hit ip ypipe eapmlic Sing ‘ Sa dyrezan men ym elcer Somer spa blnbe. } hi nycon hpep Sa yopan xerelpa yme zehydde. ne Fuppum nane luyc- bepneyye nabbad hi co yecanne. ac penap } hi mazon on pyyum lenan 7 on sipum deadlicum Smzum findan Sa sopan xeyalpa. P iy Lod. Ic nac nu hu 1c maze heona dyyiz eall ppa- ypeocole apeccan 4 ypa ypipe xeceelan ypa ic polde. foppam hi yint eapmpan j Sypizpan 7 unzeyelizpan Sonne ic hic anecan meze. felan 3 peoppyeipey hi pillmap. 7 Sonne hi hine habbap. Sonne penad hi spa ungepicrulle pac hi habban Sa sopan Be- yelpa :-
CAPUT XXXIII2
§ I. GENOL ic Se hebbe nu zepehc* ymbe pa anlicneyya J ymbe 8a yceadpa pepe ypopan zeyelpe. Ac zip pu nu ypeocole | zecnapan mihv Sa anlicneyya pepe sopan zerelpe. Sonne yippan-
m Boet. lib. iii. metrum 8.—Eheu, quam miseros tramite devio, &e.
» Boet. lib. iii, prosa 9.— Hactenus mendacis formam, &e. 1 Cott, 5000. 2 Cott. 5005. 3 Cott. 5008. 4 Cott. sepeahs.
|
eS tr. BOETHIUS. ; 19 &
that is, the supreme good which they promise them. Though they collect together all these present goods, they have not the sooner perfect good therein; neither can they make their lovers as wealthy as they wish.
§ LT. When Wisdom had ended this speech, then began
_ he again to sing, and thus singing, said: Alas! how grievous
and how dangerous the error is which seduceth miserable men
and leads them from the right way! The way is God. Do ye seek gold on trees? I know, however, that ye seek it not there, neither find ye it; for all men know that it grows not there, any more than jewels grow in vineyards. Do ye set your net on the highest hill, when ye are minded to fish? But I know that ye set it not there. Do ye carry out your hounds and your net into the sea, when ye wish to hunt 2. I
_ think, however, that ye then place them upon hills and in
woods. Truly it is wonderful that diligent men know that they must seek on the sea-shore and on river banks both white jewels and red, and gems of every kind; and they know
' also in what waters, and in what rivers’ mouths they must ? y
seek fishes, and they know where they must seek all this present wealth, and incessantly seek it. But it is a very miserable thing that foolish men are so destitute of all judg-
* ment, that they know not where the true felicities are hid, nor
indeed have they any desire to seek them! But they think that in these frail and perishable things they can find the true happiness, that is, God! I know not how I can their folly all so plainly declare, and so greatly censure as I would, for they are more miserable, and more foolish, and more unhappy than I can explain. Wealth and honour they desire ; and when they have it, then think they, so unwise! that they have the true happiness !
CHAPTER XXXII.
§ I. Evoven I have now declared to thee concerning the resemblances and concerning the shadows of the true happi- ness. But if thou canst now clearly understand the resem- blances of the true happiness, then afterwards it is necessary
2 | 3 120 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIII. : iy peang 1c pe hi yelpe zecece.! Da andpypde ic 3 cpep. Nu ~ 1c onzite openlice pacce xlcey zodey? zenoz mp on Syum— populd pelan. ne elcepe anpeald my on nanum populd pice. ne ~ ye yopa peopprerpe niy on Siype populde. ne pa meycan meppa — ne yint on pyyye populd zylpe. ne yeo hehyce bly my on pam | fleyclhicum luycum. Da andypopede se ipdom 4 cpep. Ppepep — pu nu sullice onzive fophp: hic ponne ypa seo.*® Da andypapede — 1c J cpp. Deah ic hip nu hpec hpez* onzice. ic polbe Seah hic yullcop 7 openlicop of Se onzican. Da andypopode ye Vipdom j cpep. Lenox ypeocol hic iy pectce zo0d° iy angeald 7 unto- deelidlic. peah hime Syypize men on maniz delan.® Sonne hi dSpelizende? yecap } hehyce zod on Sa yampan® xercearva. Ppepep pu nu pene f ye nahcey? mapan ne dupe. ye Se meycne anpeald herp piyye populie Da andypapede ic eft J cpp. Ne yecze ic no f he nahtey’® mapan ne dSupre. foppam 1c pac } nan nip ypa!! peliz } he yumey eacan ne puppe. Da andypopode re fiyd5om and cpp. Lenox phe du yexyc. Seah hpa anpeald habbe. zip opep herp mapan. bepeapy ye unycpenzpa pey ycpenzpan sulcumey. Da cpeep ic. Eall hic ip ppa Su pezye. ~ Da cpep ye Viydom, Deah mon nu anpeald 7 zenyht to cpem pmzum nemne. Seah hic iy an. Da cpep ic. Spa me Sincp. Da | he cpep. Penyc pu nu } ye anpeald 3 P xemht seo! co fop- yeonne, ode eft ypipop co peoppianne Sonne oppe x0d.'* Da cpep ic. Ne mez nenne mon pey tpeozan ‘p te anpeald 7 xe- nih iy to peoppianne. Da cpep he. Ucon nu. zig pe spa pmce. zeecan'* pone anpeald 3  xemihc. d50n pep peoppreipe co. 4 zepeccan ponne pa ppeo toanum. Da andypopode ic and cpp. Ucon py foppam hic ip yop. Da cpeep he. Ppaepep pe ponne pynce unpeopp 3 unmeeplic seo zezadepunz Sapa ppeopa pinza. Sonne pa ppeo bip to anum zebdon. oppe hpeepep hic Se ere pince eallpa pmza peopphcoyc 7 meeplicoyc. z1f pu wnizne mon cuperc Sapa pe hepde elcer pmzer’® anpeald. 3 elene peopp- yerpe haeyde. spa ponp ‘) he na mapan ne poprte.- zepenc nu hu peopplic 7 hu popemeeplic Se polde re mon pmcan. and Seah he nu pa ppeo herde. zip he nape hhyeatiz.'®© Sonne pepe him
1 Cott. secece. 2 Cott. Sooder. 8 Cott. ple. 4 Cott. hpusu. 5 Bod. et Cott. Lod. ® Cott. codelan. 7 Cott. Spohende. 5 Cott. yempan. 9 Cott. nauhtey. 1° Cott. nauhter. ™ Cott. bey. 1 Cott. rie. 18 Cott, oSpu 500d. Cott. ecan. 1% Cott, bmcer.  !° Bod.
hhy seadi5.
Se BOETHIUS. 121
that I show thee itself. Then answered I, and said: Now I plainly perceive that there is not enough of every good in these worldly riches; nor is perfect power in any worldly authority; nor is true dignity in this world; nor are the greatest honours in this world’s glory; nor is the highest pleasure in the fleshly lusts. Then answered Wisdom, and said: Dost thou fully understand why it is so? Then answered I, and said: Though I understand it in some mea- sure, I would nevertheless learn it more fully and more dis- tinctly from thee. Then answered Wisdom, and said: It is sufficiently clear that good is single and indivisible, though foolish men divide it into many, when they erring seek the highest good in the worse creatures. But dost thou think that he has need of nothing more, who has the greatest power in this world? Then answered I again, and said: I do not say that he has need of nothing more, for J know that no one is so wealthy that he needs not some addition. ‘Then answered Wisdom, and said: Thou sayest rightly.enough. Though any one have power, if another have more, the weaker needs the aid of the stronger. Then said I: It is all as thou sayest. Then said Wisdom: Though any one call power and abund- ance two things, it is nevertheless one. Then said I: So I ‘think. Then he said: Thinkest thou now that power and abundance is to be despised ? or, again, more to be esteemed than other goods? Then said I: No man can doubt of this, that power and abundance is to be esteemed. ‘Then said he: Let us now, if it so seem to thee, make an addition to the power and the abundance; let us add dignity thereto, and then account the three as one. Then answered I, and said: Let us do so, for it is true. Then said he: Does the assem- blage of these three things, then, seem to thee worthless and ignoble, when the three are united together? or whether, again, does it seem to thee of all things the most worthy and the most noble? If thou knewest any man who had power over everything, and had all dignity, even so far that he needed nothing more, consider, now, how honourable and how eminent the man would seem to thee; and yet, though he had the three, if he were not celebrated, then would there never-
Sade al
122 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXII.
Seah ypumer peopSyerper pana, Da cpep ic. Ne mez ic pep
opyacan. Da cpep he. Pu ne iy $ Sonne zenoz ypeorol. p pe yeulon don a hhyeadizneyye co Sam ppim. 3 d50n pa feopep To — anum. Da cpep ic. Det iy cyn. Da cpep he. Ppepep pu nu — pene ‘p ye auhz blipe sie de ealle pay peopep herp. pipce beop — yeo blir. 3 mzez don eall } he pile. and naney Smzer mapan ~ ne bepeapr’ Sonne he herp. Da cpep ic. Ne mez ic neppe — xepencan zip he ypelc pepe. 3 p eall hepde. hponon him zniz _ unpotner cuman yceolte. Da cpep he. Spa peah ip to Ze- pencenne. } pa pip pmz Se pe ep ymbe sppecon. péah hi conemde yeon? mid popdum. ‘p hic ip eall an Sinz. Sonne hi ze- zadepode beop. ‘fp iy anpeald. 4 zenyht. 7 pope mepney. J peoppreipe. 3 blir :- :
§ IL.° Da pip Sinz. Sonne hi ealle zezabenode beod. Sonne. bip } Lod. roppam %a fir ealle nan menniye man fullice habban ne mez da hpile de he on piyye populte bip. Ac ponne da pip pmz. ypa pe ep cpedon. ealle? zezadopade beop.* Sonne beop hic eall an }inz. 3 } an pinz bip God. ¥ he bip angeald unco- ovled. peah hi 2p on maniz tonemned pepe. Da andypopodse 1¢ } cpep. Diyey ic eom ealley zepapa. Da cpep he. Deah nu Lod anreald seo? and uncobdeled. rpa pa he 1p. ye menniyca ‘ gebpola hine codzelp on moniz mid heopa unnyccum popdum. fle mon tiohhap him 4} co releycum xzoobde See f he® pppoe lugap. Sonne lugap sum pec. pum eller hpev.  bip ponne hip x05 P he peep ypipoyc lugap. Sonne hi Sonne heona z0d on ypa manize’ delay codelap. Sonne mecap hi naupep ne xzobd yelpne. ne pone deel zoder Se hi rpipop lupiap. Sonne hi hme yelpne don ealne wczwedepe. nabbap Sonne naupep ne hme ealne. ne Sone deel Se hi peep of SySon. Fop 81 ne pme exile mon f he yecp, fop Sy he hic on piht ne yecp. ze yecap pep ze pFmbdan ne mazan. Sonne ze yecap eall x05 on anum zobde.* Da cpeep ic. Dec ip yop. Da cpep he. Donne re mon pedla bip. ne pillnap he naney anpealdey. ac pillap® pelan. 3 plihp Sa paedle. Ne ypmep he nauht epcep Sam.!? hu he popemepoyc yeo.!! ne nan mon eac ne bezic pac he weep ne rpincp.” he Sonne ypincp ealle’*
9 Boet. lib. iii, prosa 9.—Hoe igitur, quod est unum, &e.
1 Cott. beapy.  ? Cott. pren. 8 Cott. eall. 4 Cott. bioS. 5 Cott. pie. § Cott. serelercum ‘ ‘ he. 7 Cott. monise. 8 Cott. 5005 on anum s5o00de. ® Cott. he pilna’, © Cott. bem. N Cott. pie. 12 Cott. pin’. 13 Cott. pin’ ealla.
§ 1. BOETHIUS. 123
theless be to him a deficiency of some dignity. Then said I: I cannot deny it. Then said he: Is it not, then, sufficiently clear that we should add celebrity to the three, and make the four as one? Then said I: That is proper. Then said he: Dost thou think that he is blithe who has all these four ? The fifth is pleasure, and that any one may do whatsoever he will, and need nothing more than he possesses ? Then said I : I can never imagine, if he were such and had all this, whence any trouble should come to him. Then said he: But it must, then, be considered that the five things which we have before spoken about, though they are separately named in words, that it is all one thing when they are collected together, that is, power, and abundance, and glory, and dignity, and pleasure. ,
§ II. These five things, when they are all collected together, then, that is God. For all the five no human being can fully have while he is in this world. But when these five things, as we before said, are all collected together, then is it all one thing, and that one thing is God: and he is single and un- divided, though they before were, in many, separately named. Then answered I, and said: Of all this I approve. Then said he: Though God be single and undivided, as he is, buman error divides him into many, by their vain words. Every man proposes to himself for the supreme good that which he chiefly loves. Then one loves this, and one another thing. That, then, is his good, which he chiefly loves. But when they divide their good into so many parts, then find they neither good itself, nor the part of good which they chiefly love. When they add it all together, they then have neither all of it, nor the part which they separated therefrom. For this reason every man finds not what he seeks, because he seeks it not rightly. Ye seek where ye cannot find, when ye seek all good in one good. Then said J: That is true. Then said he: When the man is poor, he is not desirous of power, but wishes for wealth, and flies from poverty. He labours not for this, how he may be most illustrious; nor, moreover, does any one obtain that which he labours not tor. But he labours all his
_
124 — BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIII. — hiy popvld efcep pam! pelan. and foplec manizne populd luyc ~ pip pam’ Se he pone pelan bezice 7 zehealde. poppam® pe hiy — hine lyyc ogep ealle oppe* Sinz. Lig he hine Sonne bezic. Sonne © pyncp him } he nzbbe zenoz. bucon he hebbe eac anpeald? — pep co. foppam® pe him pmcp > he ne meeze Sone pelan bucon anpealde’ zehealban. Ne him eac neppe zenoz ne pincp ep he ~ hebbe eall } hme lyyz. poppam® Se Sone pelan® lyyc anpealdey.7° J Sone anpealde!! ypc peoppyerper. J pone peopprcipe lyre | meppa. Siddan he pey pelan full bip. ponne pmcp him f he heebbe ewlcne pillan. zip he hebbe anpeald. 3 zerelp’? eallne Sone pelan zfpcep Sam anpealde. bucon he hine mid leyyan bezican maze. j foplec elene opepne peoppycipe pip Sam pe he maze co pam anpealde cuman. 3 Sonne xetidep"® ofc. ponne he eall pip anpealde zereald herp P f he hepbde. f he nerp naupep ne Sone anpeald. ne eac } pet he pip sealde. ac pipp Sonne ypa eapm ‘P he nefp fuppon! pa neod peapre ane. *p Ip pyc. J peda. pilnap Seah ponne peepe neadpeapre. ney Seep an- pealdey. Ye yppacon exp be dam pip zerelpum. ip pela. 7 anpeald. 3 peoppycrpe. J popemeepney. 3 pilla. Nu hebbe pe xe- pehc”’ be pelan. 4 be anpealde. and ice pe mazon peccan be pam ppim pe pe unapehc’® habbap. } ip peopprerpe. J fope- mepney. 3 pila. Day’ pneo pmz. 7 Sa cpa.'* Se pe 2p nembdon. peah hpa pene’? } he on heopa anpa hpylcum mexze habban fulle*? zereelpa. ne byp hic no dy hpapop spa. Seah li hip pumizen. bucon hi pa fig ealle habban. Da anbdypopote ic 4 cpep. Ppec yculon pe Sonne don, nu pu cpiyt ‘} pe ne maxon on Sepa?! anna hpileum ‘p hehyce z05* habban and Sa fullan xeyeelpa. ne pe hupu ne penap P upe anpa hpele Sa pip ealle wczedepe bexzice. Da andrpopede he ¥ cpap. Ing hpa pilnap p he 8a pip ealle heebbe. Sonne pilnap he papa hehycana xeyeelpa. Ac he ne mez 8a fullice bezican on piyye populde. poppam Seah he ealle Sa ip xepelpa bexice. Sonne ne bip hic Seah hehyze z05.”* ne Sa yelercan zereelpa. foppam he ne beop ece. Da andypopode ic 4 cpep. Nu ic onzice xenoz ypeotole ‘p da yeleycan zeyeelpa ne sind on Siyye populde. Da cpep he. Ne
1 Cott. bem.  ? Cott. bem. 3 Cott. yopbam. * Cott. eal oSpu. 5 anpald. eac, deest in MS, Cott. 6 Cott. poppeem. 7 Cott. an- palde. 8 Cott. ropbon. 9° Cott. pelesan. 1° Cott. anpaldey. 1! Cott. anpalde. 1? Cott. serelS. 13 Cott. sebypeS. “yupbum. 35 Cott. sepeaht. 16 Cott. unpehc. 17 Cott. Da. 18 Cott. cu. 19 Bod. pepe. 2 Cott. pula. “. Bod. bepe. 2 Cott. 5008. 23 Cott. 5000.
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 125
life for wealth, and foregoes many a worldly pleasure in order that he may acquire and keep wealth, because he is desirous of that above all other things. But if he obtain it, he then thinks that he has not enough, unless he have also power be- sides: for he thinks that he cannot keep the wealth without power. Nor, moreover, does there ever seem to him enough, until he has all that he desires. For wealth desires power, and power desires dignity, and dignity desires glory. After he is full of wealth, it then seems to him that he may have every desire if he have power: and he gives all the wealth for power, unless he is able to obtain it for less; and foregoes every other advantage, in order that he may attain to power. And then it often happens, that when he has given all that he had for power, he has neither the power, nor moreover that which he gave for it, but at length becomes so poor that he has not even mere necessaries, that is, food and clothing. He then is desirous of necessaries, not of power. We before spoke of the five felicities, that is, wealth, and power, and dignity, and renown, and pleasure. Now have we treated of wealth and of power; and the same we may say of the three which we have not treated of: that is, dignity, and renown, and pleasure. These three things, and the two which we before named, though any man think that in any one soever of them he can possess full happiness, it is not the sooner so, though they hope for it, unless they have all the five. Then answered J, and said: What ought we then to do? since thou sayest that we cannot in any one soever of these have the highest good, and full happiness: and we do not at all think that any one soever of us can obtain the five all together. Then answered he, and said: If any one desire that he may have all the five, then desireth he the highest felicities; but he cannot fully obtain them in this world. For though he should obtain all the five goods, it nevertheless would not be the supreme good, nor the best happiness, because they are not eternal. Then answered I, and said: Now I perceive clearly enough, that the best felicities are not in this world.
126 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIIL
peapp nan man on piyye andpeapdan lire ypypian epcep Sam yopum zeyelpum. ne pey penan $ he hep mzze zod! zenoz pindan. Da cpeep ic. Sop Su pexzyt :-
§ IIL? Da cpep he. Ic pene nu f 1c Se habbe zenoz zepxd—
ymbe pa leayan zeyzelpa. Acic polde nu pf Su pendeyt pin mze-
panc ppam pam leayan zerelpum. ponne onzicyt pu ypipe pape®
6a yopan zeyelpa pe ic pe ep xehec } 1c Se eopian polde. Da cpep ic. Le ruppum 8a dypize® men onzicap pacce fulla ze- yelpa yinz. Seah he pep ne sien peep he heopa penab. Du me zehece nu lycle ep } pu hi poldeyc me zecrecan. Ac per me Sincp  P beo reo yope 7 yeo fullppemede zerelp. Se mez zlcum hipe rolzepa yellan puphpunizendne pelan.* 7 ecne an- peald. 3 ymzalne peoppyerpe. J ece meppe.° 3 fulle zenyhe. ze Fuppum } 1c cpepe sie seo pope zeyeelp Se an piyya fifa Mez fullice fopzipan. poppam Se on elcum anum hi yinc ealle. foppam ic yecze pay popd Se. fop py ic pille p pu pice ye cpide ypibe feeyc ip on mmum Mode. ypa perc P hip me nan man zebdpelizan® ne mez. Da cpep he. Eala emhe. hpec’ pu eapt zeraeliz f pu hit ppa onzicen heyyc. Ac ic polde ‘ pic ypypedon zc zpcep dam pe pe pana ip. Da cpeep ic. Ppaet iy P ponne. Da cpep he. Venyc pu hpeepep eeniz pryya andpeap- dana zooba pe meze yellan fulle zerzlpa. Da andypapode ic. J cpep. Nav ic nan puht on pyy andpeandan lire pe rpele x1pan meze. Da cpep he. Dar andpeapdan x08 pme anlicneyya Sep ecan zodey.? neey full zod.'° fonpam bi ne maxon pop z05!! 5 pull zod'? popzipan heopa folzepum. Da cpeepic. Ie eom zenoz pel zepaya Sey pe pu yeexyc. Da cpeep he. Nu pu Sonne parc hpeec Sa leayan zeyelpa yc. and hpec pa popan zeyeelpa pine. nu ic polde } pu leopnoderc hu pu mihceyct becuman to Sam yopum zerelpum. Da cpep ic. Pune zehece pu me xerypn zp ‘H pu hic poldeyc me zetaecan. 3 me lyyce nu ‘f pprpe zeopne ze- heonan,’* Da cpep he. Ppa pculon pe nu don to pam! f pe mezon cumon co Sam ysopum zerelpum. Ppepep pe yeylon bibdan Sone Zodcundan fulcum. ezpep xe on leyyan. ze on mapan. ypa spa upe uppica pede Placo. Da cpep ic. Ie pene $ pe yeylon biddan Sone feedep eallpa pinza. foppam ye Se hme
P Boet. lib. iii. prosa 9.—Habes igitur, inquit, et formam, &e.
1 Cott. ep mexse 5005. * Cott. hpebe. 3 Cott. dypesan. 4 bup- hpunizendne pelan, desunt in MS. Bod. 5 Cott. mepba. — ° Cott, sedpellan. 7 Cott. by. 8 Cott. 5006. 9 Cott. 500dey. 10 Cott. 5000. 1 Cott. 5000. Cott. 5000. |% Cott. sehepan. ' Cott. bon,
|
|
ted Dm], ter
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 1h
Then said he: No man needs in this present life to seek after the true felicities, nor think that here he can find sufficient good. , Then said I: Thou sayest truly.
§ III. Then said he: I think that I have said enough to thee about the false goods. But I am desirous that thou shouldest turn thy attention from the false goods; then wilt thou very soon know the true goods, which I before promised thee that I would show thee. Then said I: Even foolish men know that full goods exist, though they may not be where they suppose them. Thou promisedst me, a little while ago, that thou wouldest teach me them. But of this I am per- suaded, that that is the true and the perfect happiness, which - can give to all its followers permanent wealth, and everlasting power, and perpetual dignity, and eternal glory, and fall abundance. And moreover, I say that is the true happiness which can fully bestow any of these five; because in every one they all are. I say these words to thee, because I am desirous that thou shouldest know that the doctrine is well fixed in my mind: so fixed, that no man can draw me aside from it. Then said he: O, child, how happy art thou that thou hast so learned it! But I am desirous that we should still inquire after that which is deficient to thee. Then said I: What is that,then? Then said he: Dost thou think that any of these present goods can give thee full happiness P Then answered I, and said: 1 know nothing in this present life that can give such. Then said he: These present goods are images of the eternal good, not full good, because they cannot give true good nor full good to their followers. Then said I: I am well enough assured of that which thou sayest. Then said he: Now thou knowest what the false goods are, and what the true goods are, I would that thou shouldest learn how thou mayest come to the true goods. Then said I: Didst thou not formerly promise me that thou wouldest teach it me? and I am now very anxiously desirous to hear it. Then said he: What ought we now to do, in order that we may come to the true goods? Shall we implore the divine help as well in less as in greater things, as our philosopher Plato said? Then said I: I think that we ought to pray to the Father of all things: for he who is unwilling to pray to
128 BOETHIUS. CHAP. a > | biddan nyle. Sonne ne zemec he hme, ne fuppon! pihene pez pip liy ne apebap. Da cpap he. Spipe pyhe? Su yezpc. and onzan pa yinzan and Sur cpep. = |
§ IV.4 €ala Dpyhcen. hu micel 3 hu punteplic pu eapp. Su pe ealle pme zercearca. zerepenlice 3 eac unzeyepenlice. pun- deplice zerceope J zepceadpilice heopa pelcye. Su pe cida ppam middaneapder ppuman op Sone ende endebypbdlice zeyeccerc. rpa ce hi expen ze fopd apap. ze epccumap. pu pe ealle da unycillan zercearca to pmum pillan aycypayc. 3 du yelp pimle — ycille and unapendedlic Suphpunayc. foppampe nan mihcizna pe ny. ne nan pin zelica. ne pe nan neoddeapp ne lepde to pypcanne } } du pophteyc. ac mid pmum azenum pillan. 4 mid pmum azenum anpealde pu ealle Simz zepophteyc. Seah Su heopa naney ne bepoprce. Spipe pundeplic ip P zecynd pmer xobdey. Fonpampe hic iy eall an. Su 7 Sin Zodney. -} yod na ucon cumen co pe. ac hit ip 3m agen. ac eall } pe xoder habbap on pyye populde. } uy ip ucon cumen. If Fpom pe. nefye pu nanne antan co nanum pinge. Foppampe nan cpefcixna if Sonne pu. ne nan pin zelica, foppam pu ealle yod mid pmer aney zepeahce zepohceyc J zepophteyc. Ne biynode pe nan man. — yoppam Se nan ep pe ney. papa pe auht oddSe nauhe pophte. Ac pu ealle pmz xepophceyt ypipe z0de 4 ypipe peexepe. 7 pu yelp eat ‘ hehyce zob 4 ‘ paezepeyce. ypa ypa pu yelp xepohveyc. pu zepophceyc piyne middan zeand. J hiy pelyc ypa ppa du pile. 7 pu yelp daelyc eall xod ypa ypa Su pile. 7 ealle xepceapca pu ze- yceope him zelice. J eac on pumum pmzum ungelice. Seah pu da ealle zerceapca ane naman zenembde. ealle pu nembdeyc co- zeedepe and hece ponuld. 4 peah Sone anne noman Su codzldeyec on Feopep Zepceapta. an papa ip eoppe. Opep peetep, ppidde lypc. feopppe ryp. elcum pana Su zeyecceyc hip agene pundep- ycope. j peah elec ip pip oppe zenemned. 7 pbyumlice zebunden mid pinum bebobe. ypa‘p heopa nan oppey meapce ne ofepeode. J re eyle zeppopode pip da havo. 7 P pec pip Sam dSpyzum. eoppan zecynd 7 paecepey ip ceald. pie eopp ip Spyze 7 ceald. 7  pecep perc J ceald. pe lypc Sonne ip zenemned f hio ip wexpep ze ceald. ze pat. xe peapm. niy hic nan pundep. fop- pampe hio ip zerceapen on pam midle becpux Sepe dpyzan 4 pene cealban eoppan. 4 pam havan fype. } ryp ip ygemeyc ofen eallum piyyum populd zercearcum. Yundoplic ip f pm zepeahc.
4 Boet. lib. iii. metrum 9.—O qui perpetua mundum, &e. 1 Cott. yupbum. 2 Cott. pahte.
§ Iv. BOETHIUS, 129
him, will not find him, nor moreover will he pursue the right way towards him. Then said he: Very rightly thou sayest ; and began then to sing, and thus said:
§ IV. O Lord, how great and how wonderful thou art! Thou who all thy creatures visible and also invisible wonder- fully hast created, and rationally governest them! Thou, who times, from the beginning of the middle-earth to the end, settest in order, so that they both depart and return! Thou, who all moving creatures according to thy will stirrest, and thou thyself always fixed and unchangeable remainest! For none is mightier than thou, nor any like thee! No necessity taught thee to make that which thou hast made, but by thine own will and by thine own power thou madest all things, though thou didst need none of them. Very wonderful is the nature of thy good, for it is all one, thou and thy good- ness. Good is not come to thee from without, but it is thine own. But all that we have of good in this world is come to us from without, that is, from thee! Thou hast no envy to anything, because no one is more skilful than thou, nor any like thee; for thou, by thy sole counsel, hast designed and wrought all good! No man set thee an example, for no one was before thee, who anything or nothing might make. But thou hast made all things very good, and very fair, and thou thyself art the highest good and the fairest. As thou thyself didst design, so hast thou made this middle-earth, and dost govern it as thou wilt; and thou thyself dost distribute all good as thou wilt. And thou hast made all creatures like to each other, and also in some respects unlike. Though thou hast named all these creatures separately with one name, thou hast named them all together, and called them World. Nevertheless, that one name thou hast divided into four elements. One of them is earth; another, water; the third, air; the fourth, fire. To every one of them thou hast set its own separate place, and yet every one 1s with other classed, and peaceably bound by thy commandment; so that no one of them should pass over another’s boundary, and the cold suffer by the heat, and the wet by the dry. The nature of earth and of water is cold; the earth is dry and cold, and the water wet and cold. But the air is distinguished, that it is either cold, or wet, or warm. It is no wonder; because it is created in the midst, between the dry and the cold earth and the hot fire. The fire is uppermost over all these worldly
K
130 BOETHIUS. CUAP. XXXIIE
‘p pu heepye eezpep xedon. ze Sa zeypcearcra zemepyode bee him. ze eac zemenzbde. pa opizan eoypipan J Sa cealdan unbdep pam cealdan peecene 7 f pecan. p pet hnerce 7 flopende pave Py heebbe flop on pepe feeycan eopdan. poppampe hic ne mez on — him yelpum zercandan. Ac yeo eoppe hic hele 7 be yumum dele ypilzp. 3 pop pam yype heo bip zelehc } hio zpepp 7 blepp— and peycmay bpmzp. foppam zr ‘p peecep hi ne zeppende. Sonne — dpuzode hio 7 pupde codpipen mid pam pmbde ypa spa dSuyt odde * axe. ne mihce nanpuht hbbenbdey Sepe eoppan bpucan. ne pay : | petepey. ne on nauppum eapdizan fop cile. zp pu ln hpet hpezuninza pip Fyp ne zemenzdeyc. Pundoplice cpefce pu hic heyyc zeyceapen ‘} P fyp ne fopbepnp f pecep J Sa eoppan. nu hic zemenzed iy pip ezpep. ne ept P paetep and peo eoppe — eallunza ne abpeeycep P Fyp. pey peteper aznu cyp iy on eoppan. —
Jj eac on lypce. 3 eft bufan pam podope. ac Sey fyper agen | yvede ip o¢ep eallum populd zepceapcum zeyepenlicum. 7 peah hit ip zemenzed pip ealle zepcearca. J Seah ne mez nane pana zerceapca eallunza opcuman. foppampe hic nefp leape Seep eelmihcizan. yio eoppe Sonne ip hepizpe 7 picepe ponne oppa — zerceapca. foppam hio i mopop Sonne wzmz oppu xerceape — bucon pam pobdone. foppam ye podon hme herp elce daz ucane. Seah he hipe napep ne zenealece. on elcepe pcope he iy hipe emn neah. ze ufan. ze neopon. elec Sapa xeycearta. pe
pe xeyypn ep ymbe yppecon. herp hip agenne eapd on yund- — pon. Jj Seah iy ele pip opep zemenzed. foppampe nan Sapa xe- yeearca ne mez bion bucon opeppe. Seah hio unypeocol sie on | Seepe opeppe. ypa ypa nu petep J eoppe yim ypipe eapfope co zeyeonne odde co onzitonne dSyyzum mMonnum on Fype. J fpa— peah hi pint peep pip zemenzde. ypa ip eac peep fyp on Sam ycanum Jj on pam peecvepe. ypipe eanfop hape. ac hic i seah papa. Du zebunde  fyp mid ypipe unabmbdendlicum pacencum. hic ne mez cuman co hiy azenum eapbde. ‘f ip to pam ~meeyoan fype Se ofep uy ip. pyleep hic foplete pa eoppan. J ealle oppe xepcearta aypmdad pop unzemeclicum cyle. zp hic eallunza fpom zepice. Du xzercapoladeyc eoppan ypipe pundoplice 7 yeerclice ‘} heo ne helt on nane healfe. ne on nanum eopplic pinze ne pcent. ne nanpuht eonplicey hi ne healz.  hio ne yize.
j my hipe Sonne eppe co feallanne of Sune Sonne up. Du eac
pa pmepealdan yapla on zeppepum lmum ycypeyc. ppa ‘p pepe
bi
§iv. BOETHIUS. 131
creatures. Wonderful is thy counsel, which thou hast in both respects accomplished: both hast bounded the creatures
between themselves, and also hast intermixed them: the dry
and the cold earth under the cold and the wet water, that the soft and flowing water may have a floor on the firm earth, be-
- cause it cannot of itself stand; but the earth holds it, and in _ some measure imbibes, and by that moistening it becomes
wet, so that it grows, and blossoms, and produces fruits. For if the water moistened it not, then would it become dry, and would be driven by the wind like dust or ashes. Nor could anything living enjoy the earth, or the water, or dwell in either for cold, if thou didst not a little mix them with fire. With wonderful skill thou hast caused it, that the fire burns not the water and the earth, when it is mixed with both:
“nor, again, the water and the earth entirely extinguish the
fire. The water’s own region is on the earth, and also in the
ff air, and again above the sky. But the fire’s own place is
above all visible worldly creatures; and though it is mixed with all elements, nevertheless it cannot altogether overcome any one of the elements, because it has not leave from the Almighty. The earth, then, is heavier and thicker than other elements, because it is lower than any other ereature except the sky: for the sky extends itself every day outwardly, and though it approaches it nowhere, it is in every place equally
@ nigh to it, both above and beneath. Every one of the ele- ments which we formerly spoke about has its own region
apart, and yet is every one mixed with other; because no one of the elements can exist without another, though it be
| imperceptible in the other. Thus water and earth are very
difficult to be seen or to be perceived by ignorant men in fire, and yet they are nevertheless mixed therewith. So is there also fire in stones and in water; very difficult to be seen, but it is nevertheless there. Thou hast bound the fire with very indissoluble chains, that it may not come to its own region, that is, to the greatest fire which is over us; lest it should forsake the earth, and all other creatures should perish by excessive cold, if it should altogether depart. Thou hast established earth very wonderfully and firmly, so. that it does not incline on any side, nor stand on any earthly thing, nor does anything earthly hold it that it may not sink; and it is not easier for it to lall downwards than upwards. Thou also movest the threefold soul in agreeing limbs; so that K2
7
:
132 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIII.
yaple py lyre ne byp on Sam leyran ginzpe. Se on eallum pam lichoman. fop 61 1¢ cpap P pio yapul pepe ppiofeald. foppampe uppican yeczap p hio hebbe pio zecynd. an Sapa zecynda ip HP heo bip pilmzende. opep P hio bip ipprende. ppidde pec hio bip- xerceadpiy. cpa Sapa zecyndu habbap necenu. spa ame yppa men. opep Sapa ip pilnunz. opep ip ippunz. ac ye mon ana herp ze-—
yceadpipneyye. naller nan odpu zercearc. poppi he herp opep-— ' pungen ealle a eopplican zeycearca mid xepeahte 3 mid and- — zice. foppam yeo zerceadpiyney yceal pealban ezpep ze Sepe pinunza ze per ypper. foppam hio ip syndeplic cpefe Sepe yaple. Spa pu zerceope Sa yaule } hio yceolde ealne pez hpeap- flan on hipe yelrpe.* ypa ypa eall per podop hpeprp. odSe rpa ypa hpeol onhpepr¢p. ymeazende ymb hine pceoppend. odde ymbe hi selpe. od8e ymbe Say eopplican xercearca. Sonne hio ponne ymbe hipe ycippend ymeap. Sonne bid hio ofep hipe yelgpe. ac ponne hio ymbe hi yelpe smead. ponne bip hio on hine yelfpe. and undep hipe yselppe hio bip ponne. Sonne heo lurap pap eonplican pinz. 3 Sapa pundpap. Ppec pu Dpihten popzeare pam yaplum eand on hiofonum. 7 him pep xzifye peopplice zira. zlcene be hipe zeeapnunge. ¥ zederc ‘pf he pemap ypipe beophte. 3 Seah ypipe miclice biphcu. sume beophton. ume unbyphtop. ypa spa yceoppan. ele be hy zeeapnunza. Ppact pu Dmihten ze- xeedepayc Sa hioponlicon yapla J Sa eopplican hchoman, 3 hi on Sipre populde zemenzeye. spa ypa hi ppom Se hidep comon. ypa hi eac co Se hionan fundiap. Du pylderc par eoppan mid muyt- licum cynpenum nevena. 7 hi pippan ayeope miyclicum pede cpeopa J} pypca. Fopzip nu Dpihten upum Modum f hi mocon co pe aycizan puph Sar eapfopu piyye populde. 7 of pyyum bi- yezum to pe cuman. } openum eazum uper Moder pe mocen xeyeon Sone epelan epelm ealpa xzoda. ‘p eapt Du. Fonzi up donne hale eazan upey Moder. ‘p pe hi ponne moton afeeyrnian on pe. J codpip pone myc Se nu hanzap befopan uper Moder eazum. Jj onlht pa eazan mid Simum leohte. roppam pu eapt yo biphtu pey yopan leohter. 7 pu eapc seo sepce perc sop- peycpa. and pu zederc P hi pe zereop. pu eanc ealpa pmza fpuma yj ende. Du bpiyc ealle pmz bucon zerpmce. Du eapc wxzpep xe pez. xe labpeop. zeo pio cop pe ye pez co lizp. pe ealle men co Fundiap ;-
1 Bod. et Cott. yelyne.
ST, ALBERT’S COLLEGE LIBRARY § iv. BOETHIUS. 133
there is not less of the soul in the least finger than in all the body. I said that the soul was threefold, because philo- sophers say that she has three natures. One of these natures is, that she has the power of willing; the second is, that she is subject toanger; the third, that she is rational. Two of these natures beasts have, the same as-men. One of them is will, the other is anger. But man alone has reason, and not any other creature. Therefore he has excelled all earthly creatures by thought and by understanding. For reason should govern both will and anger, because it is the peculiar faculty of the soul. So hast thou created the soul that she should always turn upon herself, as all this sky turns, or as a wheel turns round, inquiring about her maker, or about herself, or about these earthly creatures. When she inquires about her maker, then is she above herself. But when she inquires about her- self, then is she in herself. And she is beneath herself when she loves these earthly things and admires them. Thou, O Lord, hast given to souls a dwelling in the heavens, and on them thou bestowest worthy gifts, to every one according to its deserving: and causest them to shine very bright, and yet with very varied brightness, some brighter, some less bright, even as the stars, every one according to its desert. Thou, O Lord, bringest together the heavenly souls and the earthly bodies, and unitest them in this world. As they from thee came hither, so shall they also to thee hence tend. Thou filledest this earth with various kinds of animals, and after- wards didst sow it with various seed of trees and plants! Grant now, O Lord, to our minds, that they may ascend to thee through these difficulties of this world, and from these occupations come to thee; and that with the open eyes of our mind we may see the noble fountain of all goods. That art thou! Grant to us, then, sound eyes of our mind, that we may fix them on thee; and drive away the mist that now hangs before the eyes of our mind, and enlighten the eyes with thy light: for thou art the brightness of the true light, and thou art the quiet rest of the just, and thou wilt cause that they shall see thee. Thou art of all things the beginning and the end. Thou supportest all things without labour. Thou art both the way and the guide, and the place that the way leads to. All men tend to thee!
184 BOETHIUS.
CAPUT XXXIVs
§ I. DA ye Piydom fa pir leop and pir xebed arunzen hezbde. pa onzan he efz ypellian and pur cpep. Ic pene pet hic pie nu wpeyc peapf. P 1c pe xepecce hpep f hehyce zod iy. nu ic pe ep hepde zepehc’ hper ic pey. od5e hpyle } medeme x0 peep. hpylc } ummedeme. ac” aney pinzey ic de polde zpeyt acyian.® Ppepep pu pene P emz diz on piyye populde spa z0d pie H hic Se meze ropzizan fulle zeyelpa. Sy* 1c pe acyize py 1c nolbe PH unc beypice znezu lear anlicney fop ysopa xepzelpa. pop py nan mon ne mez oppyacan ‘} pum z06 ne pie ‘ hehyce. spa ypa pum mical zpelm j diop. 3 non manize bpocar J prpan® of. fop Sy mon cpip be yumum zobde hic ne pie full x05. foppam him
aap ween tl baton bal dow 9 fest val f dtr fb tinmeaenf
bip hpzey hpez® pana. and peah ne bip ealler bucan. oppam ele —
pinz pypp co nauhte zi hic nauhc zoder on him nefp. be py 5
pu mihc onzican ‘f of pam meycan xobe cumap ¥a leyyan Zod.
ney of pam leyran pat meyce. Se7 ma pe yeo ea mez peoppan :
co wpelme. ac ye epelm mez peopdSan to ea. and Seah yeo ea cym® eft co pam epelme. rpa cymd ele zod of Lode. and eft co him. and he iy pec fulle zod. 4  fullppemede. } naner pillan pana ne bip. Nu Su muh fpeocole onzican ‘p ‘p ip Lod yelp. pi ne mihc pu zepencan. zip nan puht full nepe. ponne nepe nan puhc pana. j zp nan puht pana nepe. ponne nepe nan puhc® full. pop py bip amiz full pz. pe yum bip pana. + pop py bip eniz ping pana. Se yum bip full. ale pmz bip rulloye on hiy azenum eanda. Ppy ne mihc pu Sonne xepencan ziF on wnezum piyya eopplicena zoba enizey pillan 3 ewnizer zoder pana iy. Sonne ip pum x05 full elcey pillan. 4 my naney xoder
pana, Da andypopode ic J cpap. Spipe pihclice 4 ppipe zepcead- : pylice pu heeyyct me ofepcumen 4 xepanzen. ‘p ic ne mez no ~
pipepepan. ne ruppum onzean ‘f zepencan. bucon ‘p hic iy eall rpa ypa Su pegye :- § 11.8 Da cpep ye Piybom. Nu 1c polbe } pu pohveyr ze-
opnlice oppe } pu onzeace hpeep yeo fulle zerelp pie. Pu ne —
© Boet. lib. iii, prosa 10.—Quoniam igitur que sit imperfecti, &e.
8 Boet. lib. iii. prosa 10.—Quo vero, inquit, habitet, &e.
1 Cott. sepeaht. ” hpyle ) immedeme ac, desunt in MS. Bod. 3 Cott. aycian. * Cott. be. 5 Cott. piba. ® Cott. hpusu. 7 Cott. bon. 8 pana J sip nan puht pana nepe. bonne nepe nan puht, desunt in MS.
od. :
$n, BOETHIUS. 185
CHAPTER XXXIV.
§ I. Warn Wisdom had sung this lay and this prayer, then began he again to speak, and thus said: I think that it is now, in the first place, necessary that I show thee where
# the highest good is, now I have already shown thee what it
was; or which was the perfect good, and which the imperfect. But one thing I would first ask thee: Whether thou thinkest | that anything in this world is so good that it can give thee full happiness? For this reason I ask thee, because I am unwilling that any false resemblance should impose upon us for the true happiness. For no man can deny that some ~ good is the highest: as it were a great and deep fountain, and from which many brooks and rivers flow. We therefore say concerning any good, that it is not full good, because there is in it a deficiency of something; and yet it is not entirely without good, for everything comes to naught if it has no good in it. Hence thou mayest learn that from the greatest good come the less goods; not from the less the greatest, any more than the river may become a fountain. But the fountain may become a river, and yet the river comes again to the fountain! So every good comes from God, and again to him, and he is the full and perfect good, which is not deficient in any will. Now thou mayest clearly under- stand that this is God himself. Why canst thou not imagine, that if nothing were full, then would nothing be deficient: and if nothing were deficient, then would nothing be full? Therefore is anything full, because some is deficient; and therefore is anything deficient, because some is full. Every- thing is fullest in its proper station. Why canst thou not then conceive, that if in any of these earthly goods there is a deficiency of any will and of any good, then is some good full of every will, and is deficient inno good? Then answered -J, and said: Very rightly and very rationally thou hast over- come and convinced me, so that I cannot contradict, or even imagine anything contrary to it, but that it is all even as thou sayest. '§ II. Then said Wisdom: Now I would that thou shouldest consider studiously until thou discover where the full happi-
136 . BOETHIUS. CHAP. ~
a 00
payc Su nu  eall moncyn iy anmobdlice zepara P Lod iy ppuma ealpa zobda J pealdend eallpa zeycearca. he iy P hehyce zod.* ne nenne monn nu pes ne tpeop. foppam pe he nauht nycon — becepe. ne puppum nauht emn zoder. poppam uy yexp ele ze- — yceadpiyney 3 ealle men f ilce andeccap } Lod pe f hehyce | zoo. foppam pe hi cecmiap f eall z0d on him yy.” poppem zip hic ypa nepe. Sonne nepe he } H he zehacven ip. oppe emz pinz ep pepe. oppe elcwppe. Sonne pepe pet becepe Sonne he. Ac soppam pe nan dmz ney ep ponne he. ne elceppe Sonne he. ne deoppeopppe Sonne he. foppam he iy ppuma. yj pelm. j hpor eallpa zobda. zenoz ypeocol hit ip. pac  fulle z0d pay. eppam pe p pana. }* iy co xeleyanne } ye hehyca zo y* eelcer xodey fullayc. py ley pe lenz pppecen® ymbe Sonne pe pypron.® Se ica Lod ip. ypa ypa pe ep yeedon. p hehyce xob. 7 Sa yeleycan zeyelpa. nu hit iy openlice cup. p pa yelepcan ze- yelpa on nanum oppum xerceagycum ne sinc. bucon on Lobe. Da cpep ic. Ic com zepara:-
§ III.t Da cpep he. Ic pe healnze } Su xzeyceadpiylice H onzice ‘p ce [sod iy full elepe fullppemedneyye. 3 wlcer zodey. | J wlcepe zeyelpe. Da cpp ic. Ic ne mez fullice onzican. pop hpi Su efc yezyc ‘p ilce } pu ep peedeyt. Da cpep he. Foppy ic hic pe yecze eft. py ic nolbe } Su pendeyc P ye Lod Se peedep iy J Fpuma eallpa zeycearca. } him ahponan utane come hiy | yeo heahe xodney." de he full iy. Ne 1c eac nolde ‘} pu pendere ce opep pape hir zod 4 ny zeyalp. odep he yelp. foppam zip pu penyc ‘} him ahponan ucan comon da z0d S¢ he hyp. Sonne pepe P pz becepe de hic him fpam come. Sonne he. zip hic rpa pepe. Ac P ip ypipe dyyhe 4 ypipe micel yynn >} mon per penan yceole® be Lode. odSe ert penan } emz pmz xp him pepe. ode becepe Sonne he. oppe him zelic. Ac pe rceolon® bion zeparan'? p ye Lod pie eallpa Sinza becyc. Ing pu nu ze- leryc Lod pie" ypa ypa on monnum bip. oddep bip re mon. p bip yapl 3 choma. od8en bip hip zobney. pa zezzdpap Lod 4 ef eczedpe zehelc 7 xemeczap. zip pu Sonne zeleryc H hic ypa pie on Gobe.”’ Sonne ycealc pu nede zeleofon ‘) yum anjpeald'*
t Boet. lib. iii. prosa 10.—Sed queso, inquit, &e.
1 Bod. Lod. * Cott. men. % Bod. nepene’p. 4 Cott.yie. 5 Bod. yppecan. 6 Cott. ymb ponne pe ne bypren. 7 Cott. hi pio hea s00d- ney. 8 Cott. revle. ® Cott. yeulon. 10 Bod. sebara. 1 Cott. selyyyc ‘bce an Lod pre. 1? Cott. soode. 18 Cott. Seleoran. 1 Cott. snpald.
§ 111. BOETHIUS. 137
ness is. Dost thou not then know that all mankind is unani- mously consenting that God is the origin of all goods, and the ruler of all creatures? He is the highest good; nor do any men doubt it, for they know nothing better, nor indeed any- thing equally good. Therefore every argument informs us,
| _ and all men confess the same, that God is the highest good:
for they show that all good is in him. For if it were not so, then he would not be that which he is called. Or if any- thing were more ancient or more excellent, then would that be better than he.. But because nothing was more ancient _ than he, nor more excellent than he, nor more precious than he, therefore is he the origin, and the source, and the roof of all goods. Itis sufficiently evident that the perfect good was before the imperfect. This then is to be acknowledged, that the highest good is fullest of every good, that we may not speak longer about it than we need. The same God is, as we before said, the highest good and the best happiness; since it is evidently known that the best felicities are in no other things but in God. Then said I: I am convinced of tt.
§ III. Then said he: I beseech thee that thou wouldest rationally understand this, that God is full of all perfection, and of all good, and of all happiness. Then said I: I cannot fully comprehend why thou again sayest the same thing which thou saidst before. Then said he: For this reason I say it to thee again, because I am unwilling that thou shouldest sup- pose that God, who is the father and origin of all creatures ; that the supreme goodness of him, of which he is full, came to him from without. Nor moreover am I willing that thou shouldest suppose that his good and his happiness were one thing, and himself another. For if thou thinkest that the _ good which he has, came to him from without, then would that thing from which it came to him be better than he, if it were so. But it is very foolish, anda very great sin, that any one should thus think of God; or moreover think that any- thing was before him, or better than he, orlike him. But we must be convinced that God is of all things the best. If thou then believest that God is like as it is among men, that one thing is the man, that is soul and body, and another is his goodness, which God joins and afterwards holds together and
138 BOETHIUS. . OHAP. XXXIV,
yle mapa Sonne hiy. pec Sonne hi rpa zeromnize ypa he pone upne dep. Ppec ele pmz Se corceaden bip ppom oppum. bip 1 opep. opep ‘ pmgz. deah hi eczeedepe sien. In¢ ponne hpele ~ pmz corceaden bip fpom Sam! hehycvan zobde.? Sonne ne bip f no } hehyze zobd.° } iy Seah micel yyn co zepencenne be Lode. ;  eniz 705 sie buton on him. odde eniz ppom him adzeled. — Foppampe nan puhc nip becepe Sonne he. ne emn zo0d him. Ppile pmz mez beon betepe ponne hiy yceoppend. Foppam ic yecze mid puhtpe zeyceappiyneyye. ff pe } hehyce zod on hip © azgenpe zec\jnde. } te ppuma iy eallpa pmza. Da cpep ic. Nu © pu heeyyc me ypipe pihte ofeppeahte.* Da cpp he. Ppeet ic — ponne zp sede } ‘P hehyce xod 3 plo hehyte xeyelp an pepe. — Da cpp ic. Spa hicip. Dacpep he. Ppec pille pe Sonne seczan — hpec pie eller bucan Lod. Da cpep ic. Ne mez ic per opracan. foppampe ic hip pay ep xzepara :-
§ IV." Da cpep he. Ppepep du hic aypeocolop onzicon — meze. zip 1¢ Se yume bipne zer® pecze. Lip nu cpa x05 pepon.® © de ne mihton zt yomne bion. 7 peepon peah bucu zode.” hu ne pepe hic Sonne zenoh ypeocol. } luopa® neepe naupep ‘f opep. — pop py ne mez pee fulle xyod bion no codzled. hu mez hit © beon ezpep ze full. xe pana. foppam pe cpepap ‘f yio fulle ze- — yelp J z0d. } i pen an z0d 3 P pe P hehyce. Sa ne magon © neppe peoppan codelede. Pu ne rceolon® pe ponne nede bion zeparan ‘p yio hehyce xeyeelp 3 pio heahe zobcundney an pie. Da — cpep ic. Nip nan pmz poppe ponne pet. ne mazon pe nanpuht pindan becepe’’ ponne Lod. Da cpep he. Ac ic polde xet mid © yumpe biyne pe behpeppan ucan } pu ne mihtyc nenne pex pindan ofep. ypa spa upprcena xepuna iy. ‘p hi pillap pimle hpaec hpezu mpey 4 yeldbcuper eopian. ) hi mazen mid Sy apeccan ‘p Mod papa zehenpendpa :-
§ V.” Pu ne haefdon pe wep xepehc’ p Sa xerelpa and pio zobcundney an pepe. ye pe Sonne pa zeyelpa herp. Sonne hepp — he expep ye pe Sone xzpep herp. Pu ne bip ye Sonne full eadiz. Pu ne payc pu nu hpec!* pe cpepap ‘P ye bio piy pe Viyoom herp. 3 pubcpiy Se pabcpiyneyye herp. ypa pe cpepap eac
me Me
u Boet. lib. iii, prosa 10.—Respice, inquit, an hine quoque, &e.
Vv Boet. lib. iii. prosa 10.—Nam quoniam beatitudinis, &e.
1 Cott. baem. ? Cott. S00de. 3 Cott. 5005. * Bod. oreppehzne. 5 Bod. seocma. § Cott. tuxood pepen. 7 Cott. buzo go0de. §  hiopa, desunt in MS. Bod. 9 Cott. poulon. W Cott. medempe. 1 Cott. sepeahe. 12 Cott. ‘p.
ae Ape
2 ie ;
‘§ rv. v. BOETHIUS. 139.
regulates; if thou believest that it is so with God, then must thou of necessity believe that some power is greater than his, which may join together what belongs to him, as he does what appertains tous. Besides, whatsoever is distinct from another thing is one, and the thing another, though they be together. If therefore anything is distinct trom the highest good, then
that is not the highest good. It is, however, great sin to
imagine concerning God that any good can be external to him, or any separated from him; because nothing is better than he, or equally good with him. What thing can be better than its creator? Therefore I say with right reason, that that is the highest good in its own nature, which is the origin of all things. Then said 1: Now thou hast very rightly in- structed me. Then said he: But then J before said, that the highest good and the highest happiness were ore. Then said I: So it is. Then said he: What shall we then say? What else is that but God? Then said I: I cannot deny this, for I was before convinced of it.
§ IV. Then said he: Perhaps thou mayest more clearly apprehend it, if I still give thee some instance. If therefore two goods existed, which might not be together, and were nevertheless both good, would it not be then sufficiently evident that neither of them was the other? Therefore the full good cannot be divided. How can it be both full and deficient ? Hence we say that the full happiness and good, are one good, and that is the highest. They can never be separated. Must we not then necessarily be convinced that the highest happiness and the supreme divinity are one? Then said I: Nothing is more true than that. We are not able to discover anything better than God. Then said he: But I would still prepare thee by some example, so that thou mayest not find any way of escaping; as the manner of philo- sophers is, that they always wish to declare something new and strange, that they may thereby awaken the mind of the hearers.
§ V. Have we not already proved that happiness and the divinity were one? He then who has happiness, has both in having either. Is he not, then, full happy? Knowest thou not, moreover, what we say, that any one is wise who has wisdom ; and righteous, who has righteousness? So we also say that
140 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIV.
 p pre Lod. pe pa zodneyye herp J 6a zerelpa. 9 ele zepeliz mon bip Lob. 7 peah iy an Lobd.! ye iy pcemn J yradol ealpa zoda. J of Sm cumap eall zo. 3 efc hi pundiap to him. 7 he- pelc eallpa. peah he nu pie ye spuma J ye scapol eallpa zoda pe~ or him cumap.? ypa ypa ealle pceoppan peoppap onlihte J ze- biphte of Sape yunnan. sume peah beophcop. sume un-— beophtop. ypa eac ye mona. spa miclum he hhc spa pio punne hine zeycinp. Sonne hio hine ealne zeondyceimp Sonne bip he eall” beophc. Da ic pa pir ppell onzeaz. pa peapp ic azelped.® 5 ypipe apeped. J cpep. Ip pir la pundoplic. 3 pmyrum. 3 zerceadlic* ypell } pu nu yezyc. Da cpep he. Nip nan puht pynyumpe ne sepype Sonne } ping } py® ypell ymbe ip. 7 pe nu ymbe yppecan pillap. poppam me Sincp x06 p pe hic zemenzen to pam zppan. Da cpep ic. Ppa ip f la:-
§ VI.” Da cpep he. Ppt pu parc f 1c Se ep pede P pio- yode® zerelp pepe zod. J of Sepe sopan zerzelpe cumad eall Sa oppe’ zob Se pe zp ymbe yppecon. 3 eft co. spa spa of Sepe ye cymp ‘f pecep mnon pa eoppan. and pep afepyceap. cymp Sonne up wt Sam epelme. pypp Sonne co bpoce. Sonne To ea. Sonne andlanz ea. op hic pypp epc co yee. Ac ic polde pe nu acyian hu 6u piy ypell undepycanden heepderc. Ppaepep Su pene p pa pip 0d. Se pe ofc ep ymbe yppecon. f ip anpeald. J peoppyreipe. J fopemepney.§ 3 zenyhe. 7 bhi. Ie polde picon hpxpep Su pendeyc ‘Pp Say zod peepon limu pepe ysopan xeyelpe. ypa ypa monezu limu beop’ on anum men. 4 peoppap Seah ealle co anum lichoman. ode pu pendert p hpyle’’ an Sapa if zoba pophce $a yopan zerelpe. 7 yrSSan pa feopep z00d peepon hipe x05. ypa spa nu yapl 7 licchoma pypcad anne mon. J ye an mon herp manize lm. 3 Seah co Sam tpam." ip co Sepe yaple 7 co pam lichoman belimpap ealle pay pay monney zo0d. ze zayclice. ze lichomlice.’? Deer iy nu peer lichoman Zod. } mon yle paezep. J pcpanyz. J lanz. 7 bpad. 7 manezu oppu x0d To eac pam.'® 4 ne bip hic Seah ye hchoma yelf. foppam Seah he Sana zoda hpyle popleoye. Seah he bip } he ep pay. ponne ip Sepe yaple zob pepycipe. J zemeczunz. J zepylo. J pyhcpiyynep. F |
Ww Boet. lib. iii. prosa 10.—Cum multa, inquit, beatitudo, &e. |
1 Bod. 7 ye beah 1p Lod. 2 Cott. soodpa and ealpa s00da peah ip menig 500 be oy him cymS. 3 Cott. azewlped. 4 Cott. sepceadpiphic. 5 Bod. bm. © Bod. pe. 7 Cott. oSpu. § Bod. yopmepney. ° Bod. man hund hma bios. = Bod. hpyle. = Cott. bem tpaem. 1? Cott. sayclicu selichomlicu. 13 Cott. eac beem. ™ Cott. epop.
§ v1. BOETHIUS. 141
| that is God which has goodness and happiness: and every
happy man isa God. And yet there is one God who is the stem and foundation of all goods, and from whom cometh all good, and again they tend to him, and he governsall. He is, moreover, the origin and the foundation of all goods which proceed from him. Thus all the-stars are lighted and made
_ bright by the sun: some, however, more brightly, some less
brightly. So also the moon gives light in such measure as the sun shines upon him. When she shines upon him all over, then is he all bright. When I heard this speech, I was astonished and greatly afraid, and said: This, indeed, is a wonderful and delightful and rational argument which thou now usest. Then said he: Nothing is more delightful or more certain than the thing which this argument is about, and which we will now speak of, for methinks it good that we mix it with the preceding. Then said I: Oh! what is that P
§ VI. Then said he: Thou knowest that I before said to thee that the true happiness was good; and that from the true happiness come all the other goods, which we have before spoken about, and again return to zt. Thus, from the sea the water enters into the earth, and then becomes fresh. It then comes up at the fountain, then runs to the brook, then to the river, then along the river till it returns to the sea. But I would now ask thee how thou hast understood this discourse. Whetherthou thinkest that the five goods, which we have often before mentioned, that is, power, and dignity, and renown, and abundance, and pleasure; I would know whether thou thoughtest that these goods were members of the true happi- ness, as there are many members in one man, and yet all belong to one body; or whether thou though test that any one of the five goods constituted the true happiness, and then the four other goods were its good, as soul and body consti- tute one man, and the one man has many members, and nevertheless to these two, that is, to the soul and to the body, belong all these goods of the man, both ghostly and bodily. This then is the good of the body, that a man be fair, and strong, and tall, and broad, and many other goods in addition to these; and yet it is not the body itself, because if that loses any of these goods, it is nevertheless what it was be- fore. Then the good of the soul is prudence, and temperance, and patience, and justice, and wisdom, and many like virtues ;
et eee
142 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIV.
Viydsom. and maneze ypelce cpercay. J spa Seah bip opep pio — yapl. opep bip hipe cpercar. Da cpep ic. Ic polbe # Su me — yeedeyc xez ypeocolop ymbe %a oppe zod! pe co Sepe sopan ze- — yelpe belimpap. Da cpzep he. Ne sete ic pe ep f pio xepeelp — zo0b pene:- Liyye. cpap ic. pu’ p yederc f hio f hehyce — x005 pene. Da cped he. Eanc Su nu zet zepara P ce anpeald. — J peoppreipe. J fopemeepney. J xenyht. 3 blir. 7 yeo eadiqnep. Jp hehyve zoo. ‘f Sa jren ealle® an. 7 ‘} an Sonne pie z0d. Da — cpep ic. Pu pile ic nu pey opracan. Da cpep he. Ppaepep Smep pe Sonne P pa Sinz sien. pe papa sopena zeyeelpa limu. Se — yio zeyelp yelp. Da cpzp ic. Ic pac nu hpeec pu polderc pican. © ac me lyyce bet P pu me yaedert sume hpile ymbe f. Sonne Su — me acyooeyt. Da cpp he. Pune miht du zepencan. zip Sa x05 © pepon pepe sopan zerelpe hmu. donne pzepon hi hpeec hpezu* — codeled. spa ypa monney hchoman limu bip hpet hpexu® co- beled. ac pepa lima zecynd iy ‘P hie xepypcap enne lhchoman. j Seah ne bip eallunza zelice. Da cpepic. Ne Seapfp pu mape® ypincan ymbe . zenoz ypeorole Su heyyc me xereed. H pa Zod ne yint nan puht codzled ppom Sepe yopan zereelpe. Da cpap he. Genoz pihte Su hic onzicyc. nu pu onzicyt p pa x08 ealle — pine ‘P ilce } zeyelp ip. J pro zerzlp ip } hehyte zod. 7 P hehyce z0d iy Lod. 7 ye Lod ip yrmle on anum uncobdeled. Da cpsepic. Niy peey? nan cpeo. Ac ic polde nu f du me yedere hpet hpexzu® uncupey |:
§ VIL* Da cpep he. Dec ip nu ypeocol. $ ce eall pa zod. © de pe ep ymbe yppecon. belimpap to Sam hehycan zobe. 3 py — men yecap 705 zenog. de he penap } f yie ‘Pp hehyce zod. py® hi yecap anpeald. 7 eac oppu z0d. Se pe ep ymbe yppxcon, sy hi penap ‘ hic pie  hehyce zod. be py Su mihc pican f } hehyce z05 iy hpog eallpa pana oppa xoda pe men pilmap. 3 hi lye. yoppam Se nanne mon ne lyyc naner Smzer bucon zoobey, | 0d5e hpsy hpezul? Sep pe zoode xelic bip. mamzeyr pimzer hi pilmap Se full xob ne bip. ac hic herp Seah hpet hpezu' ze- licey zoode. Foppam pe cpepap ‘p  hehyce z0d sie Se! hehyza hpor eallpa zoda. 3 reo hion Se eall zod on hpeaprap. 3 eac H pinz Se mon eall z05 fone dep. fop pam Sinze men lye elcer
. * Boet. lib. iii. prosa 10.—Hujus rei discretionem sie accipe, &e.
1 Cott. oSpu 500d. 2 Cott. se bu. 3 Bod. eall. * Cott. huru. > Cott. hugu. ® Cott. ma. 7 Bod. $. % Cott. hpugu. 9% Bod. p. Cott. hpusu. 1 Cott. hpusu. 12 Cott. ye
Poyit. BOETHIUS. 143
and nevertheless the soul is one ¢hing, and its virtues are another. Then said 1» I wish that thou wouldest speak to me more plainly about the other goods which appertain to the true happiness. Then said he: Did I not say to thee before that the happiness was good? Yes, said I, thou saidst “that it was the supreme good. Then said he: Art thou now - convinced that power, and dignity, and renown, and abund- ance, and pleasure, and happiness, and the supreme good, that these are all one, and that one is good? Then said I: How shall I deny this? Then said he: Which dost thou then consider these things to be; members of the true feli- cities, or the felicity itself? Then said I: I now perceive what thou wouldest know. But I rather wish that thou wouldest inform me somewhile concerning it, than that thou shouldest inquire of me. Then said he: Canst thou not - imagine that if the goods were members of the true happi- ness, they would then be in some degree separated, as the menibers of a man’s body are in some degree separated ? But the nature of the members is, that they constitute one body, and yet are not altogether alike. Then said 1: Thou needest not labour more about that. Thou hast clearly enough proved to me that the goods are in no wise separated from the true happiness. Then said he: Very rightly thou understandest it, now thou understandest that the goods are all the same that happiness is; and happiness is the highest good; and the highest good is God; and God is ever one, inseparable.
} Then said I: There is no doubt of this. But I wish that
thou wouldest now inform me of something unknown.
Vil. Then said he: It is now evident that all the goods which we have before spoken about, belong to the highest good: and therefore men seek sufficient good, when they consider that which they seek the highest good. Therefore they seek power, and also the other goods which we before mentioned, because they think that it is the highest good. Hence thou mayest know that the highest good is the roof of all the other goods which men desire and covet. Forno man ‘covets anything but good, or something of that which resem- bles good. They are desirous of many a thing which is not fi.ie good, but it has nevertheless something of resemblance to goud. Therefore we say, that the highest good is the highest roof of all goods, and the hinge on which all good turns, and also the cause on account of which man does all
144 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIV.
Sapa zoda Se hi lyyc. $ Su mihz spipe ypeotole onzican be pam.
de nanne mon ne lyyc pey pmzer pe hine’ lyre. ne pay pe he dep. ac pey pe he mid pam eapnap. foppampe he penp. zip he Sonne luyc bezice. J P puphtio. fp he donne xecihhod” herp.
it
‘ he ponne hebbe fulle zeralpa. Du ne parc Su } nan mon
pop py ne pic. Se hme pidan lyyce. ac pic pop py pe he mid peepe pade eapnap sume eapmunza.® Sume mid pepe pade eap- map } hie pien 3y halpan. Sume eapniap } hie pien py cagpan. Sume hi polbon cuman to sumene pana copa Se hi Sonne to yundiap. Pu ne iy pe nu* zenoh ypeocol f men nane puhe®
ypSop ne lufiap. Sonne he dop  hehyce xod. roppampe ele.
puhc dey Se hi pilniap od56e Sop. hi Sop fop py. de li poldon habban  hehyce xo0d on pem. ac he dpeliap® sume on pam be hi penap hie mezen habban full zod J fulle’ zerelpa on Siyum andpeandbum zodum. Ac %a fullan xzerelpa 7  hehyce zo iy Lod? yelp. ypa ppa pe ogc ep yeedon. Da cpep ic. Ne mez ic no zepencan hu ic pey opracan mzze. Da cpep he. Ucon lecan ponne bion pay? yppece. 3 bion unc per opyopze. nu Su spa fullice onzicen heefyc } Lod ysimle bip uncodeledlic 3 gull z0d. 3 f hiy xood 3 pro ny zeyzlp him nahponan ucane ne com. ac peey yimle on him yelfum. 3 nu iy. 3 & bip:-
§ VITIY Daye Piydom Sa Sip ppell ayeed heepde. pa onzan he ere ymzan J puy cpep. Yella men pel. ale papa pe ppeo pe fundize co Sam xZo0de. J co Sam xeyxlpum. j ye pe nu xeheere yle mid Sepe unnyccan lure pyye middan xeandey. sece him ypeodom hu he mzze becuman cto pam xzerelpum. poppam yy plo an peeye eallpa uppa zerpmea. pio an hyp byp yimle ymylcu egcep eallum Sam yycum 3 Sam ypum uppa zerpmea. } ay yeo an fpispcop J plo an Fpofep epminza wzpcep Sam epmdum piyyey andpeapdan hirer. Ac pa xyldenan pranay. 3 pa yeolppenan. 4 elcer cynney zimmarp. J eall per andpeanda pela. ne onlihcap hi nauht peer moder eazan. ne heopa yceappneyye nauhc zebecap co Spe yceapunza Sepe sopan zeyelpe. ac zer rpipop he ablendap Sey Moder eazan. Sonne hi hi arcippan. Foppam ealle pa pmz de hep liciap on piyum andpeapdu.n hire. yint eopplice. op Sy hi pme fleonde. Ac pio pundoplice be- opheney. Se ealle Sinz zebiphe J eallum pele. nyle ‘ pa yapla
Y Boet. lib. iii. metrum 10.—Huc omnes pariter venite, &e.
1 Bod. hipe. 2 Cott. setohha’. % yume eapnunga, deest in MS Bod. * Cott. bonne. 5 Cott. bce men nan puhs. © Cott. dpuhad. 7 Cott. yulla. 8 Cott. 5000 1p 500. 9 Cott. ba.
§ viii. BOETHIUS. 145
good. For this cause, men covet every one of the goods which they covet. This thou mayest very plainly perceive hereby, that no man desires the thing which he desires, nor that which he does, but that which he thereby earns. For he thinks that if he obtain his desire, and accomplish that which he has re- solved, that then he shall have full happiness. Dost thou not know that no man rides because he lists to ride, but rides because he by riding attains some earning? Some by their riding earn that they may be the healthier; some earn that they may be the more active; some that they may come to one of the places which they are then hastening to. Is it not then sufficiently clear to thee, that men love nothing more earnestly than they do the highest good; because everything which they desire or do, they do for this reason, that they would have the highest good thereby? But some of them err in thinking that they can have full good and full happi- ness in these present goods. But the full happiness and the highest good is God himself, as we have often before said. . Then said I: I cannot imagine how I can deny this. Then said he: Let us then relinquish this discourse, and be so far secure; since thou hast so fully learned that God is ever in- separable and full good, and that his good and his happiness came to him from nowhere without, but was always in him- self, and now is, and for ever shall be.
§ VIII. When Wisdom had ended this discourse, then began he again to sing, and thus said: Well, O men, well! Let every one who is free, aspire to this good, and to these felicities. And whosoever is now bound with the vain love of this middle-earth, let him seek freedom for himself, that he may arrive at these felicities. or this is the only rest of all our labours; the only haven which is ever calm after all the storms and billows of our labours. This is the only asylum and the only conifort of the wretched after the calamities of this present life. But golden stones and silver, and gems of every, kind, and all this present wealth, neither enlighten the eves of the mind, nor improve their sharpness for the contem- plation of the true happiness ; but rather blind the eyes of the mind than sharpenthem. For all the things which give plea- sure here in this present life are earthly, and are therefore fleeting. But the wonderful brightness which brightens all things, and governs all, wills not that souls should perish,
L
Sh. ALDEN! o w™MeEer . a an
146 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIV.
foppeoppan. ac pile hi onlihcan. Inp Sonne hpele mon maze xeyion da biphcu peer heogenlican leohtey mid hluccpum eazum hip Moder. Sonne pile he cpepan } yio beopheney pepe punnan — yeman pie. peycepner' to mecanne pip pa ecan bplaan Goober :- § TX.” Da ye fiydom %a pir leop arunzen herbe. pa cpeep , ic. Ic eom zepara Sey pe du yezyc. Foppampe du hic heepye ze- — yeped mid zerceadpiylicne pace.. Da cpep he. Mid hu miclan? feo poldeye pu nu habban zeboht pu mibceyt onzican hpaec  yope z0d pepe. 3 hpele hic pepe. Da cpep ic. Ie polde- pesnian mu ypipe unzemeclice zefean. J 1¢ polbe mid unapi-— medum feo” zebyczan f 1c hic moyce xepion. Da cpp he. Ic — hic pe Sonne pille zeczecan. Ac ‘} an ic pe bebeobde. } pu peah yop Sepe cecnmze ne fopzice P ‘p 1c ep cehte. Da cpep ic. Nee. ne fpopzice ic hic no. Da cpep he. Pu ne ysedon pe pe © ep ‘p pip andpeande lip Se pe hep pimap. nape no } hehyte zoo. foppam hic pepe miyclict 7 on ypa manizpeald zedzeled.> ‘) hic nan mon ne mez eall habban him ne pie pumey pingey | pana. Ic pe tehte da ‘pH ce Sep pape  hehyce zod. Sep Sep > pa z05 ealle zezeebepode biop. rpelce hi sien to anum pecze® ze- — zocen. Donne pep bip full zood. Sonne Sa z0bd ealle. pe pe zp ymbe yppzcon. beop to anum zobde zezadepod. Sonne ne bip pep naney zoder pana. Sonne pa Zod ealle on anneyye biop. J yio anney bid on ecneyye. Ing hi on ecneyye neepen.’ Sonne neepe hiopa spa ypipe co zipnanne, Da cpep ic. Det ip zepeed. ne mez ic pey no cpeozan.® Da cpp he. Aip ic Se heepoe | xeyaed ‘ P nape full zod pac eall wczedepe nepe. foppam ip — pull zod Sec eall wczedepe ip untodzled. Da cpzed ic. Spa me pincp. Da cpep he. Venyc pu nu ie ealle 3a pinz pe zode ym on piyye populde. pop py zode pmc.® py hi habbap’? hpaec — hpezu!! zodey on him. Da cpap ic. Ppay meg ic elley penan. hu ne iy hic ypa. Da cpep he. Du yeealc peah zelypan po anney J ylo xobney an pmz pie. Da cpap ic. Ne mez ic per opracan. Da cpep he. Pu ne mic du zepencan } ele pmz mez bion. ze on Siyye populde. ze on pepe topeapdan. da hpile pe hic uncodzled bip. ponne ne bip hic eallunga ypa spa hic ep
% Boet. lib. iii. prosa 11.—Assentior, inquam, &c.
' Bod. bey ep ney. 2 Cott. micle. 3 Cott. yo. * Cott. muylic. 5 Cott. codeled § Cott. pesse. 7 Bod. ne pien. 8 Cott. cplogean. *Cott. rien. 10 Cott. hebben. 1 Cott. hpugu.
B.§ rx. BOETHIUS. 147
but wills to enlighten them. If, then, any man may behold the brightness of the heavenly light with the clear eyes of his mind, then will he say that the brightness of the sun- shine is darkness to be compared with the eternal brightness of God.
§ IX. When Wisdom had sung this lay, then said I: I am convinced of that which thou sayest, for thou hast proved it by rational discourse. Then said he: With how much money wouldest thou have bought, that thou mightest know what the true good was, and of what kind it was? Then said I: I would rejoice with excessive gladness, and I would buy with countless money, that I might see it. Then said he: I will then teach it thee. But this one thing I enjoin thee; that thou, on account of this instruction, forget not what I before taught thee. Then said I: No, I will not forget it. Then said he: Did we not before say to thee, that this present life which we here desire, was not the highest good; because it was varied, and so manifoldly divided, that no man can have it all, so that there be not to him a lack of something? I then taught thee that the highest good was there where the goods are all collected, as if they were melted into one mass. Then is there full good when the goods which we before spoke of are all collected into one good. Then is there a deficiency of no good. Then the goods are all in unity, and the unity is eternal! If they were not eternal, then would they not be so anxiously to be desired. Then said I: That is proved, nor can I doubt it. Then said he: I have formerly proved to thee, that that was not full good, which was not all together: because that is full good which is all together undivided. Then said I: So methinks. Then said he: Dost thou think that all the things which are good in this world, are therefore good, because they have something of good in them? Then said 1: What else can I think; is it not soP Then said he: Thou must, however, believe that unity and goodness are one thing. Then said I: I cannot deny this. Then said he: Canst thou not perceive, that everything is able to exist both in this world and in the future, so long as it remains un- separated, but afterwards it is not altogether as it before
Tig
148 BOETHIUS CHAP. a
| pey. Da cpep ic. Seze me f ypeocolop. ne mzz 1¢ fullice on-— zican eftep hpem Su ypypayt. Da cpep he. Parc Su hpec mon yie. Da cpep ic. Ic pac } hic sy! yapl 3 hchoma. Da cpep- he. pec Su parc P hic bip mon. da hpile Se reo sapl 9 ye lichoma unbdzelde” beop. ne bip hic nan mon. y1ddan hi cobdzlde ~ biop. rpa eac se lichoma bip lhchoma. pa hpile pe he hip hmu ealle harp. zip he Sonne hpyle hm foplyyc. ponne ne bip he eall — ypa he zp per. f ilce pu miht zepencan be zlcum singe. p- nan pmz ne bip ypelce hic par yiddan hit pamian onzmp. Da_ cpp ic. Nu ic hic pac. Da cped he. Yenc du hpepep emz- zerceart yeo. Se hipe pillan® nylle ealne pez bion. ac ple hipe- aznum pillan* roppeoppan :-
§ X.* Da cpep ic. Ne mez ic nane cpica puht onzican Sapa pe pice hpzec hic pille. od8e hpec ic nylle. Se unzened lyyte* foppeoppan. foppam® ele puhr polde bion hal 3 hbban. Sapa pe- me cpica’ Smcp. bute ic nat be tpeopum. ¥ be pyptum. 3 be ypilcum zerceagcum ypylce nane yaple nabbap. Da pmeapcobde — he 3 cpep. Ne Seapye pu no be pem zerceapcum tpeozan pe® ma pe, be pam oppum, Pune miht pu zepion f ele pypc 7 ele puda® pile peaxan on pem lanbde yeloyc. de him becyt xepiyt. J him zecynde bip 3 zepunelic. and pep pep hic zeppec P hic — hpapoy peaxan mez. ¥ lacoyc pealopizan.'° Sumpa pypta odse yumey puda eapd bip on Sunum, yumpa on mepyeum. yumpa on mopum. sumpa on cludum. sumpe! on bapum yonbum. Nim ponne ypa puda.’” ypa pypt. rpa hpepep ypa Su pille. of pepe scope pe hip eapd 3 zpelo bip on to peaxanne. j yetce on | uncynde" recpe him. Sonne ne zeznepp hic Sep nauhc. ac fop- — yeanap. foppam eelcey lander zecynd iy. } hic him zelice pypta J xelicne pudu cydpize.’* and hic ypa dep. ppipap 7 Fypppap pipe xeopne. ypa lonze ypa heopa zecynd bip. hi zpopan mocton. |pet pense pu fophpi ele seed zpope’’ mnon 8a eop- = J co cipum Jj co pyptpumum peoppe on Sepe eoppan. —
ucon fon py pe hi tiohhiap } ye ycemn J ye helm moce py
peycop Jj py lenz ycandon. Ppi ne miht pu onzican. Seah pu —
hic zereon ne maze. ‘ eall ye del. ye pe peer cpeopey on cpele
® Boet. lib. iii. prosa 11.—Si animalia, inquam, considerem, &e.
1 Cott. bi. 2 Cott. unzodelde. % Cott. pe. be bape pullum. 4 Cott. © pulum. 5 Bod. luc.  * Cott. yopbeem be. 7 Cott. cpuco. 8 Cott. pon. ® Cott. pudu. 1° Cott. pealopan. 1 Bod. yume. 2 Cott. pudu. 13 Cott. un5ecynde. 14 Cott. cydpe. 15 Cott. cpeope.
§ x. BOETHIUS. 149
was? Then said T: Say that to me more plainly; I cannot fully understand after what thou art inquiring. Then said he: Dost thou know what man is? Then said I: I know that he is soul and body. Then said he: But thou knowest that it is man, while the soul and the body are unseparated. It is not man after they are separated. So also the body is body while it has all its members; but if it lose any member, then it is not all as it before was. The same thou mightest conceive with respect to everything: that nothing is such as it was after it begins to decay. Then said 1: Now I know it. Then said he: Dost thou think that there is any creature which of its will desires not always to be, but of its own will desires to perish ?
§ X. Then said I: I cannot find any living thing which knows what it wills, or what it wills not, which uncompelled chooses to perish. For everything, of such as I deem living, desires to be hale and to live. But I know not concerning trees and concerning herbs, and concerning such creatures as have no souls. Then smiled he, and said: Thou needest not doubt concerning these creatures any more than about the others. Canst thou not see that every herb and every tree will grow best in that land which suits it best, and is natural and habitual to it; and where it perceives that it may soonest grow, and latest fall to decay? Of some herbs or of some wood, the native soil is on hills, of some in marshes, of some on moors, of some on rocks, of some on bare sands. Take, therefore, tree or herb, whichsoever thou wilt, from the place which is its native soil and country to grow in, and set it in a place unnatural to it: then willit not grow there at all, but will wither. For the nature of every land is that it should nourish herbs suitable to it, and suitable wood. And so it does: protecting and supporting them very carefully, as long as it is their nature that they should grow. What thinkest thou? Why should every seed grow in the earth, and turn to germs and to roots in the earth, except because they en- deavour that the trunk and the head may the more firmly and _ the longer stand? Why canst thou not understand, though thou art not able to see it, that all that part of the tree which
150 BOETHIUS,. CHAP. XXXIV.
|b terearnaats
monpum zepeaxep.! } he onzmp of Sam pyptpumum. and spa uppeapdey zpepp op pone ycemn. 7 yrddan andlanz dey pipan. J andlanz pepe pinde op Sone helm. and yrdSan eycep Sam ~ bozum ode $ hit uc ayppinzp. on learum. 3 on bloycmum. 7 — on blebum. Pp ne mihc pu onzican } ce ele puhe cpicey? bip — mnanpeapd hneycoyt: 3 unbpoe heapbdoyc. Ppeec pu miht ze- — yeon hu  cpeop bip ucon zercypped® 7 bepafed* mid pepe pinde pip Sone pinvep. J pip pa yteapcan ycopmay. J eac pip pepeyunnan hezo on sumepe. Ppa mez f he ne pundpize — ypylcpa zeycearca upey® pceoppendey.® 7 hupu peey pceoppendey. — and Seah pe hiy nu pundpien. hpele upe mez apeccan me- semlice upeyr yceppender pillan 3 anpealo. hu hip zercearca peaxap J epc paniap. Sonne Sep tama cymp. 3 of heopa pede — peoppap ere zeednipade. ypylce hi ponne peopdon to edycearce. hpeec hi Sonne ere biop. 7 eac hpzec hpezu’ anlice biod. rpilce he 4 beon.® ronpam® hi elce zeape peoppap co ebycearce :-
§ XI.” Ppepen Su zecr onzice } Sa uncpependan zepceapta — punodon co bionne on ecneyye rpa ilce ypa men. zp hi mihton. Ppeepep Su nu onzice rophpy  Fyp Fundize up. and pio eoppe of dune. fop hpy ip pec. bucon ron py Se Lod zerceop hip eand up. J hipe of dune. rop py fundiap’® ele zeyceare pidep ppipoye. pidep hiy eapd 3 hiy helo ypipoyc biop. and php } ce him pipep- peand bip. 7 unzebybe. 3 ungzelic. Ppa pa pcanap. foppam hi pnt poilpe zeeynde and heapdpe. biop eapfope co cobdzlenne. and eac uneape co yomne cumap. zif hi zedzlede™ peonpap. zp pu ponne enne yran cochyyc. ne pypp he nefpe xezadepod ppa he wp pay. Ac } paecep 7 pio lypc biop hpene hneyepan Ze- cynde. hi biop spipe eape to codzlenne. ac hi bip eft pona ewet- zedene. Det cyp Sonne ne mez nefpe peoppan codeled. Ic yede peah ou hpene ep. ‘fp ce nan puhec ny azenum pillum nolse foppeoppan. ac 1c eom nu mane!” ymbe ‘} zecynd. ponne ymbe pone pillan. foppam hi hpilum pillap on cpa.’® pu miho ~ pican'* be manezum pmzum f ‘} xecynd ip ypipe micel. 1p fop micel zecynd.  upum lichoman cymp eall hip meezen of Sam’? mete pe pe piczap. and Seah fepp ye mece uc puph done
a ers
A pomced
hn
dad ey
b Boet, lib. iii. prosa 11.—Ea etiam que inanimata esse, &e. 1 Cott. sepexS.  ? Cott. cpucey. 8 Cott. uzan sercepped. * Bod.
bepepo’. 5 Bod. upepey. ® Cott. reyppender. 7 Cott. hpusu. 8 Cott. bion. 9 Cott. popbem. 1 Bod. pundas. —"' Cott. codzelde. 12 Cott. ma. 8 Cott. cu. M4 pizan, deest in MS. Bod. 15 Cott.
peem.
Pes xz. BOETHIUS. 151
grows in twelve months, begins from the roots and so grows upwards into the trunk, and afterwards along the pith, and along the bark to the head; and afterwards through the boughs, until it springs out in leaves, and in blossoms, and in fruits? Why canst thou not understand, that every living _ thing is inwardly softest, and unbroken hardest ? Moreover, thou mayest observe how trees are outwardly clothed and covered with bark against the winter, and against the stark storms; and also against the heat of the sun in summer. Who can refrain from admiring such works of our Creator, and still more the Creator? And though we admire him, which of us can declare worthily our Oreator’s will and power? How his creatures grow and again decay, when the time thereot comes; and from their seed become again re- newed, as if they were then newly created? What they then again are, and also in some measure alone are, such they ever shall be, because they are every year newly created.
§ XI. Dost thou now understand that even inanimate crea- tures would desire to exist for ever, the same as men, if they could? Dost thou understand why fire tends upwards, and earth downwards? Wherefore is it, but because God made the station of one up, and of the other down? For every creature chiefly tends thither where its station and its health especially is, and flies from what is contrary, and disagreeing, and unlike to it. Stones, because they are of immovable and hard nature, are difficult to divide, and also with difficulty come together, when they are divided. If thou cleavest a stone, it never becomes united together as it before was. But water and air are of a somewhat softer nature. They are very easy to separate, but they are again soon together. The fire, indeed, cannot ever be divided. I just now said that nothing of its own will would perish; but I am speaking more about the nature than about the will, for these sometimes are dif- ferently inclined. Thou mayest know by many things that nature is very great. It is through mighty nature that to our body comes all its strength from the food which we eat, and yet the food goes out through the body. But neverthe-
sy Toat BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIV, . chorion, ac hy rpc! Seah 4 hiy cpefe zecymp on ewleepe zone. spa spa mon melo? yirc.? } melo* Suph’ cpypp ele pypel. J pa profopa® peonpap aryndped. spa eac upe zayc bip spipe pide= Fapende upum unpillum 7 uper unzepealder pop hip zecynde.— nalley? sop hip pillan. $ bip Sonne ponne pe ylapap. Ppaec Sa nevenu Sonne. j eac pa oppe zercearca. ma pilniap Sey pe hi pimiap fon zecynde Sonne op pillan. Ungecynbdelic 1p zlepe | puhce® } hic pilnize ppecenneyye odde dSeaper. ac peah maniz ping bip co pam zened f hic pillnap Sapa exppey. poppam? ye — pila bip Sonne sepenzpa Sonne } zecynd. hpilum bip ye pilla ypippa ponne } zecynd. hpilum per zecynd ofepeymp pone | pulan. spa nu ppenner dep. reo bid elcum men zecynbe. J hpilum*? Seah hipe bip roppepned hipe zecynder Suph pap monney pillan. eall yio lugu Sap hemed dinzey bip pop zecynde. © nallay’* op pillan :-
§ XII.¢ Be pam pu miht openhce pican $ re pceoppend eallna zeycearca herp fopzipen enne luyc 3 an xecynd eallum hiy zeyceapcum. } iy } li poldon 4 bion. zlcepe pubte ip ze- cynde f hic pillnize p hic a pie be pam-dzle Se hic hip zecynbde!? ~ healban mot 7 maz. Ne peaprc Su no tpeozan ymbe *p pe Su wp cpeodeyt. fp iy be pam xzerceaycum Se nane yaple nabbap. — wle pana zeycearca Se yaple herp. ze eac Sa pe nabbap. pillmap yimle co bionne. Da cpxp ic. Nu ic onzite } p ic xp ymbe cpeode. p ip ‘P vlc zerceapc pillnap yimle co bionne. * ip ypipe rpical!® on Sepe cydpunze. Da cpep he. Ppepen** pu Sonne onzice pec elec papa puhta Se him beon pencp. ‘Pp hit pencp — wecxzdpe beon zehal undzled. poppam zip hic codeled bip. ponne ne bip hic no hal.'© Da cpp ic. Deer ip yop. Da cpep he. €all pmz habbap peah enne pillan.'® p iy } hi poldon & bion. puph pone enne pilan hi pillmiap pey aney xoder!? Se & bip. } iy God.'8 Da epep ic. Spa hic ap spa pu peezyc.'® Da cpep he. Ppac pu miht openlice onzicon ‘ 1p fop mlice z05°° pinz p ealle zercearca y ealle?’ puhca pniap to habbenne.
© Boet. lib. iii. prosa 11.—Dedit enim providentia, &e.
1 Bod. pppec. .? Cott. meolo, 8 Cott. pert. * Cott. meolo. * Cott. bups. ® Cott. ryreba. 7 Cott. napeleey. 8 Bod. bid zlepe pyhce. 9% Cott. ropbem. ™ Bod. sehplcum. 1 Cott. naler. 1? Bod. hip secynd. 18 Cott. ppeocol. Bod. JSpeet. 1 Bod. untodeled bid hic sehal. '6 Bod, Dees ealle bing habba’d anne pillan. 17 Cott. sooder. 18 Cott.5005 ypa puyesyc, desuntin MS. Bod. % Cott. 5000. 21 Cott. ealpa,
ig Seiten OAKLA yy j § xu. BOETHIUS. FREE
less its savour and its virtue enters every vite BRA R ¥
one sifts meal: the meal runs through every hole, and the bran becomes separated. So also our spirit is very widely wandering, without our will, and without our power, by reason of its nature, not by reason of its will, that happens when we sleep. But cattle, and-also other creatures, seek that which they desire, more from nature than from will. It is unnatural to everything that it should desire danger or death, but still many a thing is so far compelled that it de- sires both of them; because the will is then stronger than the nature. Sometimes the will is more powerful than the nature, sometimes the nature overcomes the will. Thus lust does. It is natural to all men, and yet its nature is some- times denied to it through the man’s will. All the desire of cohabitation is from nature, not from will.
§ XII. By this thou mayest plainly know that the Maker of all things has imparted one desire and one nature to all his creatures, that is, that they would exist for ever. It is natural to everything that it should desire to exist for ever; so far as it can and may retain its nature. Thou needest not doubt concerning that which thou before didst question, that is, concerning the creatures which have no souls. Every one of the creatures which have souls, as well as those which have not, desires always to exist. Then said I: Now I un- derstand that about which I before doubted, that is, that every creature is desirous always to exist ; which is very clear from the propagation of them. Then said he: Dost thou then understand that every one of the things which perceives itself to exist, perceives itself to be together, whole and undivided ; because if it be divided, then it is not whole? Then said I: That is true. Then said he: All things, however, have one will, thatis, that they would exist for ever. Through this one will they desire the one good which for ever exists, that is God! Then said I: So it is as thou sayest. Then said he: Thou mayest then plainly perceive that it is on account of a thi.g, good in itself, that all creatures and all things desire
154 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXV. #)'
 ealle zercearca copleopon” ypa spa peecep. J nane yibbe. ne nane endebyponeyye ne heolbdon. ac ypipe unzepeclice® coylupen J co nauhze pupden. ypa spa pe ep yeedon* on piyye ilcan bee. — zip hi nzpbon znne Lod pe him eallum yoiopte. J pacode. and — pwddoe. Ac nu foppampe pe picon } an pealdend ip eallpa Singza. — pe yceolon® beon nede zeparan. yam pe pillan. yam pe nyllan. $ he pie ye hehyca hpof eallpa zoba. Da ymepcode® he pip min J cpep. Eala’ mm cild ea. hpeet pu eapt ypipe zereehiz. 3 1¢ yprpe — blipe. rop pmum® anbdzice. ypipe neah pu onzeate Sa p prht. J  ilce } pu ep yeedeyt P pu onzicon ne mihceyc. Sep pu pepe — nu zepara. Da cpep ic. Ppec pay pp 1c ep pede f ic nyyte.? Da cpp he. Du yeedeyre P Su nyyceyc!? lene xepcearce ende. — ac pice nu } ir zlcpe zercearce ende. pu yelp zp nembdeyc. iy z08.'! co pam fundiap ealle!? zeyceapca. nabbap hi nan z08 ofep ‘P co yecanne. ne hi nan puht ne mazon ne ufop ne utop pindan ;-
Da cpep ic. Ne mez nan mon soppe sezzan. ropSam! ic onzice j
~
CAPUT XXXV.!
§ I. DA he %a piy ypell apeed hapbde. Sa onzan he eft pmzan, ‘J puy cpeep. Spa hpa ypa pille oioplice ppipizan mid mnepeapdan Mode zycep pyhte. j nylle } hme exmz mon odse enix Sinz maze ameppan. onzinne Sonne yecan on mnan him yelfum, he zp ymbuton hime yohte. 3 poplece unnycce ymbhozan ypa — he’® yprpoyc meeze. 3} zexebdepize to pam anum. J Zeyecze Sonne hiy agnum’* Mode. pf hic mez pmbdan on mnan him ~ yelpum ealle Sa zob pe hic uve yecp. Sonne mez he ypipe pape onzican ealle } ygel jf} unnec. } he wp on hip Mode hapoe. — ypa ypeocole ypa pu miht Sa ypunnan zeyeon. J pu onzicye pm azen mzepanc. hic bip micele beophtpe 3 leohtpe Sonne yeo yunne. roppam nan heeizney Say lichoman. ne nan unpeap ne- mez eallunza ation of hir Mode pa pihcpiyneyye.! spa p he hipe hpec hpezu nabbe on hiy Mode. Seah pio ypepner pep lichoman. j pa unpeapay ofc abisezien ‘P Mod mid ofepzio- |
4 Boet. lib. iii. metrum 11.—Quisquis profundé mente, &e.
1 Cott. yopbeem. 2 Cott. Flopem. Bod. ungelice. 4 Cott. lange yxdon. 5 Cott. peulon. 6 Cott. pmeapcode. 7 Cott.€a. §® Bod. mino. ® Cott. neyye. 10 Cott. neyye. 1} ip 50, desunt in MS. Bod. 12 Cott. ealla. 8 Bod. hi. 4 Bod, anum. 15 Bod, un- pubtpipneyye.
t
| §1. BOETHIUS. 155
to possess 7#. Then said 1: No man can more truly say; for I know that all creatures would flow away like water, and keep no peace nor any order, but very confusedly dissolve, and come to naught, as we before said in this same book, if they had not one God who guided, and directed, and governed _ themall! But now, since we know that there is one governor
of all things, we must needs be convinced, whether we will, or whether we will not, that he is the highest roof of all goods. Then he smiled upon me, and said: O, my child, how truly happy art thou, and how truly glad am I, on ac- count of thine understanding! Thou hast very nearly dis- covered the truth ; and the same that thou before saidest thou couldest not understand, of that thou hast now been con- vinced. Then said 1: What was that, which I before said I knew not? Then said he: Thou saidst that thou knewest not the end of every creature. But know now, that that is the end of every creature, which thou thyself hast already named, that is, good. To this all creatures tend. They have no good besides this to seek, nor can they discover anything either above or bes ond it!
CHAPTER XXXV.
§ I. Wuen he had ended this discourse, then began he again to sing, and thus said: Whosoever is desirous to search deeply with inward mind after truth, and is unwilling that any man, or anything should mislead him, let him begin to seek within himself that which he before sought around him ; and let him dismiss vain anxieties as he best may, and resort to this alone, and say to his own mind that it may find within itself all the goods which it seeks externally. Then may he very soon discover all the evil and vanity which he before had in his mind, as plainly as thou canst behold the sun. And thou wilt know thine own mind, that it is far brighter and lighter than the sun. Jor no heaviness of the body, or any fault, can wholly take away from his mind wisdom, so that he have not some portion of it in his mind; though the sluggish- ness of the body and és imperfections often prepossess the mind with forgetfulness, and atfright it with the mist of error,
156 _ BOETHIUS. CHAP.
culneyye J mid pam zedpolmiyce bir foptio } hic ne meeze ypa beophte seman ypa hic polde. 7 Seah bip prmle copn Sepe yOpfeeycneyye seed on pape yaple punizenbde. da hyile pe pio yap J ye lichoma zebdepode beop.  copn yceal bion apeht mis aycunza Jj mid lane. zip hic zpopan yceal. Pu mez Sonne eng man pyhcpiylice 7 zepceadpiylice acpizan. zip he nan zpot yuht=— pyyneyye on him nefp. nip nan spa ypipe bedzled pyhtpiyneyye. he nan pyht andpypde nyce. zip mon acyrap. Foppam hic ip Jpipe pyhc ypell  Placo ye uppica sede. he cpp ypa hpa ppa unzemynoiz yie piubtpipneyye. zeceppe hme co hip zemynbe. Sonne pint he Sep pa pyhcpiyneyye zehyd5e mud pey hchoman heepizneyye J mid hip Moder zedpepredneyye 7 bipzunza :-
§ IL.° Da cpp ic. Ie eom xzepaga P f pay sod ypell } Placo yede. Pu ne mynezoderc! pu me eac nu cupa pepe ilcan yppece. perc pu cpepe f 1c hepde popzicen pf xecyndelic x06. ) ic on innan me yelrum herbde. pop Sey lchoman hepizneyye. ec odpum ceppe pu me seeders pet Su hepdeft onzicen ‘) me | yelrum puhce ‘ 1c hepbde eallunza foplonen } zecyndelice zod. — 1c onmnan me yelfum yceolbe habban. fop Sepe unze- — metlican unpocneyye Se ic hepbe foppam foplecenan pelan. — Da cpep he. Dap pu nu xemynbdeyc Sa pond pe ic pe seede on pepe fopman bec. donne mihc? Su be pam popdum zenogz ypeocole onzican ‘ } pu ep pederc f pu nyyyceyc.® Da cpap ic. Ppa pay p. hpeec pede ic fic nyyce:-* Da cpep he. Du yedeyc on pape ilcan bec. ‘} pu onzeate ‘} ce rod peolde piypey” middan zeapdey. ac pu peedeyc ‘P pu ne mihte pican humeva he hiy peolde, od5e hu he hiy peolde. Da cpzp ic. Ie xeman zenoz zeapa’ mm azen dyyiz. J ic hip paey ep Se xepara. peah ic hic Ee be yumum bdeele onzeate. 1c polbe zec hip mane et de Ze-
eopan. Da cpap he. Ne de nauht ep ne cpeode ce Lod peedde J peolde ealley middaneapder:- Da cpap ic. Ne me zeoc® nauht ne cpeop. ne nu nefpe ne cpeop.’ ic pe pille eac ‘ona yeczan be hpeem ic hit epeyc® onzeac. Ic onzeat pet Ser middanzeapd pey of pide manezum and miythcum® $mzum zezadepod. 4 pipe feeyce co yomne zelimed 4 zefanzod. neepen hi zezabepode 4 xepadode. spa pipeppeapda zeyrcearca. Sonne ne | pundon he nefpe ne zepophte ne eac zezadepode. 3 zip he hi
© Boet. lib. iii, prosa 12.—Tum ego, Platoni, inquam, &e.
1 Cott. myndzodeye. ® Cott. meahze. Cott. neyye. 4 Cott. nyyye. 5 Cott. Seape. 6 Cott. 51ec. 7 Cott. cpiod.  ® Bod. bam 1c wpeye. 9 Cott. muylicum.
PS a. BOETHIUS. 157
_ so that it cannot shine so brightly as it would. And never- theless, a grain of the seed of truth is ever dwelling in the
i soul, while the soul and the body are united. That grain
must be excited by inquiry and by instruction if it shall grow. How then can any man wisely and rationally inquire, if he has no particle of wisdom in him? No one is so en- - tirely destitute of wisdom, that he knows no right answer when any one inquires. Therefore it is a very true saying * that Plato the philosopher said. He said: Whosoever is forgetful of wisdom, let him have recourse to his mind; then will he there find the wisdom concealed by the heaviness of the body, and by the trouble and occupation of his mind.
§ II. Then said I: I am convinced that it was a true saying which Plato said. But hast thou not again twice re-
| minded me of the same argument? First thou saidst that I
had forgotten the natural good which I had within myself, through the heaviness of the body. At another time thou saidst to me, that thou hadst discovered that it seemed to myself that I had altogether lost the natural good which I should have within myself, through the immoderate uneasi- ness which I had on account of lost wealth. Then said he: Since thou now rememberest the words which I said to thee in the first book, thou mayest by those words clearly enough call to mind what thou before saidst thou wert ignorant of. Then said I: What was that? What did I say that I was ignorant of P Then said he: Thou saidst in that same book that thou knewest that God governed this middle-earth ; but
‘) thou saidst that thou couldest not discover in what manner
he governed it, or how he governed it. Then said I: I very well remember mine own folly, and I have already acknow- ledged it to thee. But though I know it in some measure, I would yet hear more concerning it from thee. Then said he: Thou formerly hadst not any doubt that God ruled and governed all the middle-earth. Then said I: Nor do I now doubt it, nor ever shall doubt it. I will, moreover, at once tell thee through what I at first comprehended it. I per- ceived that this middle-earth was composed of very many and various things, and very firmly cemented and joined together. If these, such contrary creatures, had not been united and re- duced to order by an all-powerful Being, then they would
158 BOETHIUS. _ CHAP, XXXV. |
ne bunbe! mid hiy unabindendlicum” pacencum. Sonne corlu hi ealle.® 3 nepon* no ypa zepiylice. ne spa endebypdlice. ne ypa zemeclice hiopa ycede. 3 hiopa pyne funden on ici ycopum. 3 on hiopa tibum. zip an unapendendlic Lod nee. peolbe pone z05 } f hey. f 1c hace Lod ypa ypa ealle sey ceapeas hazap 2 § til, f Da cpep he. Nu Su pec spa openlice onzicen heepyt. ne peapye ic nu nauht ypipe ymbe } ypmcan. f 1c de ma be ~ zobe pecce. foppem du eapt nu fulneah cumen mnon? Sa ceaytpe pepe yopan zerelpe. pe pu lanze wp ne mihtero anedian, Ac pic yculon spa Seah yecan pic ep myncon. Da cpp ic. Ppeciy $. Da cpep he. Pu ne cealdan pic ep p te zenyhe peepe® zerelpa. 3 Sa zerelpa peepon Lod. Da cpep ic. Spa hic ip spa pu yexyc. Da cpep he. Lod ne bepeapf naney oppey fulcumey. bucon hiy yelper. hip xzepcearca mid to peal- danne. Se’ ma pe he ep popfce co Sam peonce. foppam® zip he snizey pulcumery on enezum Sinzum bepoprce. Sonne neefde | he no yelp zenoz. Da cpzepic. Spa hic ip ypa pu ypexyc. Da cpp he. Duph® hime yelgne he zerceop ealle’® Sinz. 4 eallpa peale.!! Da cpep ic. Ne mez ic Sey opracan. Da cpp he. AXp pe pe heroon ‘f zepehc.’? } Lod pepe puph hme yelpne xod.'* Da cpep ic. Ic zeman pu ypayeedeyt. Da cpp he. Duph™* zoob Lob zeyceop elc!® pinz. poppam!® he pelc!” puph hme yelpne ealler Say pe pe ep cpeedon ‘f z0d pepe. 7 he 1p ana peapolears pealdend. 3 yceopa. 4 yceoppopep.'® poppem he pehc’® 4 pes eallum xzeyrcearcum. rpa spa x05"? yceopa”’ anum yerpe. Da cpp ic. Nu ic de anderce 1¢ heebbe funbden 6 bun. pep Sep 1C cop zereah ane lycle cynan.” ypa pet ic unzeape”® mihte ze- yeon** ypipe lycellne yerman leohtey, of piyum* Seorcpum. 7 Seah pu me cahceyt wp pa dSupu. ac ic hipe ne mbhte mane apebdian bucon } 1¢ hipe zpapode ymbucon P Se ic f lycle leoht zeyeah cpinchan., 1c Se yeede zerpypn ep on Siyye slcan bec.
f Boet. lib. iii. prosa 12.—Tum illa, cum hee, inquit, &e.
1 Cott. sebunde. 2% Cott. unanbmdendhcum. % Cott. ealla. ‘4 Bod. nepe. 5 Cott.inon. © Cott. pepen. 7 Cott. bon.  * Cott. ropbem. Cott. Dups. 1 Cott. eall. 1 Cott. pylz. 1% Cott. sepeahs. 1% Cott. 5000. Cott. Dups. 15 Cott. eal. 16 Cott. ropbeem. 17 Cott. pu. 8 Cott. pceoppobep 7 helma. © Cott. phe. 2 Cott. 500d. “1 Cott. propa. 22 Cott. cman. 23 Cott. uneabe. 4 Cott. 5epion. 25 Cott. bipypum.
§ x11. BOETHIUS. | 159
never have been formed nor joined together: and if he had not bound them with his indissoluble chains, then would they all be dissolved. ‘ Neither would their station and their course be formed so wisely, and so orderly and so suitably in their places, and in their times, if one unchangeable God did not
exist. Good, therefore, directed whatever is. This I call
~ God, as all creatures call zt.
§ III. Then said he: Since thou hast so clearly understood this, I need not now greatly labour in order that I may in- struct thee further concerning good; for thou art now almost _ come into the city of the true happiness, which thou some
- time ago couldest not discover. But we must nevertheless ' consider what we have already proposed. Then said 1: What | isthat? Then said he: Have we not before agreed that suffi- _— ciency was happiness, and happiness was God? ‘Then said I: So it is as thou sayest. Then said he: God needs no other help besides himself to govern his creatures with, any more than he before needed for the creation; for if he had need of any help in anything, then would he himself not have sufficiency. Then said I: So it is as thou sayest. Then said he: By himself he created all things, and governs all. Then said 1: I cannot deny it. Then said he: We have before shown to thee that God was of himself good. Then said I: I remember that thou so saidst. Then said he: Through good, God created everything, for he governs by himself all that which we before said was good: and he is the only stable governor, and pilot, and rudder; for he directs and rules all creatures as a good pilot steers a ship. Then said 1: Now I confess to thee that I have found a door, where I before saw only a little chink, so that I scarcely could see a very small ray of light in this darkness. And yet thou hadst before pointed out to me the door, but I could not ever the more discover it, though I groped for it whereabout I saw that little light twinkle. I said to thee some time ago in this same book, that I knew not what was the beginning of all
}
160 BOETHIUS. CHAP. =a
s # 1c nyyce! hpec ye ppuma pepe ealpa zercearca. Sa zepehcere pu me $? hic pey Lod.’ pa nyyce* 1c eft ymbe pone ende. ep — pu me ere zepehceye } $ pepe eac Lod.° Sa pede ic pe fic nyyce® hu he ealpa papa zercearca peolde.” ac Su hit me heepye | nu ypipe speocole zepehc.® rpelce? Su hebbe da Supu abpoden — pe ic ep ysohce. Da andypopode he me ¥ cpp. Ic pac H 1c pe zp mynezode!” Spe ican pppeece. J nu me pincp } pu ongzite rpa ypa lenz spa bec ymbe da ysoppeycneyye. ac ic polde zet pe eopian yume biyne.'! ac ypa speocole spa plo pey pe ic pe ep yeede. Da cpep ic. Ppzer ip pio!-
§ IV. Da cpep he. Ne mez nenne mon pey cpeozan” p ce eallpa zeyceayca aznum pillan’® God picrap ofep hi. 7 eap- modlice hiopa pillan pendap co liy pillan. Be pem ip ypipe ypeocol } ce Isod ezhpey pealc mid pem helman ¥ mid pem ycioppoppe hiy zobneyye. poppampe ealle!> zercearca zecynbde- lice hiopa aznum pillum funbdiap to cumanne to Zobde. spa ypa pe ofc wp yaedon on piyye ilcan bec, Da cpep ic. Ppi ne mez 1c pey tpeozan.'® roppaempe Loder anpealb nee full eadizhe. Zp pa zercearta hiopa unpilum him hepten.! 4 eft Sa ze-— yeearca nepon'* naney Soncey ne naney peoppreipey peoppe.!9 zip hi heopa unpillum hlapopde hepden. Da cpp he. Nip nan zercearc Se he tiohhize”’ } hio reyle pmnan pip hipe perppender pillan zp hio hipe zecynd*’ healdan pile. Da cpeep ic. Nir nan zercearc” pe pip hine peippender pillan pmne. bucon d5yy1x mon. ode ere Sa pipeppiepdan”® enzlar. Dacpeep he. pet pense pu. Zip wenezu zepceart ciohhode ‘} hio pip hy pillan pceolde pmnan. hpec hio mihce pip ypa mihtine ypa pe hme: zepehcne habbap. Da cpap ic. Ne mazon hi nauht Seah hi pillon. Da pundpode he 4 cpap. Niy nan puht pe meze ode pille ypa heagum** Lode pipcpepan. Da cpap ic. Ne pene ic emg puht pe Se pippmne. bucon ‘ pic ap yppeecon. Da smepcode” he and cpep. Vice zeape pp ip P hehyce zod. p hic eall ypa mihcighice
& Boet. lib. iii. prosa 12.—Cum Deus, inquit, omnia, &e,
1 Cott. nyrye. * Bod. hpet.  *% Bod. et Cott. 505. 4 Cott. nvrre. 5 Bod. et Cott. 50d. Cott. nyrre. 7 Cott. prolde. 8 Cott. sepeant. 9 Cott. ypylce. ' Cott. myndsuoe. 1 Cott. byrne. 7” Cott. cpiogan. 13 Cott. plum. 4 Cott. popbeembe. 15 Cott. ealla. 16 Cott. J/pone mes bw cplosan. 17 Bod. hepderz. 18 Cott. neepen. 19 Cott. pypbe. 20 Cott. tiohhie. 21 Cott. cynd. 2 Cott. secynd. 3 Cott. pibep- peapodan. 24 Cott. heaum, 25 Cott. ymeapcade.
7 § rv. BOETHIUS. 161
creatures. Thou didst then inform me that it was God. Then again I knew not concerning the end, until thou hadst told me that it was also God. Then said I to thee that I knew not how he governed all these creatures, but thou hast now explained it to me very clearly, as if thou hadst opened the door which I before sought. Then answered he me, and said: I know that I before reminded thee of this same argu- ment, and now methinks that thou understandest, as the later, so the better, concerning the truth. But I would yet show thee some example as manifest as that was which I be- fore mentioned to thee. Then said I: What is that ?
§ IV. Then said he: No man can doubt this, that by the proper consent of all creatures God reigns over them, and bends their will conformably to his will. By this it is very evident that God governs everything with the helm and with the rudder of his goodness. For all creatures naturally of their own will endeavour to come to good, as we have often before said in this same book. Then said I: Indeed I cannot doubt it, for God’s power would not be entirely perfect if creatures obeyed him against their will: and again the crea- tures would not be worthy of any thanks or any honour if they unwillingly obeyed their lord. Then said he: There is no creature which attempts to contend against its Maker’s will, if it desire to retain its nature. Then said I: There is no creature which contends against its Maker’s will except foolish man, or, again, the rebellious angels. Then said he: What thinkest thou? If any creature determined that it would contend against his will, what could it do against one so powerful as we have proved him? Then said I: They cannot do anything, though they will it. Then wondered he, and said: There is no being which can or will oppose so high aGod. Then said I: I do not imagine that there is anything which opposes, except what we before said. Then smiled he, and said: Be assured that that is the highest good, which so
162 ' -BOETHIUS. CHAP. |
macap. ¥ eall Simz zerceop. 7 eallum spa zepeclice pacap. 3 yap eapelice! bucon elcum zeyrpince hic eall rec. Da cpep ic. Vel me hcobe pu ep seeder. J piper me lyyc nu zet? bec. ac me~ yceamap nu # 1c hic zp ne onzeat. Da cpeep he. Ic pac® } pu _ zehepdere ofc peccan on ealbum leayum ypellum $ ce Lob — Sacupney yunu yceolde beon* ye hehyca Lod ofep oppe Lobday.? 7 he yceolde bion Sey heoyeney punu. J pcolde picpian on heo-— fenum."} pcolbon xizancay bion eoppan yuna. 7 pa rceoldon®— picpian ofep eoppan. 3 pa pceoldan™ hi beon® ypilce® hy paspon zeypyycpena beapn. roppempe? he sceolde beon heofoney punu. jy hi eoppan. Sa pceolbe Sam zizancum ofpincan fH he heefoe- hiepa!! pice. polbon Sa cobpecan Sone heofon undep him. da yceolde he yendan Sunpay. 3 lyzecu.”” 7 pmday. 3 copyppan eall hipa zepeope mid. yj li yelpe opplean. Dvllice’® learunza hi pophcon. 3 mihcton eape yeczan yopypell. zip him pa learpunza neepon!* ypecpan. 3 Seah ypipe zelic pryum. hi mihton seczan hpyle 5yyiz, Negpod ye zizanz pophte. ye Nefpod per Chuyer | yunu. Chur per Chamey punu. Cham! Noer. ye Neppod het | pypcean znne cop on Sam!6 relda pe Sennap!? hacce. 3 on pepe | Siode pe Deipa hatce. ypipe neah pape bypz Se mon nu het | Babilomia. ‘ hi 5y5on fon peem pinzum ‘!* hi polbon p.con hu | heah hic pepe co pem herone. yj hu dicke!® ye hepon pepe 7 hu feyc. odd8e hpaec pep open pepe. Ac hic zebypebde. ypa hic cynn”’ pay. $ ye zodcunda anpeald*! hi corcencce ep hi hic yullpypean moycon.”? 4 copeanp pone copp.”® 7 hiopa manizne** ofyloz. J hiopa sppeece codzlde on cpa” 4 hund eofontiz ze-— peoda.?° Spa zebypep wzlcum Sapa pe pimp pip pem zodcundan anpealde.” ne zepexp”® him nan peoppreipe on pam. ac pypp re zepanod pe hi wp harpoon :-
§ V2 Ac loca nuhpapep du pille f pic ziec ppypizen”® eepcep wnizne xerceadpiyneyye Fuppop. nu pic p apunden®*” habbap. p
h Boet. lib. iii. prosa 12.—Sed visne rationes ipsas, &e. 1 Cott. ebelice. 2 Cott. sec.  % Bod. }Speetic pac. * Cott. bion.
5 Cott, oSpu Lodu. § Cott. pceolden. 7 Cott. peeolden. ® Cott. 3 || bion. 9 Cott. rpelce. 9 Cott. popbem be. ™ Bod. hipe. 1 Cott. | lhigeta. 18 Cott. Dylhica. ™ Cott. naepen. 1S Bod. Ghaamey punu. | Lhaan. 16 Cott. bem, ” Cott. Nenyap. 18 Cott. be. 19 Cott. picce. 20 Cott. cyn. 21 Cott. pald. 22 Cott. moyzen. 23 Cott. cop. 24 Cott. monigne. 2% Cott. cu. 76 Cott. sebioda. 27 Cott.
anpalde. 78 Cott, sepyxd. 29 Bod. serpypisen. 39 Cott. punden.
oy. BOETHIUS. 163
powerfully does everything, and has created all things, and so widely over all extends, aud so easily without any labour dis- poses everything. Then said I: I'well liked what thou be- fore saidst, and this pleases me still better, but I am now ashamed that I did not know it before. Then said he: I wot thou hast often heard tell in old fables, that Jove, the son of Saturn, should be the highest god above other gods; and he should be the son of heaven, and should reign in the heavens ; and the giants should be the sons of earth, and should reign over the earth; and then they should be as if they were sisters’ children, for he should be the son of heaven, and they of earth. Then should it bethink the giants that he possessed their kingdom. Then were they desirous to break the heaven under him. Then should he send thunders, and lightnings, and winds, and therewith overturn all their work, and slay them. Such fictions they invented, and might easily have related true history, if the fictions had not been more agreeable to them, and yet very like to these. They might have related what folly Nimrod the giant wrought. Nimrod was the son of Cush; Cush was the son of Ham, and Ham of Noah. Nimrod gave order to erect a tower in the field which is called Shinar, and in the country which is called Dura, very near to the city which men now call Babylon. They did it for these reasons; that they wished to know how high it was to the heaven, and how thick the heaven was, and how firm, or what was over it. But it happened, as was fit, that the divine power dispersed them before they could complete it, and overthrew the tower, and slew many a one of them, and divided their speech into seventy-two languages. So happens it to every one of those who strive against the divine power. No honour accrues to them thereby, but that is diminished which they before had. § V. But see now whether thou art desirous that we still should seek after any argument further, now we have dis-
mM 2
1 164 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XEX¥.
pit ep rohton. 1c pene peah zip pic z1ec’ uncpe popd to yomne yleap. } pep ayppunze yum ypeapca up sopfeeycneyye Sapa pe pit zp ne zerapon. Da cpep ic. Do ypa spa du pille. Da cpep- he. Ppac nznne mon nu ne cpeop } Lod yy spa mihugz p he — meze pypcan p fhe pille. Da cpepic. Ne cpeop per nan? mon Se auhe pac. Da cpep he. Ppepep eniz mon pene®  auht pe — pey de Tod b0n ne meze. Da cpep ic. Ic hic pac  nauhe mip Sey Se he don ne meze. Da cpep he. Penysc pu hpepep he ~ mexze xniz* yfel 50n. Da cpep ic. Ic pac $ he ne mez. Da cpep he. Sop Su yexye. foppam hic ip nauhc. peep yfel auhe pepe ponne mihce® hic Lod pypcan. poppy hic ip nauht. Da cpep ic. Me pincp } pu me dpelize and dydepie.® ypa mon eld dep. lecyc me hidep 3 Sidep7 on ypa picne pubdu ‘*p ic ne mez ut apedian. foppem Su a ymbe yricce fehyc efc on Sa ilcan yppece. pe pu ep ppeece’ 7 poplecye epc Sa ep Su hi xeend0 habbe.® 3 yehyc on uncupe. py ic nav nu’? hpet pu pile. Me pincp } Su hpepyeyc ymbucon” sume punteplice 7 yeldcupe yppeece. ymbe pa anrealdneyye pape zodcundneyye. Ic zeman! ~ pu me ep pehcterc yum pundoplic ypell. be Sam pa du me pehceyc P hic pape eall an zerzelpa 3 P hehyce zod. 7 cpade f Sa zeyeelpa pepon’® on Sam" hehycan zode"? payee. J f hehyce — zod pepe Lod yelp.1® 3 he pape full elepe xerelpe. and pu cpeede ‘Pp ele zereeliz mon pepe Lod, 3 ec Su yeedeyc P Loder zodneyy)” 7 hip zepaehzneyy ¥ he yelp pet f pape’ eall an. 3 ponne pene ye hehyca zo0d. 3 co pam zobde ealle pa zepceapra fundiap Se heona zecynd healdap. y pmiap f hi? co cumen. 5 eac $u yedeyc ‘p ce Lod peolde”? eallpa hiy zepceapca mid pam?! yceoppoppe”” hip zodneyye.”* 3 eac yaedeyc ‘f ealle** xepcearca hiopa aznum pillum unzenedde him papon” undenpeodde.?® 4 nu on lac pu yeederc”’ -f ypel nape nauhc. 7 eall Sip pu xe- pehteyc co sope ypipe xerceadprylice bucon elepe leaype pee- delyan. Da cpep he. Du yeedeyt exp ‘f ic pe dpealde.** Ac me
1 Bod. pit sip set. 2 Cott. neenne. 3 Bod. pepe. * eng, deest
in MS. Bod. 5 Cott. meahte. 6 Cott. Spelle 3 Sydpe. 7 Cott. ledrz me hidpey ¥ pidper. 8 be bu ep yppece, desunt in MS. Bod. ® Cott. heabbe ' nu, deest in MS. Cott. ™ Cott. ymbe ucan. 1? Bod. senam. 13 Cott. peepen. Cott. bem. 1 Cott. s00de. 16 Cott.
5005 peepe Lod. 17 Cott. Zoodey. 18 Bod. ‘} } he peepe. 19 Cott. hy. 2 Cott. prolde. * Cott. bem. 7% Cott. proppodpe. 2% Cott. soodneyye. 24 Cott. ealla. 25 Cott. pepen, 6 Cott. undeppiodde, 7 Cott. pwder.  *8 Bod, ‘b be Spelode.
od
§ v. _ BOETHIUS. 165
covered what we before sought. I think, however, if we again strike our words together, there may spring out some spark of truth of those things which we have not yet ob- served. Then said I: Do as thou wilt. Then said he: No man doubts that God is so mighty that he is able to work whatsoever he will. Then said I: No man doubts this, who knows anything. Then said he: Does any man think that there is aught which God cannot do? Then said I: I know that there is nothing which he cannot do. Then said he: Dost thou imagine that he can do any evil? Then said I: I know that he cannot. Then said he: Thou sayest truly, for it is nothing. If evil were anything, then could God do it. Therefore it is nothing. Then said I: Methinks thou misleadest and deludest me, as any one does a child: thou leadest me hither and thither in so thick a wood that I cannot find the way out. For thou always, on account of some small matter, betakest thyself to the same argument that thou before wert speaking of, and again leavest that before thou hast ended it, and beginnest a fresh one. There- fore I know not what thou wouldest. Methinks thou re- volvest about some wonderful and extraordinary argument concerning the oneness of the divine nature. I remember that thou formerly madest to me a wonderful speech, wherein * thou toldest me that it was all one, happiness and the highest good: and saidst that the felicities were fixed in the highest good, and the highest good was God himself, and he was full of all happiness. And thou saidst that every happy man was a God! And again thou saidst, that God’s goodness, and his happiness, and himself, that this was all one, and was, consequently, the highest good; and to this good all crea- tures which retain their nature tend, and are desirous to cowe. And moreover thou saidst, that God governed all his creatures with the rudder of his goodness; and also saidst, that all creatures of their own will, uncompelled, were subject to him. And now, at last, thou saidst that evil was nothing! And all this thou hast proved for truth very
rationally, without any ambiguity. Then said he: Thou
166 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXV.
pmep yelpum } 1c pe nauhr ne dpelose.! ac ypaede de pipe lang © ypell 4 pundoplic sprpe® zerceadlice be Sam Lode de pic unc Be.
Fypn cozebedon. 7 nu zec® 1c teohhie f 1c Se hpee hpezu* uncuper zepecce be pam ican Lode. Pic ip gecynd Saepe Zod- cundneyye f hio mez beon unzemenzed pid oppe’ zercearra.
m ii iailnmds ol
buzon opeppa xepcearca pulrume. ypa ypa nan opep zepceare ne mez. ne mez nan opep® zey’ ceaye be him yelfum bion. ypa —
spa z1o’ Panmenibdey re pceop zed50de* and cpep. Se eelmibeiga?
Lod iy eallpa Smza peccend j he ana unapendendlic”® pumiap. 3
eallpa Sapa apendendlicpa!! pele. Foppaem on ne Seapye nauht Jpipe pundpizan Seah pe ypypian!? zypcep Sam™* pe pe onzunnon. ypa mid ley popda. spa mid ma. ypeepep pe hit zepeccan mazon.
Deah pe nu yculon manexa 3 miyclice!* biyna and biypell |
peccan. Seah hanzap upe {od ealne pez on pem pe pe eftep ypypiap. ne fo pe na! on Sa biyena!® and on biypell!? pop Sana leayana ypella lupan. ac roppampe!® pe polbon mid zebeacman!® 6a yopreeyeneyye. J polbon } hic yepbe cto nycce dam xe- hependum.”? Ic zemunde nu pihte”! per piyan Placoney lapa yuma. hu he cpep. }* ye mon ye pe biypell rezzan** polde. ne yeeolde fon on co ungzelic bispell Sepe ypppece de he Sonne yppecan polde. ac zeheop”* nu zepyldelice hp ic nu pppecan pille. Seah hic pe zefypn zp unnyc Suhce, hpapep pe ye ende aber lician pille :-
§ VI. Onzan 8a pmzan. 3 cpep. Geyeliz bip ye mon. pe mez zereon. Sone hluccpan epellm. Sey hehycan zodey. 3 oF him yelpum. apeoppan mez. da Sioptpo np Moder. Ve pculon zec of ealbum learum rpellum Se yum birpell peccan. Pic ze- lamp zo. ce an heappepe. pay on Sepe peode.*® pe Thpacia hacce. yio per on Cpeca pice. ye heappepe pay ypipe. unze- Fpezlice z0d."6 pay nama peey Opfeur. He haefbe an ypipe enh pip. plo peer hacen Eupydice. pa onzann’’ monn yeczan. be pam heappepe. he mihte heappian } ye puda”® pazode. 7 Sa pranay
1 Boet. lib. iii, metrum 12.—Felix qui potuit boni, &e. Cott. dpelle. 2 Cott. 4 rpibe. 3 Cott. s1ec. * Cott. hpusu.
5 Cott. oppa. § Cott. o'ppu. 7 s10, deest in MS. Cott. 8 Cott. m1dd0de. ® Cott. elmuihctesa. 0 Cott. unanpendendlhic. N Cott. et Bod. anpendendhiepa. 12 Cott. rpypien. 1% Cott. bem. 1 Cott,
miylica, 1% Cott. no. 16 Cott. byna. ™ Cott. on ba birpel. 18 Cott. yopbem be. Cott. becnan.  *° Bod. sehependon. =?! Cott. pyhte. 22 Cott. B ve. 23 Cott. yecyan. 4 Cott. sehep. 25 Cott. bode, 26 Cott. 5000. 27 Cott. ons5on. 2 Cott. pudu.
¢
ea vr. BOETHIUS, } 167
saidst just now that I deceived thee; but methinks that I have not deceived thee, but have stated to thee a very long and wonderful argument, very rationally, concerning that God to whom we some time ago prayed: and I still intend to teach thee something unknown concerning the same God. It is the nature of the divinity, to be able to exist unmixed
i _ with other beings, without the help of other beings, in such
a way as nothing else is capable of. No other thing is able to exist of itself. Thus formerly Parmenides the poet sung, and said: The Almighty God is ruler of all things, and he alone remains unchangeable, and governs all changeable things. Therefore thou needest not greatly wonder, when we are inquiring concerning what we have begun, whether we may prove it with fewer words, or with more. Though we should produce many and various examples and fables, yet our mind always hangs on that which we are inquiring after. We do not betake ourselves to examples and fables, for love of fictitious speeches, but because we desire therewith to point out the truth, and desire that it may be useful to the hearers. I called to mind just now some instructions of the wise Plato, how he said that the man who would relate a fable, should not choose a fable unlike the subject of his discourse. But hear now patiently what I shall further say, though it formerly appeared to thee unprofitable, whether the end may better please thee.
§ VI. He began then to sing, and said: Happy is the man who can behold the clear fountain of the highest good, and can put away from himself the darkness of his mind! We will now from old fables relate to thee astory. It happened for- merly that there was a harper in the country called Thrace, which was in Greece. The harper was inconceivably good. His name was Orpheus. He had a very excellent wife, who was called Hurydice. Then began men to say concerning the harper, that he could harp so that the wood moved, and the
168 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXV. |
hi peypebdon.! rop pam ypeze. 3 pild Seo.” peep poldon co ‘pHaiee. J yeandon.’ ypilce hi ctame* pepon. spa ycille. Seah hi men. odde hunbay. pip eodon. } hi hi na ne onreunebdon. da sedon — hi. } Sey heappepey pig. pceolde acpelan. 3 hipe yaple. mon — yceolde. ladon’ co helle. $a sceolbe re heappepe. peoppan ypa ~ yapiz. } he ne mihce. on zemonz oppum mannum bion. ae ceah co puda. j set on pem muntum. expep xe Swezey. Ze — nihzey. peop 7 heanpode. p pa puday bigodon. J Sa ea prodon. 7 nan heopt. ne onycunode. nenne leon. ne nan hapa. nenne — hund. ne nan neat. nyycte nenne andan. ne nenne exe. tO oppum. fop pepe miphce® Sey yoner. Da Sem heappepe pa — puhce. $ hine pa.’ naney Singer ne liyce on diye populde. Sa — pohce he. } he polde zerecan. helle Lodu.* 7 onzinnan hm. oleccan mid hiy heapepan. 3 biddan . hi him azearan.? efc hip pip. Da he pa S1i5ep com. pa yceolde cuman. pepe helle hund. onzean hime. per nama per Lepuepury.'° re rceolbe habban. ppio hearou. 4 onzan feezemian.!! mid hiy pceopte. 3 plezran™ pip hine. pop hy heappunza. Da pay Seep eac. pipe exeylhic zeac~- peapd. Say nama yceolde beon’ Capon. ye hepbe eac Spio hearbu. 3 ye’* pey ypipe opeald. Da onzan’’ de'® heappepe. hine biddan. } he hine zemundbypbe. pa hpile S¢ he pep pape. — y hime zerundne. ere panon bpohte. Sa zehet he him ‘. fop- pm he per oflyyc.'’ Sey seldbcupan roner. Da eode he puppop op he zemecce."* Sa zpaman Lybdena.!® Se roleiyce men. hacap — Papcay. da hi seczap. ‘) on nanum men. nycon nane ape. ac elcum menn. ppecan*® be hip xepyphtum. 8a hi yeezap. $ - pealban.?! eleey monnery pypde. Sa onzann”* he biddan. hiopa”? milcye.** pa ongunnon hi pepan mid him. Da eode he* fup- pop.”° 7 him upnon ealle hellpapan onzean. 4 ladon hine. to © hiopa cyninze.”” 7 onzunnon ealle rppecan mid him. 4 biddan Sey pe he bed. And f unycille hpeol. Se Ixion pey*® co xe- bunden, Laiuca®® cynmz pop hip yeylde.  opycod. pop hp heappunza. And Tancaluy ye cyning. Se on piyye populde. un-
1 Bod. hipsedon. 2 Cott. mldu diop. 3 Cott. pcondan. 4 Cott. cvamu. 5 Cott. ledan. 6 Cott. mepxbe. 7 ba, deest in MS. Cott. 8 Bod. sacu. ® Cott. aseyan,. 1 Bod. Apnepnuy. Cott. Lepuepue- pur. 11 Cott. onpesnian. 12 Bod. plersan. ' Cott. bion. '4 ye, deest in MS. Cott. 18 Cott. ongon. 16 Cott. ye. 17 Bod. onlyyz. 8 Cott. mezze. 19 Cott. mecctena.  % Cott. ppecen. 2! Cott. paloden. 22 Cott. ongon. Cott. heopa. 4 Cott. blyye. 25 Bod. hi. 28 Cott. yupbup. 27 Cott. cinninge. 28 pey, deest in MS. Bod. 29 Cott. Leuiza,
BS VI. BOETHIUS. re
stones stirred themselves at the sound, and wild beasts would run thereto, and stand as if they were tame; so still, that though men or hounds pursued them, they shunned them _ not. Then said they, that the harper’s wife should die, and {her soul should be led to hell. Then should the harper be- / come so sorrowful that he could not remain among other men, but frequented the wood, and sat on the mountains, both day and night, weeping and harping, so that the woods shook, and the rivers stood still, and no hart shunned any lion nor hare any hound; nor did cattle know any hatred, or any fear of others, for the pleasure of the sound. Then it seemed to the harper that nothing in this world pleased him. Then thought he that he would seek the gods of hell, and endeavour to allure them with his harp, and pray that they - would give him back his wife. When he came thither, then should there come towards him the dog of hell, whose name was Cerberus; he should have three heads, and began to wag his tail, and play with him for his harping. Then was there also a very horrible gatekeeper, whose name should be Charon. He had also three heads, and he was very old. Then began the harper to beseech him that he would protect him while he was there, and bring him thence again safe. Then did he promise that to him, because he was desirous of the unac- —eustomed sound. Then went he farther, until he met the fierce goddesses, whom the common people call Parcex, of whom they say, that they know no respect for any man, but punish every man according to his deeds; and of whom they say, that they control every man’s fortune. Then began he to implore their mercy. Then began they to weep with him. Then went he farther, and all the inhabitants of hell ran towards him, and led him to their king; and all began to speak with him, and to pray that which he prayed. And the restless wheel which Ixion the king of the Lapithe was bound to for his guilt; that stood still for his harping. And Tantalus the king, who in this world was immoderately
ou ae coll
170 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVI.
zemeclice zippe per. J him pep # ilce. vel fylizde.! pep zipepneyye. he zeycilde. And se Uulcop.? yceolde roplecan. $ he ne plac. pa ligne Tycier. Sey cyninzey.® pe hme ep. mid py — picnote. And eall hellpapa. picu zercilbon. pa hpile d¢ he be- — yopan pam. cyninze heappode. Da he pa lanze. 3 lanze heap- — pode. pa clipode.* re hellpapana cyninz. 3 cpap. Ucon? azipan. © peem eyne hir pip. foppam® he hi. herp zeeapnod.? mid hip heappunza. Bebead him 6a. daz he zeapa piyce.® f he? hme nzfpe. undenbeec ne beryape. sippan*’ he pononpeapd!! pepe. 7 yeede. zip he hine undenbzec beryape. ‘ he yceolde. poplecan pec pp. Ac da lupe: mon mez ypipe uneape. od5e na’” popbeodan. pila per 18 hpeec Opreur pa. leedde hiy pip mid him. oppe he com. on ‘ zemzpe. leohtey 4 peoycpo. pa eode f pig epcep him. da he fopp!* on  leoht com. Sa bereah he hme undepbee. pip Sey piper. pa lorede!> heo! him ona. Day learan" ypell. leepap zehpilcne man. papa pe pilnap. helle pioycpa.!* co phonne. 4 to pey yoper.!® zober hohze. co cumenne” he hme ne beyio. to hiy ealoum?! yrelum. ypa he hi ere. pa rullice pullppemme. ypa he hi ep d5yde. fonpam”? ypa hpa pa. mid pullon** pillan. hip Mod pent. co da yplum. pe he ep foplec. 7 hn Sonne fulppemep. and he him ponne. rullice liciap. 4 he hi nerpe. popletan ne pencp. ponne foplyyc he. eall hip eppan zod.** bucon he hic ere xebece:- Pep endad nu. seo Spidde boc Boetiey. and on-
zp yeo feoppe °-
CAPUT AXAVIS
§ I. DA ye Piydom %a pir leop ypipe lurcbeeplice 3 zerceab- piylice arunzen hayde. pa heepde ic pa zec*> hpaec”® hpeza?” ze. mynd on mmum Mode pepe unpotneyye pe ic zp hepde. J cpep. Eala Viydom. pu pe eapt boda and foppynel”s Sey popan leohcey. hu pundophe me Smep p ‘P pu me pecyc. foppaem ic
k Boet. lib. iv. prosa 1.—Hee cum Philosophia dignitate, &c.
1 Cott. pilsde. 2 Cott. ulzop. ® Bod. cynims. 4 Cott. cleopode. 5 Cott. puton. ° Cott. popbem. 7 Cott. seeapnad, 8 Cott. seape pyre. 9 he, deest in MS. Bod. et Cott. ” Bod. ropbam. 1 Cott. ponanpeapod. 12 oSbe na, desunt in MS. Bod. 18 Cott. peila per. 14 Cott. pupbum. 15 Cott, lopade. 16 Cott. hio. 7 leayan, deest in MS. Cott. 8 Cott. boycpo. Cott. yo ban. 20 Cott. cumanne. 21 Cott. ealdan. 22 Cott. yoppbaem. 23 Cott. rulle. 24 Cott. 5005. 25 Cott. siev. 26 Cott. hpyle. 27 Cott. hpusu. 78 Cott. yopepynel,
a BOETHIUS. PAL
} greedy, and whom that same vice of greediness followed
there ; he became quiet. And the vulture should cease, so _ that he tore not the liver of Tityus the king, which before | therewith tormented him. And all the punishments of the inhabitants of hell were suspended, whilst he harped before | the king. When he long and Jong had harped, then spoke
- the king of the inhabitants of hell, ‘and said: Let us give the man his wife, for he has earned her by his harping. He then commanded him that he should well observe that he never looked backwards after he departed thence, and said, if he looked backwards, that he should lose the woman. But }~ men can with great difficulty, if at all, restrain love! Well- away! what! Orpheus then led his wife with him till he _ came to the boundary of light and darkness. Then went his _-wife after him. When he came forth into the light, then looked he behind his back towards the woman. Then was she immediately lost to him. This fable teaches every man who desires to fly the darkness of hell, and to come to the light of the true good, that be look not about him to his old vices, so that he practise them again as fully as he did before. For whosoever with full will turns his mind to the vices, which he had before forsaken, and practises them, and they then fully please himyand he never thinks of forsaking them : then loses he all his former good, unless he again amend it! Here ends the third book of Boethius, and begins the fourth.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
§ I. Wuen Wisdom had very delightfully and wisely sung this lay, then had I as yet some little remembrance in my mind of the sorrow which I formerly had, and said: O Wisdom, thou who art the messenger and forerunner of the true light, how wonderful does that appear to me which thou
172 ; LOLTHIUVS. CHAP. XXXVI.
ongite pecce eall du me ep peahteye me peahte! God Suph pe. J 1c hic piyce? eac ep be sumum dele. ac me hepde pior unpotney ameppebne. f 1c hic hepbe mid ealle fopzicen. 7 # iy eac minpe unpotneyye ye meyca del. H 1c pundpize foph
ye zoda* Trod leave eniz yrel beon.* odde zp hic peah bion® yeyle. 7 he hic zeparian pile. ron hpy he hic Sonne® yona ne ppecce.’ Ppa pu mihc® Se yelp onzican } 1 co pundpanne,
5 €ac opep Snz.? me pincp zec!© mane pundop. F ip H te Syp!t
J unpihcpipney nu picrap ofep ealne!? middan ead. 7 re Piydom J eac oppe cpefcay nebbap nan lof ne nenne peopprerpe on Syye populde. ac liczap ropyepene ypa spa meox’® undep felcune. J yrele men on elcum lande ypimbdon nu pyppe. 3 da xodan habbap manizreald picu. Ppa mez ropbepan f he P ne poprze
J rpylepe pafre ne pundpize. p te zppe ypyle yrel zepyppan —
yeeolde undep Sep elmihzizan Loder anpealbe. nu pe picon he hic paz. 9 ele zod'* pile. Da cpep he. Lig hic ypa ip ypa Su yezyc. Sonne ip pac ezeylicne Sonne enz opep bpoxa. 7 7 endeleay pundop. dam! zelicoyc pe on sumer cynmzer hipede yen zyldenu acu 3 yylppenu!® roprepen. 3 ctpeopenu mon peoppize. Jc mip no!” ypa ypa pu penyc. ac zip Su eall p ze- munan pilt ‘} pe ep pppecon. mid Sey Loder fulcume. Se pe nu ymbe’* rppecap. Sonne miht!® pu onzican } pa xodan hop”? yimle pealdende. 7 pa ypelan nabbap nenne anpeald,*! 7 f 8a cpeercar ne biop nefpe buton hepimze. ne bucon edleane. ne
pa unpeapay nefpe ne biop unpicnodse. Ac pa xzodan” biop yumle zeyzelize. J pa ypelan unzeyzelize. Ic Se mez eopian Sep_
ypipe maneza biyna*’ pa Se mazon xecpymian.** co pam® + pu nayt hpec pu lenz propize. Ac ic Se pille nu ziet zetecan
Sone pex pe Se zelat cto pepe heorenlican bypiz. Se pu wp of.
come. yiddan pu onzicyc puph mme lape hpet pio pope xeyaelp bip. 3 hpaep hio bip. Ac 1c yeeal eepeyc Sm Mod xzeripepran.?®
hic meeze hit py ep up ahebban zp don hic fleozan onzimne —
on Sa heahneyye. hic meze hal 7 opropz fleozan co hip eapde, J poplecan elce papa zedpereoneyya Se hic nu ppopap.
1 Bod. mihze. 2 Cott. piyre. 8 Cott. S00da. * Cott. bion. 5 bion, deest in MS. Bod. 6 bonne, deest in MS. Cott. 7 Cott. ppece. 8 Cott. meaht. ® Cott. bines. 1 Cott. sles. 1 Cott. dyyi5. 12 Cott. eallne. '% Cott. mox. Cott. 5005. 4 Cott. bem. Cott. relppenu. 7 Cott. Nip hiz no. 18 Cott. embe. 19 Cott, meahc. 20 Cott. beoS. #2 Cott. anpald. 2 Cott. soodan. 3 Cott. bipena. “1 Bod. secpymigsan. 26 Cott. to bon. *6 Cott. Serebepan.
ay I. BOETHIUS. 173
declarest to me! Therefore I am persuaded that all which thou before saidst to me, God said to me through thee! And IJ also knew it before in some measure; but this sorrow had distracted me, so that I had entirely forgotten it. And this, besides, is the chief part of my unhappiness, that I ) wonder why the good God should suffer any evil to exist: - or, if ib yet must exist, and he wills to permit it, why he then does not speedily punish it. Indeed, thou mayest thyself know that this is to be wondered at. And also another thing seems to me even a greater wonder, that is, that folly _ and wickedness now reign over all the middle-earth, and wisdom and also other virtues have no praise nor any honour ' in this world, but le despised like dirt on a dunghill: and in every land wicked men are now honoured, and the good have _-manifold punishments. Who can forbear lamenting and won- dering at such a marvel, that ever such evil should take place under the government of Almighty God, when we know that he sees it, and wills all good. Then said he: If it is as thou sayest, then is this more dreadful than any other prodigy, and is endless wonder: most like to this, that in a king’s court gold and silver vessels should be despised, and men should esteem wooden ones. It is not as thou supposest. But if thou wilt call to mind all that which we have before said, then, with the help of God, concerning whom we are now speaking, thou wilt be able to understand that the good are always powerful, and the wicked have no power; and that virtues are never without praise or without reward, nor are vices ever unpunished; but the good are always happy, and the wicked unhappy. I can show thee very many examples of this which may encourage thee, so that thou mayest not know what thou any longer shouldest lament. But I will now teach thee the way which will lead thee to the heavenly city, whence thou formerly camest, since thou knowest through my instruction what the true happiness is, and where it is. But I must first give wings to thy mind, that it may the sooner raise itself up, before it begins to fly on high ; in order that it may, sound and untroubled, fly to its native country, and leave behind it every one of the troubles
174 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVI. |
piece him on nanan. hpeebdpeene. pocpize him on mine pez. 1¢ bio hiy lacpiop :-
§ II! Da ye See pa diy ppell anehc* heybde. pa onzann he ere yingzan J cpap. Ic habbe ypipe ypipce fepepa. H 1c mez yllozan ofep Sone hean hpof pey heofoney. Ac pep ic nu moyce pin Mod zeripeprzan mid pam fipepum. fH pu mihvero mid me fllozan. ponne miht Su ofeppion ealle par eopplican ping. Ing pu mihceyc Se lion ofep pam podope. Sonne mihtere pu xepion pa polenu undep pe. 3 mibteyc pe phozan ofep pam ype pe iy becpux pam podone J pepe lyfce. 7 mihteyt pe pepan mid pepe sunnau becpyx pam cunglum. j Sonne peoppan on— - pam pobdone. 7 yprddan cto pam cealdan ytioppan pe pe havap Sacupnery yeeoppa. ye iy eall 1y1z. ye pandpap ofep oppum preop- pum urop Sonne zniz opep cunzol. yrSson pu Sonne fopp ofep | pone biyz aherod. Sonne biyc pu bufan Sam ypifcan podone. 7 letyc ponne behinbdan pe pone hehycan heoron. piddan du muh habban dmne del Sey popan leohtey. peep picpap an cyning ye hep anpeald eallpa oppa cynmga. se zemetzap Sone bmidel. 7 ‘) pealdlepep ealley ymbhpeopfrer heofener 4 eoppan. ye an _ dema if zerceppiz Jy beophc. ye pciopp pam hpaedpeene eallpa xerceapca, Ac zip pu eppe cymyt on pone pez j to Szepe prope pe Su nu zeoc fopzicen hagyc. ponne pilc pu cpepan. Diy 1p min puhc epel. hionan ic pay ep cumen. j hionon ic par acenned. hep ic pille nu ypcandan perce. nelle ic nu nefpe hionon. Ic pat peah zip Se eppe zepypp P pu pilc odSe moyt efc Fundian papa piorcpa Siyre populde. ponne zephyc Su nu pa unpihepiyan eyninza j ealle pa ofepmodan pican bion ypipe unmihtize 7 ypipe eapme ppeccan. pa ilcan Se piy eapme fole nu heandoye ondpec ;-
§ IL1.™ Da cpep ic.* Eala Viybom. micel ip 7 pundophe pu zehecyc. J 1¢ eac nauht ne cpeoxze Sac Su hic Mmexe ae leycan. Ac ic pe halyrze } pu me no lenz ne lecve.* ac zetae me pone pez. foppem pu mihc onzican ‘} me lyre peer pexer. Da cpep he. Du reeale eperc onzican ‘Pp pa xod5an habbap rymle anpeald. and pa yrelan neeppe nenne. ne nenne cpefe. fop- pam hiopa nan ne onzit f ce. x0d° 3 yfel biop pimle zepmnan.
4
1 Boet. lib. iv. metrum 1.—Sunt etenim penne volucres, &e.
m Boet. lib. iv. prosa 2.—Tum ego, Papx, inquam, &c.
1 Cott. ladpeop. 2 Cott. apeahz. 8 1c, deest in MS. Cott. * Bod. lade. 5 Cott. 500d.
aes il. ITI.’ BOETHIUS. 175
which it now endures. Let it sit in my chariot, and be con- ducted in my path; I will be its guide.
§ II. When Wisdom had ended this speech, then began he again to sing, and said: I have very swift wings, so that I can fly over the high roof of heaven. But I must furnish thy mind with wings, that thou mayest fly with me: then mayest thou look down upon all these earthly things. When thou art able to fly over the sky, thou mayest behold the clouds under thee, and mayest fly over the fire which is between the sky and the air; and mayest go with the sun between the stars, and then be in the sky, and afterwards near the cold
¢ star which we call Saturn’s star. It is all icy. It wanders
above other stars, higher than any other heavenly body. After thou art elevated far above it, then wilt thou be above the swift sky, and wilt leave behind thee the highest heaven. After this thou mayest have thy portion of the true light. There reigns one king who has power over all other kings. He regulates the bridle and the rein of all the circuit of heaven and earth. The only judge is steadfast and bright. He directs the chariot of all creatures. But if thou ever comest into the path, and to the place which thou hast now forgotten, then wilt thou say: This is my proper country: hence I formerly came, and hence was I born: here I will now stand fast; I will never go hence! But, I wot, if it ever happen to thee that thou wilt or must again explore the darkness of this world, then wilt thou observe unjust kings, and all the proud rich, to be very feeble, and very wretched exiles: the same whom this miserable people now most dreads!
§ III. Then said I: O Wisdom, great is that and won- derful which thou dost promise, and I, moreover, doubt not that thou canst perform it! But I beseech thee that thou wouldest not any longer hinder me, but teach me the way, for thou mayest perceive that I am desirous of the way. Then said he: Thou must first understand that the good always have power, and the wicked never have any, nor any ability ; for none of them comprehends that good and evil are always
176 BOETHIUS.
zip pa zodan' Sonne yimle habbap anpeald.? ponne nabbap pa yrelan neeppe nenne. foppam® f z0b and f yrel pine ypipe un yamppzde. Ac ic de polbe zec* be ezppum dapa hper hpeza® ypeocolop zepeccan. $ Su maze py bec zelypan® de ic pe oppe_ hpile pecce be pam’ oppum. oppe hpile be pam® odpum. Tpa mz yindon pe ewlcer monner mzepanc® cofundap. $ ip pons pilla 7 anpeald.!° zip Sonne hpem papa cpeza hpepepey!! pana bip. Sonne ne mz he mid pam!” oppum nan puht sypemman.> ~ foppam} nan nyle onzmnan } } he nele.!® bucon he nede!® ycyle. 7 peah he eall pille. he ne mez. zip he pay pmzey an-— peald!” neerp. be peem pu mihc!® ypeocole onzican. xif pu enine!? mon zeyihyc pillmian®® per pe he nefp. pam bip anpeald pana.”! Da cpep ic. Det ip yop. ne mez ic pey opracan. Da cpep he. Ing pu ponne hpene® zeythyc” pe mez don } f he don pile. ne pe Sonne nauht ne tpeop p ye heebbe anpeald. Da cpep ic. Ne tpeop me py nauht. Da cpep he. AZle mom bip pealdend peer pe he pelc. nerp he nanne anpeald py pe he ne pelc. Da cpp ic. Dey ic eom zepafa. Dacpep he. Ppeepep pu nu zec"* meeze xemunan f 1c pe ep pehce.” f pay ‘f ce eleer monney inzepanc pilnap co pepe opan zerelpe to cumenne.*6 Seah he unzelice hiopa eapnize.” Da cpap ic. Det ic zeman. zenoz ypeotole me iy P zered. Da cpep he. Gemunyc pu f 1¢ pe wp”? yaede f hic pepe eall an zo” 9 zeyelpa. ye pe xeralpa yecd. he yecp z0d.°° Da cpeep ic. Ic habbe zenoz perce on xe- mynte. Da cpep he. Ealle men ze xzobe*! xe yrele plmiap co cumanne to zode.”” peah hi hip miychice*® pillnizen.** Da cpap 1c. Deer iy sop } pu yexzyc. Da cpep he. Lenox ypeotol ip $ ce fon py pt zode men zobe.** Se hi zob** xemecap. Da cpap ic. Trenoz open hic iy. Da cpep he. Da zodan*’ bezicap py z05** hi pillmiap. Da cpepic. Spame pmecp. Da cpep he. Da
1 Cott. Soodan. 2 Cott. anpald. 5 Cott. popbeem. ‘ Cott. s1ez. 5 Cott. hpusu. © Cott. seleran. 7 Cott. bem. § Cott. bem. 9 Cott. ingebonec. 10 Cott. anpald. 1 Cott. hpe'Sper. 12 Cott. bem. 18 Cott. yullypemman.  '“ Cott. popbem. 1 Cott. nyle. 1 Bod. ne. 17 Cott. anpald. 18 Cott. meahc. 1 Cott. enigne. * Cott. pilmian. 21 Cott. an palder pana. 22 Cott. hpone. —*8 Bod. serthe. 4 Cott. piec. 25 Cott. peahte. 26 Cott. cumanne. 27 Cott. eapnien. 28 wp, deest in MS. Cott. 29 Cott. 5000. 30 Cott. 5008. 31 Cott. 5000. 2 Cott. 500d. 33 Cott. muylice. 5* Cott. pilmen. 35 Cott, 00de. 36 Bod. 50de, 57 Cott. 5000an. 88 Cott. 5000.
§ rn. BOETHIUS. — Lie
enemies. If, therefore, the good always have power, then the wicked never have any, because good and evil are very incon- gruous. But I would inform thee somewhat more distinctly concerning each of them, that thou mayest the better believe what I shall sometimes tell thee concerning the one, and some- times concerning the other. There are two things which every man’s intention requires, that is, will and power. If, there- fore, there is to any man a deficiency of either of the two, he cannot with the other effect anything. For no one will un- dertake what he is unwilling to do, unless he needs must: and though he fully wills he cannot perform it, if he has not power of that thing. Hence thou mayest clearly know, when thou seest any man desirous of that which he has not, that to him power is wanting. Then said I: That is true: I cannot deny it. Then said he: But if thou seest any one who can do what he desires to do, then there is no doubt to thee that he has power. Then said I: I have no doubt of it. Then said he: Every man is powerful so far as he exercises power: he has no power when he does not exercise power. Then said I: Of that I am convinced. Then said he: Canst thou now call to mind what I before told thee, that is, that the mind of every man desires to arrive at the true happiness, though they pursue it differently ? Then said I: That I remember; it is clearly enough proved tome. Then said he: Dost thou remember that I before said tc thee, that it was all one, good and happi- ness? He who seeks happiness seeks good. Then said I: T have it sufficiently fixed in my memory. Then said he: All men, both good and evil, desire to come to good, though they desire it variously. Then said I: That is true which thou sayest. Then said he: It is sufficiently evident that good men are good because they find good. Then said I: It is evident enough. Then said he: The good obtain the good which they desire. Then said I: So methinks. Then said he: The wicked would not be wicked if they found the good
178 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVI.
yrelan neepon na! yrele. zip Hii zemecan f x05? H hi pilmiap. yop py hi pmc yrele pe® hi hic ne zemecap.* 7 op py hi hic ne zemecap.® de hi hic on piht ne yecap. Da cpap ic. Spa hic ip ypa Su yexyc. Da cpep he. Foppem hic iy nan cpeo p pa zodan® biop yimle paldende. 3 pa ypelan nabbap neenne anpeald.7 — pop py 8a zodan* f z0d on puhz yecap. 2 da yrelan on poh. Da cpep ic. Se pe penp } pir sop ne pie.” Sonne ne zelerp!? he- naney yopey :- 3.
§ IV." Da cpap he. Ppepep pense pu nu. zip tpexen men undiap co anpe ycope. 3 habbap emn micelne pillan co to | cumenne. ¥ opep hep hip poca anpeald } he mez zan pep he — pile!! ypa ypa eallum monnum zecynbe pepe } hi mihzon.!? — opep neerp hiy foca xepeald ) he maze zan. 7 pilnap peah co fapenne.!3 4 onzinp cpypan!* on Sone ican pez. hpapep Sapa tpezpal® pmep pe mihtizna.!® Da cpep ic. Nir p xelic. ye bip mihtizna ye Se xep. ponne ye pe cpypp.'’ fop- pam!® he mez cuman ep piden!® Se he pile Sonne ye opep. yee” eller du pille. } pac wle man.” Da cpep he. Spa — xelice”? beop*® pam zobum** 7 Sam? ypelum. axpep hiopa*® punap pop zecynde pec he cume co pam hehycan zode. Ac ye zoba mez cuman pydep he pilnap. foppam he hip on phe ~ pilnap. J ye ygela ne mez cuman co pam”? pe he pilnap. fop-— pam he hic on poh” yecp. Ic naz peah pe eller hpeet Smee. Da — cpeep ic. Ne pmcp me nauht oppey of pum ypellum. Da cpap he. Genoz pyhze pu hic onzicyc. 3 p ip eac cacn Simne heele.* — ypa ypa leeca zepuna ip } he cpepap Sonne hio seocne*’ mon xe+ | ylop. zep he hpelc®* unpeezhc*? caen him on xereop. me pmep nu pm zecynd 7 Sim xzepuna fle ypipe ypiplce pip Sem oyy1ze f+
MN V.° Ic habbe nu onzicen } Su eapct xeapo co onzivanne mine lane.** poppy ic pe polde xezaedeprzan manizu ypell 7
» Boet. lib. iv. prosa 2.—Rursus inquit: Si duo sint, &e.
© Boet. lib, iv. prosa 2.—Sed quoniam te ad intelligendum, &e,
1 Cott. no. 2 Cott. 500. 8 Bod. *p. 4 Cott. mecad. 5 Cott. mecad. 6 Cott. soodan. 7 Cott. anpald. 8 Cott. soodan. 9 Cott. 8e be ne pend ‘ hip po pie. Cott. selyyS. 1 beep he pile, desunt in MS. Bod. 1% Cott. meahcen. 1 Cott. repanne. 4 Cott. cpeopan. 15 Cott. tpesa. 1° Cott. mehzigpa. 17 Cott. cmepd. 8 Cott. ropbeem. 19 Cott. bydep. 29 Cott. pasa. 21 Cott. mon. 2? Cott.1lce. 28 Cott. brs. 24 Cott. so0odum. 25 Cott. bem. °° Cott. heopa. 27 Cott. peem. 28 Cott. pos. 29 Cott. heelo. 30 Cott. he piocne. 31 Cott, hi hpuile. 32 Cott. unsepeshic. %8 Cott. mina lapa.
 §iv.v. BOETHIUS. 179
which they desire; but they are wicked because they do not find it, and they do not find it because they do not seek it rightly. Then said I: So it is as thou sayest. Then said he: Therefore there is no doubt that the good are always powerful, and the wicked have no power, because the good seek good rightly, and the wicked wrongly. Then said I: He who thinks that this is not true, then believes he no truth.
§ IV. Then said he: Whether dost thou think ? if two men are going to one place, and have equally great desire to arrive there, and one has the use of his feet, so that he may go where he will, as it were natural to all men that they could; and the other has not the use of lis feet that he can go, and yet is desirous to go, and begins to creep the same way, whether of
1 the two dost thou think the more powerful? Then said I:
There is no comparison. He is more powerful who goes than he who creeps, because he can more easily come whither he will than the other. Say what else thou wilt, every man knows that. Then said he: In like manner it is with the good and with the wicked. Each of them desires naturally that he may come to the highest good. But the good is able to come whither he desires, because he desires it rightly, and the wicked cannot come to that which he desires, because he seeks it wrongly. I know not but thou mayest think dif- ferently. Then said I: I do not think at all differently from what thou sayest. Then said he: Very rightly thou under- ‘standest it: and that is also a token of thy health; as it is the custom of physicians to say, when they see a sick man, if they perceive in him any healthy token. Methinks now that thy nature and thy habit contends very powerfully against error.
§ V. I have now found that thou art prompt to understand my doctrine: therefore I am desirous to collect for thee many
N2
180 BOETHIDS. CHAP. XXXVI.
maneza birna. be pam Su’ mihveyc! py ed onzican hpet 1¢ yeczan pile. Onzic nu hu unmihzze pa ypelan men beop.”
nu hi ne mazon cuman pisen. Sidep Sa unzepiccizan zepceapta — pumap® co co cumenne.* 4 hu micle unmihzezpan® hi pepon.
j
zip hi hip nan zecynde nefdon.° beheald nu mid hu hepizpe ©
pacentan dyyizey J unzeyelpa hi ymz zebundene. Ppzer pa cylo.
ponne li ruppum zan mazon. ¥ eac da ealdan ceoplay. Sa hpile ©
pe hi zan mazon. pilmiap sumer peoppyerpes J sumpe meppe.
Da cild pidap on heopa ycapum. 7 manizrealdne plezan pleziap. — Sep hi onhypiap’ ealbum monnum. 7 8a dSyrezan nan puht — nyllap onzmnan. dey pe hi® him appep meezen copenan odde — loger 0d5e leana. ac Sop } pypre iy. rpnap hiden 7 Sidep* Spohi- | zende undep pam hpofe eallpa zercearca. J P ce pa unzepitte- —
zan!° zeyceayta piton. } nycon pa dyfezan men. poppy pmt da cpercay becpan Sonne $a unpeapay. foppam Se ele mon yseeal bion zepara. yam he pille yam he nylle. } ye pe anpaldezorc!! 2 mez becuman to pam hehycan hpore eallpa xefcearca. “p ip
od. 6am nip nan puhc bufan. ne nan puht benypan. ne
ymburan. ac ealle Smz pmc bmnan him on hip anpealte. fe-
Lod iy ypipe co lupienne. Pu ne cpede pu ep f ye pepe an
yepe mihcizoyc ye pe mihte zan. Seah he polde. op piyye eoppan
ende. ypa pet ce nan del Sipe eoppan ofep ‘p neepe. p ilce pu miuht zepencan be Lobe. ypa ypa pe ep cpeedon. ‘ ye bip mihti- zoyc. pe co him cumon mez. foppam he no hpisep ofep } cumon ne mez :+
§ V1 Be eallum piyum pacum pu miht onzican ‘f pa zodan |
biop yimle mihtize. 3 yrelan biop elcey mezener J elcer cpepcey bedalde. hpy penyc pu Sonne p hi roplecan Sa cpeefeey J Folzian Sam unpeapum. Ic pene Seah P pu pille peczan hic ple pop. Syyize ‘P hi hi ne cunnon cocnapan. Ac hpeec pexpc Su Sonne ‘Pp sie fop cuppe. Sonne ysio ungeyrceadpipney. hpi sepapiap hip hi bios dypize. hpy nyllad hi ppvpizan eecep epeepoum 7 weep iydome. Ie pac peah } yponzopney hi ofpic 7 hi mid sleppe ofepcymp. 3 zicpunz hi ablenc. pit cpaedon Seah ep p nan puhe nape pypre ponne unzerceadpiyner. Ac hpeec pillap pe nu” cpepan. zip Sa xerceadpiyan habbap unpeapay 7 nillap
P Boet. lib. iv. prosa 2.—Ex quo fit, quod huic objacet, &e.
1 Cott. meahte. 2 Cott. bioS. 3 Bod. pllad.  +* Cott. cumanne. ® Bod. unsenuhtpan. ® Cott. nepden, 7 Cott. hypia’s. 8 Bod. et Cott. hiz. © Cott. hidper pidper. Y Cott. Sepizaisan. 11 Bod, anpealde hesoy. 2 Cott. pic nu pit.
wr cenit
§ vr. BOETHIUS. 181
arguments and many examples, so that thou mayest the more easily understand what I am about to say. Observe now, how feeble wicked men are, when they cannot come thither where even irrational creatures are desirous to come; and how much more feeble they would be if they had no natural inclination to it. Behold with how heavy a chain of folly and unhappi- ness they are bound! Even children, when they can just go, and also old men, as long as they can go, are desirous of some honour and some praise. Children ride on their sticks, and play at various sorts of play, wherein they imitate old men. But the unwise are not willing to attempt anything from which they may expect to themselves praise or rewards. But they do what 1s worse; they run erring hither and thither under the roof of all things; and that which irrational crea- tures know, unwise men do not know. Therefore the virtues are better than the vices. For every man must be convinced, whether he will, or whether he will not, that he is the most powerful who is able to arrive at the highest roof of all things, that is God; whom nothing is above, nor anything beneath, nor about, but all things are in him, in his power. God is greatly to be loved. Didst thou not before say, that he was most powerful in walking who could go, if he would, to the end of this earth, so that no part of tlis earth were beyond it? . The same thou mayest conceive with regard to God, as we before said, that he is most powerful who can come to him, because he nowhere beyond that can come!
VI. From all these arguments thou mayest understand that the good are always powerful, and the wicked are desti- tute of all power and all ability. Why, then, dost thou think they forsake virtues and follow vices? But I suppose thou wilt say, that it is through ignorance that they are not able to distinguish them. But what wilt thou then say is worse than this want of reason? Why do they allow themselves to be ignorant? Why will they not inquire after virtues and after wisdom? But I know that drowsiness oppresses them, and overcomes them with sloth, and covetousness blinds them. We have before said, that nothing was worse than ignorance. - But what shall we now say, if the intelligent have vices,.and
182 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVI. _
ypypian! ecep Piybome 4 xycep cpercum. Ic pac Seah $ pu —
pil cpepan } ppeenney 4 unzemecpeeycney hi ofpiece. Ac hpec yy Sonne unyrpenzpe? Sonne ye mon pe biod® cto unzemeclice ofepypiped mid pam* cedpan fleyce. bucon he eft zerpice J pimne pip pa unpeapay ypa he ypipoyc meeze. Ac hpec pile du ponne cpepan. zip hpa puhc nylle pip pmnan. ac mid fullan® plan foplec ele zod 4 pulzep pam yrele. 3 bip Seah zepcead- pire. Ic yeeze pie unmihciz 7 eac ealley nauhc. roppam spa hpa pa Sone zemeenan Z0d eallpa zoda foplec. bucon tpeonne bip ye nauhc. Ac ypa hpa ypa pillnap } he cpzepriz pie. he pillnap he piy yie.® ypa hpa ypa ponne cperciz bip. he bip piy. 3 ye Se py bip. he bip zo0.7 re pe Sonne xod bip. ye bip xerelhz. 7 ye Se zeyeliz bip. ye bip eadiz. 4 ye pe eatiz bip. re bip Lobd.® be pam® dele Se pe ep pehcon’’ on piyye lean bee. Ac ic pene nu hponne } dyyize men pillon pundpian peey pe 1c ap peede. H pay ‘ ce yfele men nepon"! nauhcay. foppempe papa iy ma Sonne papa oppa. Ac Seah hi hiy nu neyzpe ne xzelepan. peah 1c iy ypa. ne mazon pe nefpe Zepeccan pone yrelan mon clenne J un- cpipealone. pe’? ma pe pe mazon hatan odde habban deadne mon fop cpucene. ne bip re cpuca Sonne nyccpa pe ye deada. zip him hiy yrel ne hpeopp. Ac ye pe ungepeclice hogap. 3 hip zecynd nyle healdan. ne bip se nauhe:-
§ VI1.4 Ic pene Seah } pu pille cpepan } hic ne pie ealler ypa zelic. p ye ypela maze don veel Seah he zod ne meze. J ye beada ne maze naupep don. ac ic Se yecxe pet ye anpeald’® papa yflena ne cymp of nanum cpeerce. ac of unpeapum. ac TE pa yrelan yymle zode"* peepon.” Sonne ne Sydon hi nan yrel. ne bip'® } nane mihva ;f mon meze yrel don. act’ beop un- muhva. zig ‘p yop ap ‘P pe ep xerypn pehtan’® } p yfel nauhe ne yie. ponne ne pypep se nauhc. ye Se yfel pypcp. Da cpeep ic. Lenoz yop ‘pay P pu yezyc.!® Da cpp he. Pu ne pehton*? pe ep ‘} nan puhc nepe mihtizna Sonne  hehyce z0d.7! Da epeep ic. Spa hic iy ypa Su yexzyc.?? Da cpeep he. Ne hic peah ne mez
4 Boet. lib. iv. prosa 2.—Sed possunt, inquies, mali, &e.
1 Bod. ppypisan. 2 Cott. unptpenspa. 3 Cott. bi. 4 Cott. peem. 5 Cott. yulle. © Bod. pipyprge. 7 Cott. S000. 8 Bod. 500. 9 Cott. peom. Cott. peahczon. 1 Cott. neepen. 2 Cott. bon. 13 Cott. anpald. “4 Cott. s00de. 18 Cott. pepen. 16 Cott. bod. 17 Bod. 4. 8 Cott. peahton. 19 Cott. pesye. 20 Cott. peahton. 21 Cott, 5000, 22 Cott. passyo.
Hovey! fdr wo fee Hh anny
oath
§ § vit. BOETHIUS. 1838
will not inquire after wisdom and after virtues? I know,
however, that thou wilt say that luxury and intemperance
oppress them. But what is weaker than the man who is utterly overcome by the frail flesh, unless he afterwards de- sist, and contend against vices as he best may? But what | wilt thou say if any creature will not contend against them, - but with full will forsakes all good, and does evil, and is nevertheless intelligent ? I say that he is feeble, and more- over altogether nothing! For whosoever forsakes the uni- versal good of all goods, without doubt he is nothing. But whosoever desires that he may be virtuous, desires that he may be wise. Whosoever, then, is virtuous is wise: and he who is wise is good; he then who is good is happy; and he who is happy 18 blessed; and he who is blessed is a god, so
- far as we have before mentioned in this same book. But I
rather think that foolish men will wonder at that which I- have just now said, that is, that wicked men were nothing ; because there is a greater number of them than of the others. But though they never believe it, yet it is so. We can never reckon the wicked man pure and sincere, any more than we ean call or esteem g dead man living. Nor indeed is the living better than the dead, if he repent not of his evil. But he who lives recklessly, and will not preserve his nature, is not he nothing P
§ VII. I think, however, thou wilt say that this is not altogether so likely, because the wicked can do evil, though he cannot do good, and the dead can do neither. But I say to thee that the power of the wicked does not come from any virtues, but from vices. But if the evil were always good, then would they do no evil. It is not from power that any one is able to do evil, but it is from weakness. If that is true which one some time ago asserted, that evil is nothing, then he works nothing who works evil. Then said I: Very true is that which thou sayest. Then said he: Did we not prove be- fore that nothing was more powerful than the highest good ? Then said I; So it is as thou sayest. Then said he: Yet it
-
‘ 184 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVI.
nan yrel bon. Da cpep ic. Det iy sop. Da cpep he. Ppxepep — zniz mon pene } zniz mon sie rpa mihtiz } he mezeze bon eall } peer he pille. Da cpzep ic. Ne penp Sey nan mon de hiy zepic | herp. Da cpep he. Ppzec ypele men mazon Seah yrel don. — Da cpep ic. Cala f' hine mihcon. Da cpep he. Pic ip ypeocol — ‘} kn mazon 60n yfel. 7 ne mazon nan zod. P iy foppam se P ~ yrel miy nauhc. ac pa zodan.? zip hi fulne anpeald habbap. hi | mazon 60n to zode° f f hi pillap. poppy ip ye fulla anpeald* co — cellanne co pam’ hehycum zodum.® roppam? ezpep xe se an- peald.§ ze pa oppu z0d.° and pa cpercay. pe pe lonze ep nembon. yindon feyce on pam hebycan zobde.’° ypa ypa eleer hurey pah bip peeyc eexpep ze on Sepe flope. ze on pam hnore. ypa bip ele zo"! on Lode peyc. poppem he ip elcer zoder wzpep ze hpog ze plop. Dy i 4 co pilmanne per anpealder. mon mezze zo" don. roppam ay ye becyca anpeald.’* }) mon meze ¥ pille pell’* don. ypa leyyan ypedbum spa mapan. rpepep he haebbe. roppam ypa hpa ypa pillap’ z0d"* co donne. he pillnap z0d!7 co habbenne.’® 4 mid zode co bionne. fop piy!® ip ye Placoney cpide zenoz yop. de he cpep. Da piyan ane maxzon bon co zode”" f hi pilmap.”! Sa ypelan mazon onzmnon } hi pilmap. Ic nat nu peah du pille cpepan } Sa zoban onzmnon hpilum ‘p hi ne mazon roppbpinzan. Ac ic cpepe. pe hi hic bpinzap prmle fopp. peah hi } peope ne meezen fulfpemman. hi habbap Seah yulne pillan. y ye uncpeorealda pilla biop”® co cellenne** pop rullppemod peopne. yopsam*> he nefpe ne poplyyc Sam leanum ode hep. odde pep. odde ezpep. peah pillap Sa ypelan pypcan  } hi lyyc. Seah hic nu ne pie"? nyc. ne popleorap hi eac pone pulan. ac habbap hiy pitve. oppe hep. odSe eller hpap. ode wxpep. ye ypla pila”? co ponne hiopa pele. poppy hi ne maxon bezican ‘ z05% - hi pillmap.” ron dy hi hic Suph*? Sone plan recap. naley puph pihcne pex.*! Se yyela®® pilla neeyp neenne ze- yepyerpe pip pa zeraelpa. Da ye Vipdom pa diy spell anehe heepde. da onzan he ere pinzan and Sup cpep.
1 Bod. bap. Cott. beep. 2 Cott. sooban, * Cott. sood5e. 4 Cott. anpald. 5 Cott. bem. * Cott. soo5um. 7 Cott. ropbem,  § Cott. anpald, ® Cott. 500d, 10 Cott. s00de. N Cott. 5008, 2% Cott. sood. Cott. anpald. ™ Cott. pel. ™ Cott. pilnad. © Cott. x00. 17 Cott. 5000. '8 Cott. habbanne. Cott. poppy. 20 Cott. so0de. 1 Cott. pila’. 22 Bod. beah. 3 Cott. br&. * Cott. callanne. 25 Cott. opbem. % Cott. hicnycne me. * Bod. pilla yyel. 78 Cott. 500d. 29 Cott. pilnia’. % Cott. bups. 3 Bod. nallap buphcne pes: 82 Cott. yyla. 33 Cott. apeaht,
OS vir. BOETHIUS. 185
cannot du any evil. Then said I: That is true. Then said he: Does any one think that any man can be so powerful that he is able to do all that he wills? Then said I: No man thinks it who has his senses. Then said he: But wicked men, nevertheless, can do evil. Then said I: O that they were not § able! Then said he: It is evident that they can do evil, and |. cannot do any good. That is because evil is nothing. . But the good, if they have full power, are able to do whatsoever good they will. Therefore full power is to be reckoned among the highest goods; for both power and the other goods and excellences, which we long ago mentioned, are fixed in the _ highest good. As the wall of every house is fixed both to the floor and to the roof, so is every good fixed in God, for he is both the roof and floor of every good. Therefore is the power that man may do good, ever to be desired: for that is the best power, that any one is able and willing to do well, whether _ with less means or with greater, whichsoever he may have. For whosoever wills to do good, is desirous to have good, and to be with good. Therefore is Plato’s saying very true, which he said: The wise alone can do the good which they desire ; the wicked can only attempt what they desire. I know not, however, but thou wilt say that the good sometimes begin what they cannot accomplish. But I say that they always accomplish it. Though they may not perfect the work, they have nevertheless full will, and the sincere will is to be reckoned for the perfect work. Therefore they never fail of rewards either here or there, or both. If the wicked have will to work what they list, though it is not now perfect, they lose not also the will, but have its punishment either here or elsewhere, or both. So greatly does the evil will control them! For this reason they cannot obtain the good which they desire, because they seek it through this will; and not through the right way. The evil will has no fellowship with happiness. When Wisdom had finished this speech, then began he again to sing, and thus said:
186 BOETHIUS. CHAP, XXXVII.
] 1 -
CAPUT XXXVII:
§ I. GEPER nu an ypell be pam ofepmodum J pam unpihc- pyum cynimzum. pa pe zeplop yiccan on pam hehycan heahyec- lum. pa yemap on manezpa cynna hpezlum. 7 biop ucon
7 { ’ ; } * 7 + ’
>
vmbycandende mid miclon zefepycrpe hiopa pezna. J pa biop — mid feclum. 3 mid zylbenum hyle ypeopdum. 3 mid maniz- — yealoum hepezeatpum xzehypyce. J ppeaciap eall moncynn mid — hiopa ppymme. ¥ ye Se hiopa pelt. ne mupnp naupep ne Fpiend ©
ne fiend. pe ma Se pedende hund. ac biod ypipe unzeppezlice upaharen on hi Mode foppam unzemeclican anpealde. Ac zip him mon ponne apinc of pa clapay. 7 him ofcihp papa penunza  pey anpealder. Sonne mihc pu zeyeon } he biop ypipe anhe
papa hiy pezna pumum %e him Sap peniap. bucon he fopppa pie. — And zip him nu pear zebypep him pypp yume hpile papa ©
penunza or cohen. 3 papa clapa. 3 peey anpealder. ponne pincp him # he sie on capcepne zebpoht. odde on pacencum. foppam
of pam unmeczva. } pam unzemeclican zexzepelan. of pam ypec- — mectcum. 3 of mifclicum dopyncum pey hper. onpaecnap po —
pode ppaz pepe ppenneyye. j zedperp hiopa God ypipe ypiphice. ponne peaxap eac pa opepmecta Jj unzeppeepney. J ponne hi peoppap zebolzen. Sonne pypp '‘p Mod beypunzen mid pam pelme pepe hacheoptneyye. oppec hi peoppap zepeepce mid pepe un-
pocneyye. 3 ypa zehepce. SiSdan p Sonne zedon bip. Sonne —
onzmp him leozan ye tohopa pepe ppeece. J spa hpeey ypa hay ippunz pillap. Sonne zehec him pay hip pecceleyc. Ice pe pede xerypn ep on piyre ilcan bec. ) ealle zepcearca pillnodon pumer zodey. fop zecynde. ac Sa unpihtpiyan cynzar ne mazon nan
zo bon. Fop pam ic pe nu ysaede. mip ‘Pp nan pundop. foppam hi |
hi undeppiodap eallum pam unpeapum pe ic Se 2p nembde. rceal Sonne nede co papa hlapopda dome pe he hme ep undeppeodde. 4p ce pypre ap. } he him nyle Fuppum pippmnan, peep he hic anzinnan polde. 7 Sonne on pam Zepimne puphpunian mihze. ponne nerde he hip nane yreyloe :-
§ IL® Da ye iydom %a piy leop arunzen heefde. pa onzan he ert ypellian 3 pur cpep. Gephyc Su nu on hu miclum, 7 on hu
r Boet. lib. iv. metrum 2.—Quos vides sedere celso, &e. ® Boet. lib. iv. prosa 8.—Videsne igitur, quanto in cexno, &e,
ie i. 11. | BOETHIUS. 187
CHAPTER XXXVII.
§ I. Hear now a discourse concerning proud and unjust
_kings, whom we see sitting on the highest thrones; who
%
shine in clothes of many kinds, and are surrounded by a great company of their thanes, who are adorned with belts and golden-hilted swords, and with manifold weapons, and terrify all mankind with their greatness. And he who governs them regards neither friend nor foe, any more than a mad hound; but is inconceivably hfted up in his mind, through unbounded power. But if any man should strip off from him the clothes, and deprive him of the retinue and the power, then wouldest thou see that he is very like to any one of those his thanes who serve him, unless he be worse. And moreover, if it by chance happen unto him that he at any time is deprived of the retinue, and of the clothes, and of the power, then it seems to him that he is brought to prison or to chains. Because from excess, and from immoderate clothing, and from dainty food, and from various drinks of the cup, the fury of Just is excited, and disqmiets their minds very greatly: then increases also arrogance and wickedness; and when they are offended, then is the mind scourged with the heat of anger, until they are distracted with unhappiness, and so enslaved! After this takes place, the hope of revenge begins to deceive them, and whatsoever his anger wills his recklessness pro- mises him. I said to thee long before, in this same book, that all creatures were naturally desirous of some good: but unjust kings can do no good, for the reason I have now given thee. That is no wonder, for they subject themselves to all the vices which I have already named to thee. very one of them, therefore, necessarily must swbmit to the judgment of the lords, to whom he has already subjected himself; and what is still worse, that he will not even strive against them. If he were willing to attempt it, and then were able to per- severe in the contest, then would he be free from his guilt. § Il. When Wisdom had sung this lay, then began he again to speak, and thus said: Seest thou in how great, and
: 188 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVII.
Siopum. j on hu Sioytpum hopayeape! papa unpeapa pa yrel-— pillendan yriciap. 3 hu Sa zodan” cmap beophtop ponne sunne. Foppam® pa zoban* nefpe ne beop bedzlde papa edleana hiopa~ xodey.> ne pa yelan negne pana pica de hi zeeapmiap. Alle ping pe on diye populde zebdon bip. herp edlean. pypce hpa } p he pypce. odSe 0 f H he d0. 4 he hard H f he eapmap.° Nir eac nauhc unpehc’ ypa spa z10 Romana peap pey.® 3 xe? ip on manezum Seobum.'’ $ mon hehp znne heapodbeah" zyloenne — eet yumey wpnepezey ende. feepp ponne micel role co. 7 ypnap™ ealle endemey.’* 3a pe hiopa epnmze cpepap. 7 ypa hpile ypa zpeyc co Sam beaze cymp. ponne moc ye hine habban him. ele pilnap he reyle wpeyt to cuman ¥ lime habban. ac anum he Seah zebypap.'* ypa dep eall moncynn. on pyy andpeapdan lize ipnap. and oneczap. and pillniad ealley’ py hehycan zodep.!6 ac hic iy nanum!7 men zeciohhod. ac 1y eallum monnum. fop- pem ip elcum peapr f he hizie eallan'® mezne!® epcen pepe mebde. pepe mede ne pypp nefpe nan x05”? man bebdzled. ne mez hme mon no mid puhte hacan ye zoobda. xp he bip pee hehycan zooder bebdzeled.”! foppem nan x05” peop ne bip bucon zobum” edleanum. ton %a yfelan } } hi don. pymle bip ye beah** zobey?> edleaney pam xobum”*® zehealSen on ecneyye. ne mez papa yfelena yfel pam xodan*’ beniman heona zooder J hiopa phicey. ac zip ln f xood bucon himyelpum heeden. Sonne meahce hi mon hip beniman.** opep cpeza odde ye Se hic ep ysealde. od5e opep mon.”? Ac ponne fopheye x0d°” man hir leanum.*! Sonne he hip 305 foplac. Onzic nu p te elcum men hir azen z06"" zipp xood edlean. ‘ xod ce onmnan him yelrum bip. Ppa pippa monna pile cpepan ‘f emz xod man pie bedwled Sey hehycan zobdey. foppam he pimle xfcep pam ypmep. Ac zemun Su yimle Sey miclan 3 pey faezpan edleaney.
1 Cott. hopo seaba. 2 Cott. soodan. 3 Cott. ropbem. 4 Cott. soodan. » Cott. sooder. © Cott. xeeapnad. 7 Cott. unihc. 8 Bod. Romana pbeapay 1p. ® Cott. sec. 19 Cott. biodum, 1 Cott. beas. 2 Cott. ypna’s. 18 Bod, endemeryt. 4 Cott. sebype’. 18 ‘Cotte ealle. 16 Cott. sooder. 7 Cott. anum. 18 Cott. ealle, 19 Cott. mesene. 20 Cott. 5006. 21 Cott.ne mes hine mon no mid pihze hatan ye gooba. sip he biS ber hehyzan soodey bedeled. 22 Cott.
5000. 5 Cott. s005um. *% Cott. beas. 25 Cott. soodep. 26 Cott. soooum. 27 Cott. 5oodan, 28 Bod. hiopa 50d. bucon himyelpum neepden. bonne mihze hi mon hi beniman. ® Bod. pealde oSpa obep
ma. 30 Cott. 5000. 31 Bod. selearan. 82 Cott. 5000,
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 189
in how deep, and in how dark a sink of vices the evil-willing are involved, and how the good shine brighter than the sun ? For the good are never destitute of the rewards of their good, nor the wicked ever of the punishments which they deserve. Everything which is done in this world has recompense. Let any one work what he may, or do what he may, he will ever
have that which he earns. Moreover, it is not unjust, as was
formerly the custom of the Romans, and still is in many na- tions, that man should have a golden crown at the end of some course. Many people then come thereto, and all run equally, those who have confidence in their running; and -whichsoever first arrives at the crown, then may he have it to himself. Every one desires that he may first arrive, and have it; but nevertheless it falls to one. So does all man- kind in this present life,—runs and hastens, and is desirous of the highest good. But it is offered to no one man, but is offered to all men. Therefore it is needful to every one that he strive with all his power after the reward. Of the reward no good man is ever deprived. A man cannot rightly call himself good if he be destitute of the highest good, for no good servant is without good rewards. Let the wicked do what they may, the crown of good reward will always be pos- sessed by the good for ever. The evil of the wicked cannot deprive the good of their good, and of their excellence. But if they had that: good from without them, then might some one deprive them of it; either he who formerly bestowed it, or another man. But a good man then loses his rewards when he forsakes his good. Understand, then, that to every man his own good gives good reward; that good which is in himself. What wise man will say, that any good man is des- titute of the highest good? for he always labours after it. But meditate thou always on the great and the fair reward,
190 BOETHIUS. CHAP. er |
4 foppam! f edlean ip ogep ealle oppe? lean co lupienne.® 3 50 peey lean co pam foperpecenan zodum* pe ic Se ep cealde on Spiddan bec. ponne hi ponne zezadepude® biop. Sonne miht® - pu onzican } pa zeyelpa 7 $ hehyce zod? bip eall an. 7 yp — God. 7 ponne du mihc® eac onzican } zlc z05° man bip eadiz. © J  ealle zeyaelize men beop!? Loday. 7 habbap ecu edlean — hiopa!! zobder :- 1?
§ III.t Foppam™ ne Seapp neenne piyne mon cpeozan. Pda
yrelan nabban eac ece’* edlean heopa yreley. p bip ece pice. © Deah du nu pene f hiopa hpyle!® zereliz*® pe hep pop populde. he herp Seah pimle!? hiy yfel mid him. 7 eac pey yreler!s edlean Sa hpile pe hit him leap. Niy nu nan pir man f nyce P| ce z0d"" 5 yfel biop pumle”? unzeppeepe becpux*! him. 4 ymle* on cpa** pillap. 3 spa ypa Sey xoban zodney bip bir agen xo0d"4 5 hiy agen edlean. ypa bip eac pay ypelan ypel by azen yrel. 9 hip edlean. 7 hip agen pite. ne tpeop nenne mon zir he pice hep. he neebbe yrel. Ppec penap pa yrelan } he beon bedzlde Sapa pica J pm fulle ewlcer yreley. nallay?? no an } hi biop arylode. ac popneah co nauhte zedone. Onzic nu be pam xooum hu muicel pice pa yrfelan yymle habbap. 3 zehyp xyc"° pum biypell. 4 zeheald pa pel perc pe ep pede. Eall . ce anneyye | herp. P pe yeczap paec ce pie. Sa hpile pe hic zc yomne bip. J Sa yamppeedneyye pe hacap zod. Spa spa an man bip man. da hpile Se yio sapl 3 ye lichoma bip etyomne.?’ ponne hi ponne zeyindpede biop Sonne*s ne bid he f p he ep pey. Puce pu mihc”? zepencan be Sam lchoman ¥ be hiy hmum. zip papa lima hpile*? of bip. Sonne ne bip hit no full mon ypa hic ep pay. zip eac hpyle zod** man ppom zobde xepice. Sonne ne bip he pe®? ma fullice zoo. zip he eallunza ppom zode** xepice. ponan hic zebypap } Sa yrelan foplecap p p hi ep didon** ne** biop
* Boet. lib. iv. prosa 3.—Que cum ita sint, &e. 1 Cott. ropbem. 7 Cott. oSpu. *% Cott. luymanne. * Cott. soodum. 5 Cott. senadepudu. 6 Cott. meaht. 7 Cott. 5005. 8 Cott. meahz,
9 Cott. 500d. 1 Cott. biod. ™ Cott. heopa 1 Cott. soodepr. 15 Cott. yoppeem. ™ Cott. nabben eac ecu. 15 hpvyle, deest in MS. Bod. 16 Bod. seyeelbe. 7 Cott. yymle. 18 Cott. yrlep. 19 Cott. 5008, 20 Cott. pymale. 21 Cott. betpeox. * Cott. yymle. 8 Cott. cu. 24 Cott. so0d. 25 Cott. nalley. 26 Cott. Sex. 27 Cott. etpomne bios. 28 hi bonne seyimdpede bios bonne, desunt in MS. Bod. 2° Cott. meahe. 30 Cott. hpyle. 31 Cott. 5000, 32 Cott. bon. 33 S0de,
deest in MS, Cott. 34 Cott. Syoon. 35 Cott. J ne,
§ cu. ' BOETHIUS. 192
for that reward is above all other rewards to be loved: and _ add that reward to the before-mentioned goods which I for- merly recounted to thee in the third book. When they are added together, then mayest thou perceive that happiness and the highest good are all one, and that is God. And then thou mayest also perceive that every good man is happy, and that all happy men are gods, and have eternal reward of their good!
§ IIL. Therefore no wise man needs to doubt that the evil have also eternal recompense of their evil, that is, eternal punishment. Though thou mayest think that any of them is happy here in respect of the world, he nevertheless has always his evil with him, and also the recompense of the evil, even whilst it gives hit pleasure. There is no wise man who is ignorant that good and evil are always discordant between themselves, and always are at variance in their wishes. And as the goodness of the good is his own good, and his own re- ward, so is also the evil of the wicked his own evil, and his reward, and his own punishment. No man if he has punish- ment, doubts that he has evil..- What! do the wicked think that they are exempted from punishments, and ye¢ are full of all evil? Not only are they foul, but almost brought to nothing. Understand, therefore, from the good, how great punishment the wicked always have: and hear, moreover, an example; and well retain those which I before mentioned to thee. Whatsoever has unity, that we say exists while it re- mains together; and this unity we call good. Thus a man is a man whilst the soul and the body are together. But when they are separated, then is he not that which he was before, The same thou mayest conceive concerning the body, and concerning its limbs. If any of the limbs is off, then it is not full man, as it was before. So if any good man depart from good, then is he not any more fully good, if he at all depart from good. When it happens that the wicked leave off what they before did, they are not what they before were.
)
192 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVII. | 4
 } hi ep pepon. Ac ponne hi  z05! foplecap 3 peoppap — yrele. Sonne ne beop? hi nauhzvay bucon anlicney. } mon mez — zerion ‘} hi zo men pepon.® ac hi habbap per menmiycer — donne pone becycan dl foplopen. 7 pone fopcupeycan* ze- — healden. hi poplecap } zecyndelice zod. f° yme menniychce — peapay. j habbap peah manney anlicneyye Sa hpile pe li ~ hbbap :-
§ Iya Ac ypa spa manna zobdney® hi ahefp ofep pa men- — niycan zecynd. co pam’ } hi beop Lobday zenemnebde.® rpa eac © hiopa yfelney apyppp hi undep Sa menniycan zecynd. co pam® in biop yrele zehacene. } pe cpepap pie nauhc. Foppam zp Su ypa zeplecne mon metyz f he bip ahpepfed ppom xode"? co yrele. ne mihc™ Su hine na mid pihce nemnan man. ac neat. Lif pu ponne” on hpilcum men onzicyc. f he bip zicyepe 7 pearepe. ne ycealc pu hine na hacan man. ac pulp. And pone pepan pe bip ppeopteme. pu ycealc hacan huns. nallay’* mann. And done leayan lycezan. pu yeealt hacan fox. ney mann. And Sone unzemeclice modezan J yppiendan.'* Se co micelne andan herp. Su ycealc hacan leo. ney mann. And pone yeenan. pe bip co slap. Su pceale hacan ayya ma ponne man. And pone unze- metlice eapzan. pe him ondpxt mane’ ponne he pupre.!® pu mihc!” hacan hapa. ma Sonne man. And pam!§ unzeyceeppezan 7 Sam’ heelzan.”? pu mihe”? peczzan”? } hi bip pide zelicna. odde unytillum fuzelum. Sonne zemecpeytum monnum. And pam pe Su onzicyc he hp”? on huy hchaman luycum. ‘} he bid anlicoyc fectum ypmum. pe yimle pillnap** hezan on fulum — yolum. 7 hi nyllap aypylizan*’ on hluccpum petepum.?® ac peah hi relbum hponne beyrpemde peoppon. Sonne yleap he efe on pa solu ¥ bepealpiap pap on. Da ye Pipsom pa piy rpell aneht heepbe. Sa onzan he yingzan y puy cpeep.
« Boet. lib. iv. prosa 3.—Sed cum ultra homines, &e.
1 Cott. 500d. * Cott. bioS. * Cott. paepen. 4 Bod. popeubenan. 5 Bod. jy.  ° Cott. soodner. 7 Cott. pon.  ° Cott. senemde. Cott.
pon. 10 Cott. so0de. “Cott. meahz. 1% bonne, deest in MS. Cott. 13 Cott. naller. 4 Bod. ippiende. 15 Cott. ma. 6 Cott. bypre. 17 Cott. meahc. 18 Cott, bam. 19 Cott. baem. 20 Cott. salan. 21 Cott. meaht, 22 Cott. pecyan. 23 Cott. lsd. *4 Cott. pyymle
pulas. 26 Cott, neype nellad aypylian, 76 Cott. pectpum,
§ rv. BOETHIUS. 193
But when men forsake good, and become wicked, then are they nothing but a resemblance; so that one may see that they formerly were men, but they have lost the best part of humanity, and kept the worst. They forsake the good of their nature, that is human manners, and have nevertheless the likeness of man while they live.
§ IV. Butas the goodness of men raises them above human nature, so far that they are named gods; so also their wicked- ness degrades them below human nature, so far that they are called evil, which we say is nothing. Therefore if thou shouldest meet a man so debased that he is turned from good to evil, thou canst not rightly name him man, but beast. If then thou observest with respect to any man, that he is a rapacious man, and a spoiler, thou shouldest not call him a man, but a wolf. And the fierce man who is a brawler, thou shouldest call a hound, not a man. And the deceitful, crafty man, thou shouldest call a fox, not a man. And the immo- derately proud and angry man, who has great malice, thou shalt call a lion, not a man. And the dull man who is too slow, thou shouldest call an ass more than a man. And the excessively timid man who is more fearful than he needs, thou mayest call a hare more than a man. And to the inconstant and the light, thou mayest say, that they are more like the ’ wind, or restless birds, than modest men. And to him whom thou observest that he is lying in the lusts of his body, thow mayest say, that he is most like to fat swine, which always desire to lie in foul mire, and will not wash themselves in pure waters; but if they sometimes rarely are made to swim, then cast they themselves again into the mire, and wallow therein. When Wisdom had ended this speech, then began he again to sing, and thus said:
'
194 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVUI.
hee ee ame
CAPUT XXXVIII."
§ I. ID Se* mez peccan of ealdum leayum spellum yum rpipe anlic ypell pepe yppece pe pic nu ymbe sppezcon. Pic ze- bypede zio on Tpoiana zepinne peep pey an cynmg per nama Aulixer. ye heepde cpa d105a undep pam Kayepe. Da dioda — pepon hacene Ipacize 3 Recie. 7 Sey Kayeper nama per Aza- memnon. Da ye Aulixey mid pam Kayepe to pam xepiohte fon. | da heepde he sume hundped yerpa. Sa pepon hi sume ten zeap © on pam zepinne. Sa ye cyninz eft ham cepde Fpom pam Kayepe. | 4 in land heydon zepunnen. Sa nzfoe ma ycrpa poune an. H © pey Seah ppe peppe. Sa zercod hme heah peden j ycopm ya. — peapp Sa sopdpipan on an izlond ut on” Sepe Pentel ya. pa — per pep Apollmeyr bohcop. Tobey yuna. ye Lob pay hiopa cyninz. J licecce } he yceolde bion ye hehyca Lod. 4 } dyyize pole him zelypde. foppampe he per cyne cynney. j hi nyycon neenne opepne Irod on Sane timan. bucon hiopa eynmaay hi peonpodon fop Loar. Sa yceolde peer Iobey feedep beon eac © Lod. pey nama pey Sacupnuy. 3 hip ppa ice eal cyn® bi heepdon — pop Gob. pa par hiopa an ye Apollinuy de pe 2p ymb ypppeecon. Sey Apollmey Sohcop yceolbe bion zydene. pepe nama per Kinke. pio hi yeedon yeeolde bion ypipe Spycpeprizu. 7 310 punode on Sam izlande pe re cyninz on fopdpiren peapp Se pe ep ymbe yppecon. Pio hefbe Sep yprpe micle penode hipe | Sezna. J eac opeppa mexbdena. Sona ypa hio xzeyeah Sone fop- dpipenan cyning pe pe ep ymbyppeecon. pay nama pep Aulixep.
Sa onzan hio hine lupian. 3 hiopa expep opepne ypipe unze- metlice. rpa ‘p ce he pop hipe lugan yoplec hip pice eall. 4 hip cynpen. J punode mid hipe op done pipye ‘P lip peznay him ne mihcon lenz mid xepunian. ac pop hiopa eapder lufan 4 fon Seepe ppace ctihodon hine co foplecanne. Da onzunnon leare men pypcan ypell. 3 paedon  hio pceolde mid hipe dpyepeere- pa men fopbpedan. 6 peoppan hi an pilde deopa he. 7 prdsan ylean on pa paccencan Jj on corpay. Sume hi sadon p hio | rceolbe fopyceoppan co leon. 7 Sonne seo yceolde pppecan. ponne pynde hio. Sume yceolban bion efopayr. 3 Sonne hn |
eos f pana dpc.
reeolban hiopa yap spiopian. ponne zpymecodan hi. Sume pupdon co pulpan. Sa Sucon. Sonne hi yppeecan yceoldon.
v -Boet. lib. iv. metrum 3.—Vela Neritii ducis, &e. 1 Bod et Cott. ba. 2 Bod. et Cott. uton, 3 Bod. et Cott. eleme.
| ST, ALBERTS COLLEGE LipRany = § x. BOETHIUS, 195
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
§ I. I oan relate to thee, from ancient fables, a story very like to the subject which we have just now spoken about. It happened formerly in the Trojan-war, that there was a king whose name was Ulysses, who had two countries under the Cesar. The countries were called Ithaca and Retia, and the Ceesar’s name was Agamemnon. When Ulysses went with the Czsar to the battle, he had some hundred ships. Then were they some ten years in that war. When the king again returned homeward from the Cesar, and they had conquered the land, he had not more ships than one; but that was a ship with three rows of oars. Then opposed him a great - tempest and a stormysea. He was then driven on an island out in the Wendel sea. Then was there the daughter of Apollo, the son of Jove. Jove was their king, and pretended that he should be the highest god, and that foolish people believed him because he was of royal lineage, and they knew not any other God at that time, but worshipped their kings for gods. Then should the father of Jove be also a god, whose name was Saturn; and likewise all his kindred they held for gods. Then was one of them the Apollo whom we before mentioned. Apollo’s daughter should be a goddess, whose name was Circe. She, they said, should be very skilful in soreery ; and she dwelt in the island on which the king was driven, about whom we before spoke. She had then a very great company of her servants, and also of other maidens. As soon as she saw the king driven thither, whom we before mentioned, whose name was Ulysses, then began she to love him, and each of them the other, beyond measure ; so that he for love of her neglected all his kingdom, and his family, and dwelt with her until the time that his thanes would no longer remain with him; but for love of their country, and on ac- count of exile, determined to leave him. Then began false men to work spells. And they said that she should by her sorcery overthrow the men, and cast them into the bodies of wild beasts, and afterwards throw them into chains and fetters. Some, they said, she should transform to lions, and when they should speak then they roared. Some should be wild boars, and when they should lament their misfortune then they grunted. Some became wolves. These howled
0 2
it 2 |
¢ | 196 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVITI. .
Sume pupdon co pam dSeoncynne pe mon hat wizpiy. Spa peopd eall ye xepepyceipe fophpepred co miyclicum dSeopcynnum. zle co sumum oiope. bucon pam cynimze anum. Atlene mete hi_ onrcunedon pe men ecap. 7 pilnodon Sapa pe deop etap. — Nedon hi nane anlicneyre manna ne on hchoman ne on © ycemme, J ele piyyce Seah hip zepic ypa spa he zp piypce. P Ze-— pit pay ypipe fopziende fop pam epmpum de hi Spozan. Ppeec — pa menn Se pyrum leayunzum zelepdon. Seah piyyton pet hio mid pam opycperce ne mihce Sapa manna Modon pendan. peah hio 3a lichoman onpende. Eala } hic iy micel cpeefe Sep Mobdey fop Sone hchoman. Be ypilcum 7 be ypilcum pu miht onzican P ye cpefe per lchoman bip on pam Mode. 7 te zlcum men ma demiap hiy Moder unpeapar. Sep Moder tiop eallne pone lichoman to him. 3 pey lichoman meccvpumney ne mez ‘) Mod eallunza co him zetion :-
§ IL” Da cpep ic. Ic eom zepara P f ip sop. P pu ep yeeoerc. P pay hic nauht unpihe pepe pect mon da yfel- pulendan men heve nevenu. od8e pildeon.t Seah hi manney on- lieneyye hebben. Ac zip 1c heepbe ypilcne anpeald.” ypylee ye celmibvexa Irod herp. Sonne ne lece ic no Sa yrelan dSepian Sam? zodum* ypa ypipe rpa hinu dop. Da cpep he. Niy hic him no ypa lonze aleped ypa pe Syncp. ac Su miht onxzican ‘Pp him bip ypipe hpzdlice zepcyped> hiopa opropzneyre. ypa ic pe nu puhce yeczan pille. Seah 1c zec emtan® nebbe fop opeppe’ rppece. Sep hi Sone unnyccan anpeald® nepden pe hi penap hi habbap.? Sonne neydon hi ypa micel pice pa hi habban rculon. Da yrelan bip micle'? unzereelizpan ponne. Sonne" hi mazan puphcion’ pec yrel hi lyyc. ponne hi ponne bion, ponne hi hic Son ne magon. Seah Si" Syprze men ne zeleran.! Iie iy ypipe vpel mon” > yrel pille. 3 hicl® iy peah micle pypre ‘) hic mon mex don.? ” poppeem's ye yrela’® pilla bip coycenced. rpa pe pecely?® bepopan fype. zip mon >} peope puphtion*! ne” mez. Ac Sa ypelan” habbap hpilum Spio unzeyelpa.”* an ip hi yrel pillap. opep } P hi mazon. ppidde f hi hic puphciop.”?
w Boet. lib. iv. prosa 4.—Tum ego, Fateor, inquam, &e. 1 Cott. piloiop. 2 Cott. anpald. 8 Cott. bem. 4 Cott. soodum.
5 Cott. sepuoped. § Cott. emeczan. 7 Cott. oSpe. 8 Cott. un- neccan anpald. Cott. hebben. '° Cott. bioS pymle. ™ Bod. pone. 2 Cott. mason bupscion. }3 Cott. hip. * Cott. seleren. 15 Cott. mon ‘p. 16 Bod. he. 17 50n, deest in MS. Cott. 18 Cott. popbem yopbem. 19 Cott. yyla. °° Cott. bep pec. * Cott. bupszion. * ne, deest in MS. Bod. 23 Cott. yylan. ** Cott. unyeelba. 25 Cott. bupsz0%.
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 197
when they should speak. Some became that kind of wild beast that man calls tiger. Thus was all the company turned to wild beasts of various kinds; each to some beast, except the king alone. Every meat they refused which men eat, and were desirous of those which beasts eat. They had no resemblance of men either in body or in voice, yet every one knew his mind, as he before knew i¢. That mind was. very sorrowful through the miseries which they suffered. Indeed, the men who believed these fictions, nevertheless knew that she by sorcery could not change the minds of men, though she changed the bodies. How great an excellence is that of the mind in comparison of the body! By these things, and the like thou mayest learn, that the excellence of the body is in the mind; and that to every man the vices of his mind are more hurtful. Those of the mind draw all the body to them, and the infirmity of the body cannot entirely draw the mind to it.
§ II. Then said I: I am convinced that that is true which thou before saidst, thatis, that it would not be unfit that we should call evil-willing men cattle, or wild beasts, though they have the resemblance of man. But if I had such power as
‘the Almighty God has, then would I not let the wicked injure the good so much as they now do. Then said he: It is not permitted to them so long as thou supposest. But thou mayest be assured that their prosperity will very soon be re- moved, as I will shortly inform thee, though I have not leisure now on account of other discourse. If they had not the vain power, which they think they have, then would they not have so great punishment as they shall have. The wicked are much more unhappy when they are able to accomplish the evil which they list, than they are when they are unable to doit; though these foolish men do not believe it. It is very wicked that any man wills evil, and it is still much worse that he is able to do it, for the evil will is dispersed like incense before the fire, if man is not able to accomplish the work. But the wicked have sometimes three misfortunes: one is, that they will evil; the second, that they are able ¢o do it; the third,
' 198 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVIII.
roppampe’ Lio herp zeciohhod co yellenne” picu 3 epmpa pam yrelum® monnum fop hiopa yglum peopcum. Da cpep ic. Spa hic ip ypa Su. yezyc. J peah ic polde zepyycan. zip 1¢ mihte.* ‘) hi neefbon pa heapdyzelpa } hi mihcon yyel 50n. Da cpzep he. Ic pene peah } him loyize se anpeald® ep ponne Su poldeyc.® odde hi penen. yoppem nan puhc nip lang? yeeper on pip and- peapdan hye. peah monnum pynce hic lang pie. Ac ppipe oft re micla anpeald® Sapa yrelena zehpiyc ypipe feeplice. rpa spa zpeact beam on pyda® pypcp hlutne dync Sonne men leyt penap. 3 poppam!? eze hi biop" yrmle yprpe eapme. Ing hi Sonne hiopa yrel eapme zede5. hu ne bip ponne pimle f lanze yrel pypre Sonne } ycopcte. Deah nu pa yplan negpe ne pup- don!” deade. Seah ic’® polde cpepan } hi pepon’ eapmoyce.!® Ing pa eapmpa ealle’® yope!’ yinc. Se pe lanze'S xp ymbe pehcon.’” } $a yfelan?? hep on populde*? habban yceoldan.™” ponne iy pet ypeocol. } pa eapmpa beop® endeleaye pe ece** biop. Da cpp ic. Deec iy pundoplhic } Su yexyc.”° J ypipe eap- poplc dyrezum monnum co onzicanne. Ac 1¢ onzive peah f hic belumpp zenoz pel co peepe yppaece pe pit ep ymbe yppeecon. Da cpep he. Ic ne yppece nu no to dSyrezum monnum. ac yppece to pam pe pillmap*® iybsom onzican. foppem p bip cacn Viydsomey. ‘p hine mon pilnize”? zehenan* 7 onzican. Ac zip Oyyizpa hpone cpeze”? wnizer Sapa ppella. Se pe ep ymbe*” rppeecon on piyye ilcan bec. Sonne zepecce he. zip he maze. Opep cpeza odde papaypellayum leay ode unzelic Sepe pppece pe pic ercep ppypiap. ode pmidde pend onzice ¥ xelere ‘p pic on juhe ypymien.*? zip he papa nan ne dep.” Sonne nat he hpac*® he menp:-
§ IIT* Ac ic 3e mez zer®* cecan opep Smz pe Syrexum monnum pile Sincan zec*® unzelependlicpe.*’ 3 iy Seah xenoz
= Boet. lib. iv. prosa 4.—Nam hoc quoque quod dicam, &e.
1 Cott. yopbembe, * Cott. pellanne. * Cott. yflum. * Cott. meaht. 5 Cott. anpald. 6 Cott. polde. 7 Cott. long. § Cott. anpald. 9 Cott. puda. '© Cott. yoppeem. 1 Cott. beo’. 12 Cott. pupden. ie, deest in MS. Cott. 4 Cott. paepen. 15 Cott. eapmoyte J unsereel- poste. 16 Cott. ealla. ¥ Cott. popa. '8 Cott. longe. 9 Cott. peahzon. 0 Cott. yylan. 21 Cott. peopulde. 22 Cott. pceolden. 28 Cott. ypmba, bios. 4 Cott. eac. 25 Cott. peesyc. © Cott. pel puniad. 27 Cott. pelmge. + Bod. sepan. * Cott. cpeoge. °° Cott. ymb. 3! Cott. ppypisen. 32 Cott. nyte. 33 Cott. nan bapa hpes. *4 Cott. mend. 35 Cott. sec. 36 Cott. Ziet. 37 Cott. unsele- pedlicpe.
“ea sa fbb aot haem amas
prt deterring bed dew
= 6 111. BORTULUS. 199
that they accomplish it. For God has deerced to give punish- ments and miseries to wicked men for their wicked works. Then said I: So it is as thou sayest; and yet I would wish, if I might, that they had not the unhappiness of being able to do evil. Then said he: I think, however, that that power ~ will be lost to them sooner than pone chou or they would expect. For nothing is of long duration in this present life, though it seem to men that it be long. But very frequently the great power of the wicked falls very suddenly, even as a great tree in a wood makes a loud crash when men least expect; and through fear they are always very miserable. But if their wickedness makes them miserable, is not then the long evil always worse than the short? Though the wicked never died, I should still say that they were most miserable. If the miseries are all true, which we long ago discoursed about, that the wicked should have in this world, then is it evident that those miseries are infinite which are eternal. Then said [: That is wonderful which thou sayest, and very difficult to be understood by foolish men. But I nevertheless perceive that it appertaius well enough to the discourse which we were before holding. Then said he: I am not now speaking to foolish men, but am speaking to those who desire to understand wisdom; for it is a token of wisdom that any one is willing to hear and understand it. But if any of the foolish doubt any of the reasonings which we have already uttered in this same book, let him show, if he can, some one of the arguments which is either false, or inapplicable to the subject about which we are inguiring ; or thirdly, let him turn, understand, and believe that we argue rightly. If he will do none of these things, then he knows not what he means.
§ III. But I can still teach thee another thing, which to foolish men will seem yet more incredible, and is nevertheless suitable enough to the argument which we are holding. Then
200 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVIII.
zelic pam ypelle Se pic wpcep ppypiap. Da cpep ic. Dpeec +p p la Smza. Da cpephe. Pic ip $$ Sa ypelan’ biop micle zeypziiz- pan de on Syye populde? habbap micelne pean 3 mamzpeald pice® yop hypa* yelum.® Sonne pa sien pe nane ppece nabbap. ne nan pice on pyye populde rop hiopa yple. Ne pene Seah nan mon ‘ ic fop pem anum dyllic yppece. de 1¢ polbe unpeapar ceelan. 3 zobe hepian. 7 mid Sepe bipne® men Speacian J cihcan? cto zobum Seapum. foppam® eze Sey piter. ac fop oppum pmzum? ic hic yppece’ zec ypipop. Da cpep ic. Fop hpilcum** oppum dinzum poldeyc’” Su p yppecan.’* bucon fop- pam}* Se pu nu pederc. Da cpep he. Gemunyc!® du f pic ep yppecon. } peer } pa zodan!® hepden!? yymle anpeald’® 7 ze- yeelpa. 3 pa yrelan’® nepben nefpe naupep. Da cpep ic. Deer ic zeman. Da cpep he. Ppet pense Su nu. wp pu zZephyc hpylene ypipe unzerehizne mon. 3 onzicye Seah hp hpezu*® zodey”! on him. hpepep he pie ypa unzepaeliz ppa se pe nan puht zodey? nerp. Da cpep ic. Se me pyncp xerelzpa. Se hpec hpezu*® heyp. Da cpep he. Ac hu pyncp Se ponne be pam™* pe nan puhe zodey” neefp. zip he heerp*® yumne eacan yreley. ye pu pile yeczan ponne zec”’ pie unzereelizpa Sonne ye opep. pop per yreley?® eacan. Da cpp ic. Pp ne pceolbe me ypa Smean.* Da cpep he. Telo ponne } Se pa pmep.* onzic Sonne mid innepeandan*? Mode ‘} pa yrelan®? habbap yrmle** hpeec hpezu** zodey on zemonz hiopa yrel. P ip hiopa pice } mon meex yprdse eade Zepeccan mid puhce him co xobde.** Ac pa pe him bip un- picnode eall hiopa yfel on Sie populde. habbap yum yrel herizpe 4 -pecendlicpe ponne eniz*° pice pe on piyye populde. p iy } him bip ungepicnode*? hiona yfel on piyre populde.®s iy ‘} ypeocoloyce cacn®® pay meycan yreley on piyye populde.*°
' Cott. yylan. 2 Cott. peopulde. 3 Cott. picu. * Cott. hiona. 5 vyelum, deest in MS. Cott. ® Cott. byrne. 7 Cott. bneamsan 4 cyhcan. * Cott. roppem. 9% Cott. bmesum. Cott. pppec. 1 Cott. hpylcum. 2 Cott. poldey. 8 Cott. pppecan. 4 Cott. popbem. 18 Cott. semanyc. 16 Cott. soodan. 7 Cott. heydon. 18 Cott. anpald. 19 Cott. yylan. Cott. hpusu. 2! Cott. soodep. 2? Cott. soodey. 23 Cott. hpusu. ™ Cott. bem.  *% Cott. sooder. 76 Bod. ney. 27 Cott. ple. 28 Cott. yyler. 29 Cott. byucan. 0 Da cpe’d he. Telo bonne ‘} be rpa pbinc®, desunt in MS. Cott. 31 Cott. m-
nepeapdpe. % Cott. yylan. *3 Cott. rymle. 4 Cott. hpugu. 5 Cott, soode. %6 Bod. am. 7 Cott. unpicnod. % Cott. peopulde.  % Cott, tacen. 0 Cott. peopulde.
§ rz. BOETHIUS. 201
said IT: What thing is that? Then said he: It is this, that thése wicked persons are much happier who in this world have great misery, and manifold punishment for their evil, than those are who have no suffering nor punishment in this world for their guilt. Let no one, however, think that I
| speak thus merely because I would reprove vices, and praise
virtue, and by the example urge and persuade men to good | conduct through fear of punishment: but I speak it still more for other reasons. Then said 1: For what other reasons wouldest thou speak it, except what thou hast just mentioned P Then said he: Dost thou recollect what we before said, that is, that the good always had power and happiness, and the wicked never had either? Then said 1: That I remember. Then said he: But what thinkest thou, if thou seest any man very unhappy, and yet perceivest something of good in him; is he as unhappy as the man who has no good in him? Then said I: He appears to me happier, who has something of good. Then said he: But what then dost thou think con- cerning him who has no good, if he has some addition of evil? He, thou wilt say, is still more unhappy than the other, through the addition of evil. Then said 1: Why should not I think so? ‘Then said he: Consider that it so appears to thee, and understand with inward mind that the wicked have always something of good among their evil, that is their punishment, which we may very easily, and justly reckon to them as good. But those whose evil is all unpunished in this world, have an evil heavier and more dangerous than any punishment in this world is; that is, that their evil is un- punished in this world, which is the most evident token of the greatest evil in this world, and of the worst recompense
202 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVIII.
} per pyprcan! ebdleaney zycep Sipye populde. Da cp ic. Ne?* mz ic Sey opracan. Da cpephe. Foppeem yint unzeyzliznan pa yrelan. roppem him bip bucon zepyphcum fopzipen hiopa yrel Sonne pa ypien pe him bip hiopa yrel zeleanod be heopa® zepyphcum. foppem hic iy puht } mon yfehze pa yrelan.* 3 hic ip poh® $ hi mon leave unpicnode. Da cpep ic. Ppa oprecp per. Da cpep he. Ne mez nan man opyacan hic ne pie eall zoe ce puht bip.’ 9 eall ypel H ce poh bip. Da cpep ic. [c eom ypipe zedpefed mid Siyye pppeece. J pundpize* ophpi? ypa pubcpiy 5ema enize unpihce zie pille fopziran. Da cpep he. Be hpam'® cpeyc pu p. Da cpep 16. Foppampe™ Su ep cpeede P he unpiht dyde. P he lece unpyc- nod” pa yfelan. Da cpep he. Deec ip hay peoppyerpe. p he ypa gipol’® ip. 3 pa pumedhice zifd. } ip micel zipu"* P he xebic osdeer Sa ypelan onzicap hypa!® yrel 3 zecyppap"™ co xzode.!® Da cpep ic. Nu ic onzice } hic nip ece zipu } he zifp pam’® yrlum. ac ip hpac hpezu”® elbunz”’ 3 anbid pey hehycan 5eman. Foppam” anbide 7 poppam*® zepylbe me pmcp f he pie pe yp!pop fopyepen. 7 peah me heap sip spell xenog pell. 4 pynep me zenox zelic’* pam pe Su ep peedert !-
§ IV. Ac ic 8e halprze”® zer"* - Su me yexxe*’ hpepep Su pene } pa yrelan** habban ewniz pice epcep diye populde.*® od8e pa zoban*? eniz edlean heopa*! zoder.** Da cpp he. Pu ne yeede ic Se zp ‘f pa xodan** habbap edlean hiopa** zodey.° expen ze hep. xe on ecneyye. j Sa yrelan®*® eac habbap edlean heopa*? yreley."8 expep ze hep. ze eft on ecneyye. Ac ic pille delan Sa yfelan®? Sam yfelum*’ nu on cpa.*? foppampe* open deel pana yrelena*® heed ece pice. foppam hi nanne mildheopt- neyye ne xeeapnodon. opep dal yceal beon zecleenyod.** and Sa
¥ Boet. lib. iv. prosa 4.—Sed, queso, inquam, te, &e.
' Cott. pyppercan. % Ne, deest in MS. Bod. Cott. hmopa.  * Cott. yylise ba yylan. 5 Cott. pos. * Cott. so0d. 7 br’S, deest in MS, Cott.
§ Cott. pundpie. ® Cott. pophpy. 10 Cott. hpam. 1 cpeyt bu *p. Da cpxeS 1c yoppam, desunt in MS, Cott. 1% Cott. unpienod. 8 Cott. sipul. Cott. s1po. 15 Cott. yylan. 16 Cott. hiopa. 17 Cott. secieppad, 18 Cott. Zoode. 19 Cott. bem. 20 Cott. hpile hpusu. 21 Cott. elocuns. 22 Cott. yoppeem. 23 Cott. ropbam. 24 Cott. sesonselic. 5 Cott. healyrge. *6 Cott. siec. 77 Cott. pecge. 78 Cott. yylan. 29 Cott. peopulde. 30 <ooan, deest in MS. Cott. 31 Cott.
hiopa.  % Cott. sooder. % Cott. soodan. *4 Cott. heopa. *° Cott. sooodey. 36 Cott. yylan. 7 Cott. hiopa. 38 Cott. yyley. 39 Cott. yylan. 40 bam yyelum, desunt in MS. Cott. *' Cott. cpua. *” Cott. roppam pe. 48 Cott. yylena. 44 Cott. Seclaynod.
t
ive BOETHIUS. 203
after this world. Then said I: I cannot deny this. Then said he: Therefore the wicked are more unhappy, because their wickedness is undeservedly forgiven them, than they are if their wickedness is recompensed according to their deserts. Therefore it is right that evil should be inflicted on
the wicked, and it is wrong that they should be suffered to
go unpunished. Then said 1: Who denies this? Then said he: No man can deny that everything is good which is right, and everything evil which is wrong. Then said I: I am
very much troubled with this discourse, and wonder why so
righteous a judge should bestow any unjust gift. Then said be: Wherefore sayest thou that? Then said 1: Because thou before saidst that he did wrong, inasmuch as he lett the wicked unpunished. Then said he: That is his glory, that he is so bountiful, and bestows so abundantly. It isa great gift that he waits till the wicked are sensible of their evil and turn to good. Then said I: Now I understand that it is not an eternal gift which he gives to the wicked, but is rather the delay and waiting of the highest judge. On account of his waiting and forbearance, methinks he is the more despised ;
‘and yet this argument pleases me well enough, and seems to
me like enough to what thou before saidst.
TV. But I beseech thee, now, that thou wouldest tell me whether thou thinkest that the wicked have any punishment after this world; or the good any reward for their goodness ? Then said he: Did I not say to thee before, that the good have recompense for their goodness both here and for ever; and the wicked also have recompense for their evil, both here, and also forever? But I willnow divide the wicked from the wicked in two parts. For one part of the wicked shall have eternal punishment, because they have deserved no mercy ; and the other part shall be cleansed and proved in the
204 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVIII.
ameped on pam’ heoronlicon fype. spa hep bip yylpop.? fop- _
pam® he herp sume zeeapnunza sumepe mildheoprneyye. fop- pam* he moc cuman efcep pam® eapropum co ecpe ape. Lic
ic pe mihte peccan mape.® wzpep ze be pam? zobum.* ze be
pam® yylum. zip’? 1c nu ewmean™ hepde. Ac ic ondpede f ic foplece” H pic ep xpcep arpypedon.'> f per p pic poldon
zepeccan } du onzeace } pa yflan neepd5on™ nenne anpeald.’* — ne on peepe TO- ©
ne neenne peopprcipe. ne on Siyye populde.'®
peandan. roppem pe puhce ep  eallpa Smza pypperc P pu pendeyc!” } hi herdon'* co micelne. 3 f ealne pez!” propoderc”? p hi ealne pez?! nzpon on pice. 7 1¢ pe yeede ealne” pez f lu nepfpe ne biop buton pice. peah Se ypa ne Since. Ac ic pat Seah f pu pile popian hi rpalanzne*® ryprc habbap lear** yfel co donne, J 1¢ pe sede ealne pez Pye fypyc bip ypipe lycle hpuile. and ic 6e yecze zet.”° spa ypa he lenzpa bip. ;pa hi biop unze- yelizpan. } him pepe ealpa meyt unyelp °° } pe pypye pepe op Somer deez. And ic Se pede eac ‘P Sa pepon unzeyehzpan Se him unpihclice hiopa yrel popbopen pepe. ponne pa peepen pe him” hiopa”® yfel pyhclice onzeppecen pape. xec*® hic ze- bypep Se pep p pa opropzan bip*? zereelzpan*! Sonne™ pa zepicnodan | +
§ V.* Da cpep ic. Ne Smcp me nefpe nanpuhc ypa yoplic ypa me pincp Sin? ypell peem cimum** pe ic pa zehepe. Ac Zip 1c me pende co Siyey folcer 5ome. ponne my hic no } an ‘} hn nyllap pyre Simpe pace zelezan. ac hi lic nellap*® puppum ze- hipan.*® Da cpep he. Nip nan pundop. Ppec pu payct P pa men pe habbap unhale eazan. ne mazon ful eape locian onzean pa sunnan Sonne hio beophzoye*’ yemp. ne ruppum on pype.** ne on nan puht beophcey*? hi ne lyye locian. zip ye eppel ler
% Boet. lib. iv. prosa 4.—Tum ego, Cum tuas, inquam, &e.
1 Cott. bam. 2 Cott. reolpop, 3 Cott. poppeem. * Cott. pon- bem. 5 Cott. beem. 6 Cott. meahze mape peccan. 7 Cott. bem. * Cott. s00dum. ® Cott. peem. © Cott. beep. 1 Cott. semeczan. 12 Cott. yoplerze. 18 Cott. ppypedon. Cott. neepden. 15 Cott. anpald. 16 Cott. peopulde. 17 Cott. pender. 18 Cott. hayden. 19 Cott. eall nes. 20 Cott. propodey. 21 Cott. eall nes. 22 Cott.
eallne. 2% Cott.longne. 7% Cott. leaye. 5 Cott. siez. 26 4}, deest in MS. Cott. 27 be him, desunt in MS. Cott. °° Cott. heopa. 79° Cott. 5It. 30 Cott. biod. 3! Bod. et Cott. ungerehsyan. 32 Cott. bonne ponne. 33 Cott. bincad bine. 54 Cott. dum. 35 Cott. nylla’. 36 Cott. sehepan. 87 Cott, beoptort. 38 Cott. ofyp. 39 Cott. beopvey.
| | | | |
Sv. BOETHIUS. 205
heavenly fire, as silver here is, because it has some deserving of some mercy, wherefore it may come after these troubles to everlasting honour. Still I could instruct thee more both concerning the good and concerning the evil, if I now had leisure. But I fear that I should neglect what we were be- fore seeking after, that is, that we would argue so that thou mightest perceive that the wicked have no power, nor any honour, either in this world or in that to come. For foy- merly this appeared to thee the worst of all things, that thou thoughtest they had too much; and thou always didst lament that they were not always punished: and I always said to thee, that they never are without punishment, though it ap- pear not so to thee. But I know, however, that thou wilt lament that they have so long time permission to do evil; and I have always said to thee, that the time is a very little while; and I now say to thee, that the longer it is, the more unhappy they are, and it, would be to them the greatest un- happiness of all, that the time continued till doomsday. And I said to thee also, that they would be more unhappy if their evil weré unjustly passed over, than they would be if their evil were justly punished. Yet it so happens that thou thinkest those who have impunity are happier than those who are punished.
§ V. Then said I: Nothing ever appears to me so true as thy arguments appear to me, at the times when I hear them. But if I turn myself to the judgment of this people, they not only are unwilling to believe this thy doctrine, but they will not even hear it. Then said he: That is no wonder. Thou knowest that the men who have unsound eyes cannot very easily look at the sun when she shines brightest, nor indeed do they choose to look on fire, or on anything bright, though the apple of the eye be left. In like manner the sinful minds
206 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVIII.
bip. spa biop! pa yynngullan Mod ablend mid hopa? ypelan3 pullan. } hi ne mazon zeyion } lohc* pepe beophtan yoppayc- neyye. ‘ ip ye hehyca Viybom. Ac him bip spa pem fuzlum. 7 pem diopum. pe mazon? bec locian on niht Sonne on dex. ye oez blent 3 sioycpap hiopa eazan. 7 Sepe nihte piorcpo hi onlihcap. Foppy penap 6a ablendan Mod. fp pe pio mzeyte ze-
yelp } men yeo alered yrel to donne. 4 yo dz him moze bion
unpicnod. foppem hi ne® lyyc pprpian efcep wzlepe sppece ypa lange 08 he } pyht piton. ac pendap on hiopa unphtan’ pillan J ypypizap epcep pem. Dy ic nat hu nyca® pu me cehyt to pem oyrezum monnum, Se nefpe efcep me ne ypyap. Ie ne yppece nefpe co pem. Ac ic yppece co Se. poppem du ceohhayct } Su yppypize eypcep me. J ypipop ypmecyt on pam ypope Sonne hi 50n. Ne pecce ic hpeet hi Seman. Ic leve nu co Sinum Some ma ponne co hiona. foppam h. ealle lociap mid bam® eazum on pay eopplican Smz. 3 hi him leap eallunza. ezpep xe on pey Moder eagum. ze on peep lichoman. Ac du ana hpilum beyeylyc mid oppe eazan on pa heorenlican ping. mid oppe'? pu locayc nu zec on par eopplcan. roppeem penap pa dypzan ‘} ele mon pie blind ypa hi pm. 7 P nan mon ne meeze yeon!! } hi zerion ne maxon, Dec dyyiz ip anliccoyt pe yum cil yie full hal 3 full zlcape zebonen. 7 spa fullice dionde on eallum cyycum j cpercum, pa hpile pe hic on cmhthade bop.” 5 ypa popp eallne Sonne xiozop had. op pe he pypp zlcer cpefcer medeme. J Sonne lycle wep hip midfephpe peoppe™ beem!* eazum blind. 3 eac pay Moder eazan peoppan ypa ab- lende p he!® nanpuhe ne zemune per de he wpne ep xereah odde zehenbde. j pene peah } he pie elcer Simgey ypa medeme ypa he eppe medemayc!® pane. 3 penp } wzleum men jie ypa ppa him yi. 3 elcum men! pynce! ypa ypa him pincp. peah pe! he Sonne ypa Sypiz sie Hp he pay pene. hpepep pe Sonne pillon”? ealle penan Sey pe he penp. 1c pene peah } pe nyllen.”! Ac polde pican hu pe puhte be pam?? monnum 8e pic ep cpeedon
' Cott. beods. 2 Cott. heopa. 3 Cott. yylan. * Cott. leohz. > Bod. pa max. 6 Bod. et Cott. hine. 7 Cott. unneczan. 8 Cott. nyc. ® Cott. bem. 10 mid oSpe, desunt in MS. Cott. 1 Cott. senion. 12 Gott. br. 18 peopbe, deest in MS. Bod. “ Bod. bam. 15 Cott. hie. 16 Cott. medomipc. 17 pre ppa pa him jy. ¥ elcum men, desunt in MS, Cott. '8 Cott. pmce, 19 beah pe, desunt in MS. Cott. 7° Cott. pulen. 21 Bod. nyllad. 22 Cott. bem.
§ v. BOETHIUS. 207
are blinded by their evil will, so that they are not able to be- hold the light of bright truth, which is the highest wisdom.
But it is with them, as with the birds and the beasts which can see better by night than by day. The day blinds and darkens their eyes, and the darkness of the night enlightens them. Therefore the blinded minds think that this is the greatest happiness, that a man should be permitted to do evil, and his deed should be unpunished. For they are not desirous to inquire after every instruction, until they know what is right, but turn to their evil will, and seek after it. There- fore I know not to what purpose thou teachest me to the foolish men who never inquire after me. I never speak to them ; but I speak to thee, because thou art inclined to seek after me, and labourest more in the pursuit than they do. I care not what they judge. I approve thy judgment more than theirs, for they all look with both eyes, as well with the eyes of the mind as with those of the body, on these earthly things, which excessively delight them. But thou alone sometimes lookest with one eye on the heavenly things, and with the other thou lookest as yet on these earthly things. For the foolish think that every man is as blind as they are, and that no man is able to see what they cannot behold. Such folly is most like ¢o ¢his; that. a child should be born full sound and full healthy, and so flourishing in all excellences and virtues, during childhood and afterwards throughout youth, that he becomes capable of every art ; and then a little before his middle-age, he should become blind in both eyes, and also the eyes of “the mind should become so blinded, that he remembers nothing which he ever before saw or heard :
and nevertheless he should think that he is as capable of everything as he ever was when most capable: and should think that it is with every man as it is with him; and that it. seems to every man as it seems tohim. But*though he were so foolish as to think so, should we all think as he thinks P I think, however, that we should not. But Z wish to know what thou thinkest concerning the men of whom we before
208 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXVIIT.
unc puhce f pepon! pildiopum zelicpan Sonne monnum. hu — micelne /iydom pa hepdon.? me pmcp Seah } hi nebbeen®
neenne :-
§ VI.* Ic de polbe xec* peccan yume puhene pace.’ Ac ic © pac f piy ole hiy nyle® zeleran.” $ iy } pa biop zerezlezpan pe ~ mon picnop.§ Sonne pa bion pe hi preniap. Da pundpode ie pep J cpep. Ic polde f pu me zepeahce® hu!’ hic ypa bion mihte.*? — Da cpep he. Ppepep pu onzice P elec yrelpillende mon 3 ele © yrelpypcende pie pice pyppe. Da cpap ic. Lenox ypeocole ic f © onzice. Da cpep he. Ju ne ip ye ponne yrelpillende and yrel- ©
pypcende Se pone unycyldzan picnop.!® Da cpeep ic. Spa hic ip
rpa pu yezyc."* Da cpep he. Ppepep pu pene p pa sien eapme ~
‘y unzeyeelize pe picer pyppe biop. Da cpp ic. Ne pene ic hip no, ac pat zeapa.'* Da cpep he. Inf pu nu Seman moyte.’® hpeepepne polderc’® pu Seman pices pypppan. Se pone un- yeylozan”’ picnobde. pe Sone pe f pice polode.!® Da cpxd ic. Nir ‘p zelic. ic polde helpan pey pe dep unycyldiz pepe. and henan pone’? pe hine yrelode.”? Da cpep he. Donne pe pmep ye
eapmpa ye 'P yrel dep. Sonneye pe hic parap. Da cpzep ic. Day -
ic zelere P ce zlc unpihe picnung yie peer yfel pe hic dep. ney
pey pe hic pazap. poppam?! lup ypel hine zedep eapmne. ¥ 1¢ ©
onzice ‘ piy iy ypipe”® yaht pacu pu nu pecyc. J ppipe anlic peem pe Su ep pehreyc.”*® ac 1c pat peah p pyy”* folce spa ne pinep :-
§ VII.® Da cpep he. Pel pu hic onzicyc. Ac pa pmgepar
pmziap nu hplum pem Se leyran peapfe ahton. pngiap pem
pe” peep man yrlap. 7 ne pmziap pam”? pe } yrel Sop. pam pepe mane peapr. pe pa oppe unycyldize yrelap.?’ f him mon pynzode co pam”® picum. 7 bade ‘f him**? mon dybde ypa micel pice ypa hi Sam*? oppum unreyldezum dyd5on. spa ppa ye ploca
® Boet. lib. iv. prosa 4.—Nam ne illud quidem, &e.
b Boet. lib. iv. paosa 4.—Atqui nunc, ait, contra faciunt, &e.
1 Cott. paepen, 2 Cott. heypden. 3 Cott. neebben, * Cott. lev. 5 Cott. rpibe pihte paca. 6 Cott. nele. 7 Cott. selyyan. § Cott. picnad. 9% Bod. senehverc. 1 Bod. In, ™ Cott. meahze. 1! Cott. pirnad. Cott. pexrc. ™ Cott. seape. 1 Bod. moyzoyrs. © Cort. polder. 17 Bod. nonereylogan. 18 Cott. bolade. 19 Bod. bonne. ~ Cott. yylode. 21 Cott. ropbem. 7% Bod. ypa. 23 Cott. peahter. 24 Cott. bp. 5 pe, deest in MS. Cott. 78 Cott. bem. 27 Cott. yylas. 28 Cott. beem. » Bod, bam ‘. 30 Cott. beem.
§ VI. VII. BOETHIUS. 209
said, that it appeared to us that they were more like wild beasts than men? How much wisdom had they ? Methinks, however, they have none.
§ VI. I would now utter to thee a true observation, but I know that this people will not believe it: that is, that those persons whom men injure are happier than those are who injure them. Then wondered I at this, and said: I wish that thou wouldest explain to me how it can be so. Then said he: Dost thou understand that every evil-willing man and every evil-doing man is deserving of punishment ? Then said I: Clearly enough I understand that. Then said he: Is he not then evil-willing and evil-doing, who injures the innocent? Then said I: So it is as thou sayest. Then said he: Dost thou think that they are miserable and unhappy, who are deserving of punishment? Then said I: I not only think it, but know 7¢ very well. Then said he: If thou wert now to judge, which wouldest thou judge more deserving of punishment, him who injured the innocent, or him who suffered the injury? Then said I: There is no comparison. I would help him who was innocent, and oppose him who injured him. Then said he: Then, in thy opinion, he ¢s more miserable who does the evil, than he who suffers it. Then
-said I: This I believe, that every unjust punishment is the evil of him who inflicts it, not of him who suffers it; there- fore his evil makes him miserable. And I perceive that this is a very just observation which thou now makest, and very agreeable to those which thou madest before; but I never- theless know that this people will not think so.
§ VIL. Then said he: Thou understandest it well. But advocates now-a-days plead for those who have less need of zt. They plead for those who are injured, and do not plead for those who do the injury. It were more needful to those who injure others who are innocent, that some one should plead for them before the magistrates, and pray that as great hurt might be done to them, as they had done to other innocent persons. As the sick man has need that some one should
210 BOETIUS. CHAP. XXXTX.
ah peapre } hme mon lebe co pam’ lece. he hy uilize. ypa ah ye pe? } ygel dep. hme mon lebde co pam*® picum } mon pep meeze pnipan 7 bepnan hiy unpeapay. Ne cpepe ic na f yrel pie } mon helpe peer unycyldizan* 3 him fonepinzie. Ac 1¢ cpepe p hic iy becpe® $ mon ppeze pone yeyloizan.® 5 1¢ peexe pio fopeyppeec ne Syze" naupep ne pam® yeyloizan.? ne pam’? pe him rope pmzap. zip hi pey pumiap f him hiopa’? yfel un- ppecen yie be py zylcer andepne. Ac ic pac zip pa peyloizan’” zenizne ypeapcan isomer hepdon’ 7 be znzum dele on- zican.'* } hi mihcan!> hiopa yeylba puph’® pice’ zebecan. pe him hep on populde® on become. Sonne noldon hi na cpepan ) hic peene pice. ac polbon cpaepan } hic pepe hiona’® clen- yunz. j heopa bectpunz. 7 nolbon nenne pmgepe ysecan.”° ac luyclice hi poldon lezcan Sa pican hie cucian ezptep hiopa aznum pillan. foppeem ne yeyle nan ply man nenne mannan hatian. ne hacap nan mon pone xoban. buton ye ealpa*! dyye- zoyca.”* ne ‘ nip nan pihc } mon pone yrelan hatize. ac hic ip pihtpe pec him mon milbyize.”* } 1p ponne hiopa mildyung. mon ppece hiopa unpeapar be hiopa xzepyphcum.** Ne yeeal*® ‘nan mon yslocne monnan”® zerapzodne”’ rpencan. ac hme mon yceolde”s leban co Sam”? lace he hip cilize. Da ye Viydom
+ | = ; - _—
pa Sip ypell apeahc hepde. Sa onzan he eft pmyan J pup ©
cpeep.
CAPUT XXXIX-°
§ I. FORP/I dpere xe eoppu Mod mid unpihcpe plounze ypa ypa ypa fop pmbde pa ye hpepap. oddSe fon hpy ztpice ze eopeppe pypde P hio nan zepeald nah. odd3e hp: ne mazon ze xebidan zecynbdelicer deadey. nu he eop ewlce daz copeapder onec. Ppl ne mazon ze zeyion ‘ he ypypap elce Sex epren puzlum. J epcep Siopum. J epcep monnum. 4 ne foplet nan
© Boet. lib. iv. metrum 4.—Quid tantos juvat excitare motus, &e.
1 Cott. baem. 2 be, deest in MS, Cott. 3 Cott. bam. 4 Cott. unreylosan. 5 Cott, bezene. 6 Cott. peyldsan. 7 Bod. dypise. 8 Cott. pam. © Cott. peylosan. 10 Cott. bem. 1 Cott. heopa. 12 Cott. peylosan. 13 Cott. heypden. M4 Cott. onzeaten. 15 Cott.
meahten. Cott. bups. 17 Cott. pyrite. 18 Cott. peopulde. 1 Cott. heopa. 29 Cott. serecan. 2% Cott. eallpa. 2% Cott. oypsoyza. 75 Cott. muilcyize, 4 Cott. unpyphcum. 25 Cott. reyle. 26 Bod. monna. 27 Cott. J 5erapsoone. 28 Cott. peel. 2° Cott. bem.
ee § I BOETHIUS. 211
lead him to the physician, that he may cure him; so has he who does evil, that some one should lead him to the magis- trates, that they may cut off and burn his vices. I do not say that it is wrong that men should help the innocent, and defend him; but I say that it is better that we should accuse the guilty ; and I say that the defence does no good either to the guilty or to him who pleads for him, if they wish that their evil should not be punished in proportion to its guilt. But I know that if the guilty had any spark of wisdom, and in any measure knew that they might make amends for their crimes by punishment, which came upon them here in this world, then they would not say that it was punishment, but would say that it was their purification and their amend- ment; and would seek no advocate, but they would cheer- fully suffer the magistrates to punish them according to their own will. Hence no wise man ought to hate any one. No one hates the good, except the most foolish of all. Nor is it right that we hate the wicked; but it is more right that we have mercy on him. This then is mercy to them, that we punish their vices according to their deservings. No one ought to afflict a sick person who is troubled; but we should lead him toa physician, that he may cure him. When Wisdom had finished this discourse, then began he again to sing, and thus said:
CHAPTER XXXIX.
§ I. WHEREFORE vex ye your minds with evil hatred, as waves through the wind agitate the sea? Or wherefore up- braid ye your fortune, that she has no power? Or why cannot ye wait for natural death, when he every day hastens towards you? Why cannot ye observe that he seeks every day after birds, and after beasts, and after men, and forsakes
P2
212 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX.
peep ap he zerehp  f he wren ypynep. Pala pa pa unge-
yelizan menn ne mazon zebibon hponne he him to cume. ac
yopyceocap hme fopan. rpa spa pilbe deop pillnap opep to ac- — pellenne. Ac hic nepe no manna pyht ‘} hiopa eniz opepne ©
plode. Ac } pene pyht. } hiopa elc zulbe oppum edlean zlcer peoncey epcep hiy zepyphcum. iy } mon lufode pone zodan.
/¢
oe
ypa ypa pihe ip } mon 60. 3 mildyrze pam yrelum. ypa pe ep — cpeedon. lugie pone man. ¥ hazize hiy unpeapar. ceopfe him oF
ypa he ypipoyt meez :-
§ [1.4 Da he pa pir leop arunzen heerde pa zerpeozode’ he ane hpile. Da cpep ic. Nu ic onzice openlice } pio pope ze- yelp scent on zodpa monna ze eapnunza. J yo unyelp prent on yfelpa monna ze eapnunzgum. Ac ic yeczxe xet ‘fp me ne pincp nauhz lycel x05" pyyer andpeapdan lire zereelpa. ne eac nauhe lycel ypel hip unzerzelpa. foppaem ic nefpe ne zereah ne zehypde neenne piyne mon pe ma polde bion ppecca. J eapm. J zlpiodiz.® J foprepen. Sonne peliz. 3 peopp. 7 pice. 7 Fopemepe on hiy aznum eande. foppeem hi seczap* } hi meexen? py® ep hiopa Yiydome fulzan 7 hme xehealdan. zip hiopa anpeald bip
rullice ofep } fole pe him unbep bip. 3 eac on’ pumum dele
ofep pa Se him on neaperce bip ymbucon.§ foppam® -p hi mazen’’ henan 8a yrlan. and pypppian"? pa zoban."* poppem ye zoda'* bip yrmle appyppe. ezpep xe on pir andpeapdan lie. xe on Sam'* copeapdan. 3 ye yfela. pe mon hip ypley’’ zercypan ne mez. bip yimle pivey pyppe. xe on pipe populde. ze on pepe
copeapdan. Ac 1c pundpize ypipe ypiplice fop hp: hit ypa pence — ypa hic nu ofc dep. ‘P iy ‘ muiyclice pica’® 3 manizpealde’?
eappopal’ cumap co Sam! zobum ypa hi co pam”? ypelum rceoldon. 4 Sa x05"! pe yceoldbon bion edlean zobum monnum zoopa peopca. cumap co yrlum monnum. foppem ic polbe pican nu ec pe hu pe lcode p xeppixle. Ic hay pundpode micle py lay. zip 1c pyyrce”’ Pp hic pear zebypede bucon Loder pillan 7 bucon hiy zeprcneyye. Ac ye elmihciza’® Lod herp zeeced
4 Boet. lib. iv. prosa 5.—Hie ego, video, inquam, &e.
! Cott. serpusode. 8 Cott. 500d. 3 Cott. elbiodig. —* Cott. peexad. 5 hi meesen, desunt in MS. Bod. § Cott. be. 7 Cott. be. 8 Cott. bioS ymburan. ° Cott. ropbem. 1° Cott. maexen. ™ Cott. yypbpan. 12 Cott. so0dan, 1 Cott. sooda, ™ Cott. bem. 1 Bod. yyel. 1% Cott. miyheu picu. 7 Cott. manispeald. 18 Cott. eaprobu. 19 Cott. peem. 20 Cott. beem, 21 Cott. 5000, 22 Cott. pyre. 23 Cott. elmehcega.
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 213
no track till he seizes that which he pursues? Alas! that unhappy men cannot wait till he comes to them, but antici- pate him, as wild beasts wish to destroy each other! But it would not be right in men, that any one of them should hate another. But this would be right, that every one of them should render to another recompense of every work accord- ing to his deserts; that is, that one should love the good, as it is right that we should do, and should have mercy on the wicked, as we before said; should love the man, and hate his vices ; and cut them off, as we best may.
§ Il. When he had sung this lay, then was he silent for sometime. Then said 1: Now I clearly understand that true happiness is founded on the deservings of good men, and misery is founded on the deservings of wicked men. But I will yet say that methinks the happiness of this present life is no little good, and its unhappiness no little evil. For I never saw nor heard of any wise man who would rather be an exile, and miserable, and foreign, and despised, than wealthy, and honour- able, and powerful, and eminent in hisown country. For they say that they can the better fulfil their wisdom, and observe it, if their power be ample over the people that are under them, and also in some measure over those who are in the neigh- bourhood round about them, because they are able to repress the wicked, and promote the good. For the good is always to be honoured, both in this present life and in that to come; and the wicked, whom man cannot restrain from his evil, is always deserving of punishment, both in this world and in that tocome. But I very much wonder why it should so fall out, as it now often does; that is, that various punishments and manifold misfortunes come to the good, as they should to the wicked; and the blessings which should be a reward to good men for good works, come to wicked men. Therefore I would now know from thee, how that course of events were approved by thee. I should wonder at it much less, if I knew that it happened by chance, without God’s will, and without his knowledge. But the Almighty God has increased my
gag ST. ALBFR TS CORTES
USRARY BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX.
minne eze j mime pafunza mid Siyyum pmzum. foppem he —
hpilum yelp 6a zeyeelpa Seem zobum.' 7 pem yflum unyelpa. spa hit pub pape p he simle? dyde. hpilum he ere zepagap } pa zodan* habbap unyelpa 3 unzelimp on menezum pmzum. J da yrelan habbap zeyzelpa. 7 him zelimpp* ogc epcep opa aznum pulan. py 1c ne mez nan opep xepencan. bucon hit pear ypa ze- bypize. bucon Su me zet py zerceadlicop opep zepecce. Da
broth
oy fat
andypanode he ymbe lonz 4 cpap. Nip hic nan pundop deah hpa pene } ypylcey hpeec? unmyndlinza zebypize.° ponne he ne —
can’ onzican 3 zepeccan rop hpi Lod ypyle* xeparap. Ac du ne yealz no tpeozan? } spa z0d'° yceoppend J pealdend’ eallpa ze-
yeearca pihclice yceop’ eall f he rceop.’? 3 pyhce Semp J ~
pealc’® ealley. peah pu nyce fop hpi'* he ypa J ypa d0:-
§ IL1.° Da he Sa piy rpell apehc” heepde. Sa onzan he pinzan J cpep. Ppa unlepedpa ne pundpap pey podeper pepelder 7 hiy ypipeneyye. hu he elce Sez uton ymbhpyprsd ealne Sipne middaneand. ode hpa ne pundpap } ce yume cunzlu habbap yeypcpan hpyppe Sonne yume habban. ypa ypa.cunzlu habbap pe pe havap peeney Siyla. pop py hi habbap ypa pceoptne ymbh- pypre. foppr hi ymz ypa neah Sam noppende pepe eaxe. Se eall per podon on hpeprp. ode hpa ne parap pey. bucon da ane pe
hic picon. ) yume cunzlu habbap lenzpan ymbhpypfe. ponne —
yume habban. 7 Sa lenzercne pe ymb pa eaxe middepeapde hpeanpap. ypa nu Boewiey dep. 7 Sacupnuy se pceoppa. ne cymp pep ep ymb ppicciz pmepa pep he xp pep. OdSe hpa ne
pundpap Sey Pp yume ycreoppan zepicap undep pa yee. ypa ypa — yume men penap  y10 yunne 50 Sonne hio co yetle zep. Ac —
hio ne bip Seah py neap pepe ye pe hio bip on midne deez. Ppa ne parap Sey Sonne ye fulla mona pypp ofeptozen mid ploycpum, od8e ere ‘P Sa peeoppan cmap befopan pam monan. ‘J ne ycmap beropan pape sunnan. Sipey hi pundpiap 7 maniey pylhcer. 3 ne pundpiad na‘ ce men ¥ ealle cpuca puhta habbap yinzalne 3 unnycne andan becpuh him. Od<se hp ne pundpiap hi pey ‘P hic hpilum punpap. hpilum na ne ongmp. odde eft ze- piney yee. J pmbda. J ypa. 7 lander. odde hpi} ip peoppe J ec
© Boet. lib. iv. metrum 5.—Si quis Arcturi sidera nescit, &e.
1 Cott, 5005um. 2 Cott. yymle, % Cott. soodan. —* Cott. limp’. 5 Cott. sehper. 6 Cott. sebepige. 7 Cott. con. § Cott. op hpy rpyle Lod. ® Cott. on tpiosan. 10 Cott. 5000. 1 Cott. paldend. 12 Cott. Zepceop. 13 Cott. pelz. 14 Cott. hpy. 8 Cott. apeahs.
§ 111. BOETHIUS. 215
fear and my astonishment by these things. For he some- times gives felicities to the good, and infelicities to the wicked, as it were right that he always did. Sometimes again he per- mits that the good have infelicities and misfortunes in many - things; and the wicked have happiness, and it frequently happens to them according to their own desire. Hence [ cannot think otherwise but that it so happens by chance, un- less thou still more rationally show me the contrary. Then answered he, after a long time, and said: It is no wonder if any one think that something of this kind happens unde- signedly, when he cannot understand and explain wherefore God so permits. But thou oughtest not to doubt that so good a creator and governor of all things, rightly made all that he has made, and rightly judges and rules 2 all, though thou knowest not why he so and so may do.
§ IZ. When he had made this speech, then began he to sing, and said: Who of the unlearned wonders not at the course of the sky, and its swiftness; how it every day re- volves about all this middle-earth? Or who wonders not that some stars have a shorter circuit than others have, as the stars have which we call the waggon’s shafts? They have so short a circuit, because they are so near the north end of the axis, on which all the sky turns. Or who is not astonished at this, except those only who know it, that some stars have a longer circuit than others have, and those the longest which revolve midward about the axis, as Bootes does? And that the star Saturn does not come where it before was till about thirty winters? Or who wonders not at this, that some stars depart under the sea, as some men think the sun does when shesets? But she nevertheless is not nearer to the sea than she is at mid-day! Whois not astonished when the full moon is covered over with darkness ? or again, that the stars shine before the moon, and do not shine before the sun? At this and many a like thing they wonder, and wonder not that men and all living creatures have continual and useless enmity with each other. Or why wonder they not at this, that it sometimes thunders, and sometimes begins not? Or, again, at the strife of sea and winds, and waves and land? or why
216 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX. . Fop pepe sunna seman to hiy aznum zecynbe peoppe. Ac p unzeyteOoize pole pundpap py pe hic yeldoyc zeprhp. Seah hic layye pundop sie. J penap p f ne" pie eald zerceare. ac pe pear — zepopden nipane. Ac da pe pippet zeopne peoppap J onzimnap — ponne leopnian. zip him Lod abpic of pam Mode  dyyiz H hic © zp mid ofepppizen pey. Sonne ne pundpiap hi no rela per pe hi nu pundpiap :- ; § IV.‘ Da ye fiydom pa pip leop ayunzen heyde. Sa ze- ypuzobe he anelycle hple. Dacpepic. Spa hic iy ypa du yexye.? | Ac 1c polde zec } pu me hpet hpezu* openlicop xepeahte* be pepe piyan pe mim Mod ypipoye zedpered herp. p ip P 1c Se ep ymb acyade. foppam hic pey yimble® xec pm xepuna } du poldeyc axlcum Mode dizlu mz cecan J yeldbcupe:-° Da — onzan he ymeancian 3 cpep co me. Du ypenyse’ me on da meytan yppece J on Sa eapfopeytan to Zepeccenne. pa pace yohzon ealle uppican 4 ypipe ypiplce ymbypuncon. 4 uneape zniz com to ende pepe yppece. foppam® hic ip peap pape yppeece J Spe arcunze.? } ce simile’? ponne Sep an cpeo ofadon bip. ponne bip Sap unpim aytyped. spa ypa mon on eald ypellum yezp'! } an nebdpe pape Se heepde nizan™ heapdu. 7 pimle.™ zip mon anpa hpulc ofyloh."* ponne peoxon peep plofon of pam’? anum hearbe. 8a zebypede’® hic pet pep com se Fopemepa Epculuy co. re pay lobe yunu. pa ne mihte he ze- pencan hu he hi mid znize cperte opopeuman yeeolde. ep he hi bepeez mid pubda uran. 7 popbepnbe”’ Sa mid Fype. Spa ip Syye yppeece pe Su me eefcep arcayc.'* uneape hype cymp emz mon of. zif he epee on cymp.'” ne cymp he nefpe to openum ende. bucon he hebbe ypa pceapp andzec*® ypa ‘p fyp. Foppam ye Se ymb * aycian piles he yceal apeyc pcan hpet pe plo anrealde poperceapunz Loder. ¥ hpaec pypd sie. 3 hpeec pear xe- bypize. 3 hpec pre xobcund anbdzic. 7 xodcund fpopeciohhung. and hpeec monna ypeodom pie. Nu Su miht ongzican. hu hepiz 4 hu zeaprope*? pip ip eall co zepeccanne. Ac ic yeeal peah
f Boet. lib. iv. prosa 6.—Ita est, inquam, &e.
Ine, deest in MS. Bod. et Cott. 2 Cott. yeesy'c. 3 Cott. hpusu. 4 Bod. sepehcert. 5 Cott. pymle. © Cott. reldcuS. 7 Cott. ppeenys. 5 Cott. popbeem. ® Cott. arcunsx. 1° Cott. yymle. M Cott. pesd. 2 Cott, mison. 13 Cott. pymle. ' Cott. hpele oraylos. © Cott. bem. 16 Cott. sebenede. 17 Cott. yopbaepnde. 8 Cott. acyays. 19 Cott. cemS, 2 Cott, andgic, = #1 Cott. eaprobe.
§ Iv. BOETHIUS. PAW
ice is formed, and again by the shining of the sun returns to its own nature? But the inconstant people wonder at that which it most seldom sees, though it be less wonderful; and thinks that that is not the old creation, but has by chance newly happened. But they who are very inquisitive and en- deavour to learn, if God removes from their ‘mind the folly with which it was before covered, then will they not wonder at many things which they now wonder at.
§ IV. When Wisdom had sung this lay, then was he silent a little while. Then said I: So it is as thou sayest. But I am still desirous that thou wouldest instruct me somewhat more distinctly concerning the thing which has chiefly troubled _ my mind, that is, what I before asked thee. For it was always hitherto thy wont that thou wouldest teach every mind ab- struse and unknown things. Then began he to smile, and said to me: Thou urgest me to the greatest argument, and the most difficult to explain. This explanation all philoso- phers have sought, and very diligently laboured about, and scarcely any one has come to the end of the discussion. For it is the nature of the discussion and of the inquiry, that always when there is one doubt removed, then is there an innumerable multitude raised. So men in old tales say, that there was a serpent which had nine heads, and whenever any one of them was cut off, then grew there seven from that one head. Then happened it that the celebrated Hercules came there, who was the son of Jove. Then could not he imagine how he by any art might overcome them, until he surrounded them with wood, and then burned ¢hem with fire. So is this argument which thou askest about: with difficulty comes any man out of it,if he enter into 7¢. He never comes toa clear end, unless he have an understanding as sharp as the fire. For he who will inquire concerning this ought first to know what the simple providence of God is, and what fate is, and what happens by chance, and what the divine knowledge is, and the divine predestination, and what the freedom of men is. Now thou mayest perceive how weighty and difficult all this is to explain. But I will nevertheless endeavour to
218 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX.
hpeec hpeza’ hir onzmnan pe co taecanne. foppam? ic habbe on- zicen } hic ip ypipe micel lecedom Sinpe ysopze. ziF pu piper auht onzityc. Seah hic me lanz co lepenne pie. yoppeem hic ip — neah pepe cide Se 1c zeciohhod hzfbe on oSep peope to Fonne. J xec nebbe Sir zedon. 3 me Smncp eac f pu ysadize hpect © hpeznunzey*® and pe pimcen co ewlenze pay lanzan ypell. rpelee Se nu lyrce leopa.* 1¢ pac eac } Se heopa? lyre. Ac du peeale — peah zepohan yume hpile. ic ne mez hit nu ypa hpape apmzan. ne emean® nabbe. St hic iy ypipe long ypell. Da cpap ic. — Do ypepep pu pille:- § V.s Da onzon he yppecan yprpe feoppan ymbucon. rpilce — he na pa yppece ne meende. j tiohhode hic peah pideppeapder — J cpep. Ealle® zeycearca. zerepenlice and unzerepenlice.? pollu | J unyzllu” onfop ec peem yoillan.’) 7 et pam xepceppizan. F zt pam’” anyealban Lobe. endebypbneyye. 7 andplican. 7 xe- meczunze. J yophpem hit spa xzerceapen peey. foppem he pat py’ he zerceop eall } he xerceop. nif him nan puhe** unnyc pey Se he zeyceop. Se Lod punap yimle’’ on pepe hean cearcpe — hiy anrealdneyye 7 bileprcneyye. Sonan he dz]p maneza 4 miyc- lice!’ zemeczunza eallum hip zerceapcum. and ponon™ he pele — eallpa. Ac . pte pe hacap Lobdey foneponc ¥ hip poperceapung.  bip. 3a hpile pe hic pep mid him bip. on hy Mode. eppam"s pe hic zeppemed peoppe. da hpile pe hic zepohe bip. Ac yrddSan hic pullppemed bip. Sonne hacap pe hit pypd. Be py mez ele mon pican } hi’? pmt axpep xe tpezen naman. xe tpa Sing.”? fopepone 3 pypd. Se fopepone ip in Fees oh Zepceadpiypner. ylo ip feeye on pam hean yceoppende*! pe eall ropepac hu his zepeoppan yceal ap wp hic zepeoppe. Ac p ‘p pe pypd harap. p bip Lobdey peonc pe he elce dz pypcp. expep xe per pe pe xe- yeop. ze peey pe uy unzerepenlic bip. Acye zodcunda fonepone, heapenap ealle zerceayca P hi ne mocon coylupan of heopa endebypdneyye.”” Sio pypd Sonue dlp eallum zeycearrum and- plican. J ycopa, J cida. J Zemeczunza. Ac plo pypd cymp oF
& Boet. lib. iv. prosa 6.—Tum velut ab alio orsa principio, &e.
1 Cott. hpusu. 2 Cott. popbem. 3 Cott. hpusunungzey. * Cott. hopa. 5 Cott. hiopa. 6 Cott. emeczan. 7 Cott. polde. § Cott. Calla. 9 Cott. sepepenlica and ungerepenhica. 1° Bod. pille 7 unpille. 1 Bod. unyzillan. 2 Cott. bam. 18 Cott. hpy. * Cott. phe. 15 Cott. yymle. 16 Cott. mipleca. 17 Cott. bonan. 18 Cott. epbem. 19 Bod. et Cott. hiv. 20 Cott. pines. 2! Cott. peeppende. 22 Bod,
pyponerye.
§ v. BOETHIUS. 219
teach thee a little of it, because I have conceived it to bea very powerful remedy for thy sorrow, if thou learn something of this, though it be long for me to teach. For it is near the time when I had intended to begin other work, and I have not yet finished this: and methinks, too, thou art rather weary, and these Jong discourses appear to thee too lengthy, so that thou art now desirous of my songs. I know, too, that they give thee pleasure. But thou must nevertheless bear with me for some time. I cannot so readily sing it, nor have I leisure, for it is a very long argument. Then said I: Do as thou wilt.
§ V. Then began he to speak very far about, as if he - intended not that discourse, and nevertheless approached thitherward, and said: All creatures visible and invisible, still and moving, receive from the immovable, and from the steadfast, and from the singly-existing God, order, and form, and measure; and therefore it was so ordained, because he knew wherefore he made all that he made. Nothing of that which he has created is useless to him. God dwells always in the high city of his unity and simplicity. Thence he dis- tributes many and various measures to all his creatures, and thence he governs them all. But that which we call God’s providence and foreknowledge, is such while it is with him, in his mind, before it is fulfilled, and so long as it is designed ; but after it is fulfilled, then we callit fate. Hence may every man know that these are both two names, and two things, providence and fate. Providence is the divine intelligence which is fixed in the high Creator, who foreknows all, how it shall come to pass, before it happens. But that which we call fate, is God’s work which he every day works, both what we see, and what is invisible to us. But the divine provi- dence restrains all creatures, so that they cannot slip from their order. Fate, then, distributes to all creatures, forms, and places, and times, and measures. But fate comes from
>
220 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX.
pam! zepicce 3 of pam? fopeponce per zelmiherzan® Lobe. re pypep maycepe hiy unayeczendlicum fopeponce ponne’® ypa —- ; ypa he* wa
§ VI. Spa ypa ele cpefoeza pencp J meancap hiy peope on ~ hiy Mode zp zp he it pypce. 3 pypep yrddan eall. prior pand- — piende pypd pe pe pypd hacap. fepp zpcep hip fopeponce. 5 ~ zepcep hiy zepeahte. ypa spa he tiohhap hic pie. peah hit up © manizpealdlic Since. rum x0d.° yum yrel. hit ip peah him anfeald x05.° ronpam® he hic eall co zo5um ende bpinzp.7 7 pop zobe® dep eall } he dep. Sippan pe hic hacap pypd. pySdan hic ze- © pophc bip. ep hic peer Lobdey® popeponce J hip fopectiohhunz. Da — pypd he Sonne pypcp. od5e puph da zodan"” enzlar. odSe puph monna ysapla. od6e puph opeppa zercearca hr. odde puph heo- fener cunzl. oppe puph Sapa yeuccena? miylice lotppencap. hpilum puph an pana. hpilum puph eall da. Ac * ip opentics cup. ‘} slo zobcunde rope teohhung iy anfeald 7 unapendendlic.”
J pele elcey pmzey enbebypehes. and eall pmz xehipap. Sume?* ping ponne on Siyye populde™ yint undep pred pepe pypde. pume hipe nane!® puht unbdeppiede!® ne pine. ac pio pypd. J eall pa Sinz pe hine mabopEe yinc. ymt undeppied pam’? zodcundan fopeponce. be pam"’ 1c pe meez yum biypell yeczan. } Su mihe's Sy ypeocolop onzican hpylce men biop undeppied pepe pypoe. — hpylce!® ne biop. Eall?° Sioy unytille zepceape 3 peoy*? hpeap- lende hpeaprap”” on Sam** yrillan Lode. 3 on pam xercedde- xan. J on pam** anrealdan. 3 he pele eallpa xepcearca pa ypa he et ypuman zecihhod herbe 7 zee herp -
§ VIL. Spa ypa on peeney eaxe hpeapfap** pa hpeol. 4 pio eax ycenc ycille. 7 bypp peah eallne” Sone yeon. and pele ealler peer yeepeldey.”°  hpeol hpeprp. ymbuton.”? 7 pio naga”® nehye Seppe eaxe. yo pepp micle peyclicop 3 opropzlicop Sonne pa felzan”? bon. ypelce pio eax sie ‘} hehyce zod. pe pe nemnap Lod. 4
h Boet. lib. iv. prosa 6.—Sicut enim artifex, faciende rei, &e.
i Boet. lib. iv. prosa 6.—Nam ut orbium circa eundem, &e,
1 Cott. baem. 2 Cott. elmehzisan. 3 bonne, deest in MS. Cott. “Cott. hpa. 5 Cott. 5005. © Cott. poppem. 7 Cott. bpensd. —§ Cott. s00de. ® Cott. Toodey. 10 Cott. So0dan. 1 Bod, yeuccena loz. 12 Cott. unandpendhie. 18 Cott. Sumu. “ Cott. peopulde. 15 Cott. nan. 16 Cott. undepbied. 17 Cott. bem. | Cott, meehc. 19 hpylee, deest in MS. Bod. *0 Bod. eal. 21 Cott. prop. 22 Bod. hpeaprod. 23 Cott. bem. 4 Cott. hpeapyiad. 25 Cott. elne. 78 Cott. peepelzey. 27 Cott. ymbucan. 28 Cott, nayu. 2” Cott. pela.
§ vi. VII. BOETHIUS. 221
the mind, and from the providence of Almighty God. He, therefore, works after his unspeakable providence, whatsoever he wills. ;
§ VI. As every artificer considers and marks out his work in his mind before he executes it, and afterwards executes it all; this varying fortune which we call fate, proceeds after his providence and after his counsel, as he intends that it should be. Though it appear to us complicated, partly good, and partly evil, it is nevertheless to him singly good, because he brings it all to a good end, and does for good all that which he does. Afterwards, when it is wrought, we call it fate; before, it was God’s providence and his predestination. He therefore directs fortune, either through good angels, or through the souls of men, or through the life of other creatures, or through the stars of heaven, or through the various deceits of devils; sometimes through one of them, sometimes through them all. But this is evidently known, that the divine predestination is simple and unchangeable, and governs everything according to order, and. fashions everything. Some things, therefore, in this world are sub- ject to tate, others are not at all subject to it. But fate, and all the things which are subject to it, are subject to the divine providence. Concerning this, I can mention to thee an example, whereby thou mayest the more clearly under- stand which men are subject to fate, and which are not. All this moving and this changeable creation revolves on the immovable, and on the steadfast, and on the singly-existing God; and he governs all creatures as he at the beginning had, and still has determined.
§ VIL. As on the axle-tree of a waggon the wheel turns, and the axle-tree stands still, and nevertheless supports all the waggon, and regulates all zts progress—the wheel turns round, and the nave, being nearest to the axle-tree, goes much more firmly and more securely than the fellies do—so the axle-tree may be the highest good which we call God, and
222 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX, : :
Sa yeleycan men fanan nehyc Lobe. rpa spa yio naru fepp nehyc*
pepe eaxe. and pa midbmeyvan spa spa spacan. foppampe? zlcer ;
:" é
ypacan bip opep ende faeyt on pepe nage. opep on Szepe felze. —
ypa bip pam® midleyctan monnum. oppe hpile he ymeap on hiy
Mode ymb piy eopplice hr.* oppe hpile ymb f zodcunbdlice. — ypelce® he locie mid oppe eazan to heofonum. mid oppe co — eoppan. ypa ypa pa® ypacan ycicap’ opep ende on pepe felze. —
Opep on pepe nare. middepeand ye ypaca® bid zexzSpum emn neah. peah opep ende bio faye on pepe nare. opep on pepe yelze. spa biop $a midbmeycan? men on middan pam ppacan. J pa becpan?° nean pepe nare. 7 pa meycan"™ nean pam’ relzum, biop peah yeyce. on pape nare.* 3 ye nara on pepe eaxe. Ppeec 8a pelza Seah hanziap'* on Sam ypacan. peah hi eallunza pealopizen on pepe eoppan. ypa Sop pa meycan men on pam midmeycum. 3 pa midmeycan! on pam berycan. 7 da becycan on Lobe. Deah pa meycan ealle hiopa luge penden co Siyye populde. hi ne mazon pep onpunian. ne to nauhte ne peoppap. zip hi be nanum dele ne biop zereeycndde co Lobe. pon ma pe pey hpeohley!® yelza mazon bion on™” pam feepelde.’® zip hi ne biop feyce on pam’ ypacum.”° 7 Sa rpacan on Sepe eaxe. Da yelza’* biop ryppere pepe eaxe. popdem hi ranad unzepyde- heoyc.” yio nafu fyepp nehyc Sepe eaxe. roppy hio feepp ze- yundrullicoye.”® ypa dop Sayeleycan men. rpa hi hiopa lure neap Lobe lecap. and ypipop pay eopplican Sinz fopreop.”* rpa hi biop opropzpu.”® 4 ley peccap. hu yio pypd pandpize. odSe hpaee hio”® bnenze. rpa ypa pio naru bid yimle?’ ypa zeyund. hneeppen da yelza on P Se hi hneppen. 3 Seah bip po nafu hpec hpuzu codeled ypom pepe eaxe. Be py Su mihc** onzican ‘fp pe”® pen bip micle lenz zerund pe ley bip codzled ypom pape eaxe. ypa biop $a men eallpa opyropzoyce*® xzpen xe Sipey andpeandan liger eapropa.®* ze Say copeandan. pa Se feeyce biop on Lode. ac ypa hi ypipop®? biop aryndpode** ppam Lode. ypa hi pprpop*#
1 Cott. neahyc. 2 Cott. popbeembe. 3 Cott. beem. * hy, deest in MS. Cott. > Cott. ppilee. § Bod. bey. 7 Cott. priciad. 8 Bod. middepeapone ppaca. » Bod. meeyvan. Bod. bepan. © Bod. et Cott. mectpan. 2 Cott. bem, 18 Cott. nye. ™ Cott. hongia’. 15 Cott. mezerctan. 16 Cott. hpeoley. 17 on, deest in MS. Bod. 18 Cott. peem yeepelze. 19 Cott. bem. 7? Bod. ypacanum. 21 Cott. pelzea. 22 Cott. unsepedelhicore. 28 Cott. sepundheoyc. *4 and ypipop bar eopdhcan bing yopyeos, desunt in MS. Cott. 25 Cott. opropspan. %6 Cott. hi. 27 Cott. yymle. 8 Cott.meahz. Cott. be.  % Cott. opropserze. 31 Cott. eapyobe. % Cott. yybup. 83 Cott. arynopede. 34 Cott. ppipup.
§ vir. BOETHIUS. 223
the best men go nearest to God, as the nave goes nearest to the axle-tree; and the middle class of men as the spokes. For of every spoke, one end is fixed in ‘the nave, and the other in the felly. So is it with respect to the middle class of men. One while he meditates in his mind concerning this earthly life, another while concerning the heavenly: as if he should look with one eye to the heavens, and with the other to the earth. As the spokes stick, one end in the felly, and the other in the nave, and the spoke is midward, equally near to both, though one end be fixed in the nave, and the other in the felly ; so are the middle class of men in the middle of the spokes, and the better nearer to the nave, and the most numerous class nearer to the fellies. They are nevertheless fixed in the nave, and the nave on the axle-tree. But the fellies depend on the spokes, though they wholly roll upon the earth. So do the most numerous class of men depend on the middle class, and the middle class on the best, and the best on God. Though the most numerous elass turn all their love towards this world, they are not able to dwell there, nor do they come to anything, if they are not in some measure fastened to God, any more than the fellies of the wheel can make any progress if they are not fastened to the spokes, and the spokes to the axle-tree. The fellies are farthest from the axle-tree, therefore they go the most roughly. The nave goes nearest the axle-tree, therefore it goes the most securely. So do the best men. As they place their love nearer to God, and more despise these earthly things, so are they more free from care, and are less anxious how fortune may vary, or what it may bring. Provided the nave be always thus secure, the fellies may rest on what they will. And yet the nave is in some measure separated from the axle-tree. As thou mayest perceive that the waggon is much longer secure, which is less separated from the axle-tree; so, of all men, those are most untroubled, with the difficulties either of this present life, or of that to come, who are fixed in God; but as they are farther
4 224 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX.
biop zedperde 4 zeypencce. ezpep ze on Mode ze on lichoman. Spyle Aca pe pypd hacap..... § VIIL«
- +
... Be pam’ zodcundan fopeponce ypylce jlo
ymeaunz J ysio zeyceadpiyney iy TO Mecanne pip pone zeapopican?
and ypelce } hpeol bip co mevanne pip Sa eaxe. Foppam y1o eax —
pelc ealley peey paeney. pa Sep ye zobcunda foneponc. he yrypep? Sone podon Jj da cunzlu. 3 Sa eoppan zedep yrille. 3 xemetzap pa feopep zeycearca. P ip paecvep. J eoppe. 3 Fyp. J lyfe. Sa he ppapap 3 zeplicezap.* hpilum ere unplicezap 3 on oppum hipe zebpenzp J eft zeednipap. 3 cydpep® ele cudop. and hic® epe
“bbe
.xehyc ¥ xehelc. Sonne hic popealdod bip. and popreapod. 7 efe —
xeeopp J zeednipap ponne ponne he pile.? Sume uppican® peah yeczap  yio pypd pealde® ezpep xe xeyeelpa xe unzeyelpa elcer monney. Ic Sonne yecze. spa ypa ealle Cpiycene men yeczap. f ylo zodcunde fopeciohhungz hiy pealde. ney pio pypd. 7 1¢ pat $ hio 5emp eal ping ypipe phe. Seah unzerceadpryum monnum?? ypa ne pince. Pi penap P Sapa zlc,pie Lod. Se hiona pillan pulzep. Nir hic nan pundop. poppem hi biop ablende mid
dam" pioycpum hiopa!® yeylba. Ac re zobcunda fopeponc hie *
undepycenc eall ypipe pyhce.*® Seah up pmce. pop upum dyyrze. ic on poh fape. foppam™ pe ne cunnon ‘ phe unbep- ycandan. Pe demp Seah eall ypipe pyhce. Seah uy hpilum ypa ne Since :-
§ IX.! Ealle men ypypiap wfcep pam hehycan zobde.'® ze zode!® ze yrele. Ac poppy ne mazon Sa!? yrelan cuman co pam!* hean hpore eallpa zoba.!® poppam?? hi ne ppymap on pihe epcep. Ic pac”! Seah Su cpepe? nu hponne co me. Ppyle unpyhc mez bion”® mape Sonne he** zeparize hic xepyppe.*° rpa hic hpilum zepypp. p peem zod5um”* becymp angeald yrel on pyre populde.?? 5 pam yplum anreald x05. 4 oppe*® hpile eezpep zemenzed. ezpep ze pam zodum.”? ze pam yrlum. Ac ic pe
k Boet. lib. iv. prosa 6.—Igitur uti est ad intellectum, &e.
1 Boet. lib. iv. prosa 6.—Nihil est enim quod mali caus&, &e. 1 Cott. baem. 2 Bod. seapepizon. Cott, Seapopican 7 ypylce bay lenan ping bioS co mevanne prs pa ecan ¥ ypylce } hpeol. 3 Cott.
ayzeped. * Cott. sedSpapad J phzesad. © Cott. mdpeS, § Bod. et Cott. hi. 7 he pile, desunt in MS. Cott. § Cott. wSpiocan. 9 Cott. pold. 10 Cott. men. 1 Cott. bam. 2 Cott. heopa. 13 Cott. pihce. ™“ Cott. yopbem. ™ Cott. pprmad. 1 Cott. 500d. 17 Cott. p. 18 Cott. bam. '9 Cott. 5005a, 20 Cott. ropbem. 21 Cott. naz. 22 Cott. cpaebe. 28 Cott. beon. *4 Cott. se. 26 Cott. sepeopbe. 26 Cott.soodum. * Cott, peopulde. % Cott. odppe. °° Cott. soodum.
§ Vitti. 1x. BOETHIUS. 225
separated from God, so are they more troubled and afflicted both in mind and in body. Such is what we call fate. . .
§ VIII. . . . With respect to the divine providence; as argument and reasoning is, compared with the intellect, and such the wheel is, compared with the axle-tree. For the axle-tree regulates all the waggon. In like manner does the divine providence. It moves the sky and the stars, and makes the earth immovable, and regulates the four elements, that is, water, and earth, and fire, and air. These it tempers and forms, and sometimes again changes their appearance, and brings them to another form, and afterwards renews them: and nourishes every production, and again hides and preserves at when it is grown old and withered, and again discovers and renews 7¢ whensoever he wills. Some philosophers how- ever say, that fate rules both the felicities and the infelicities of every man. But I say, as all Christian men say, that the divine predestination rules over him, not fate. And I know that it decrees everything very rightly ; though to unwise men it does not appear so. They think that everything which fulfils their desire, is God. It is no wonder, for they are blinded by the darkness of their sins. But the divine provi- dence understands everything very rightly, though it seems to us, through our folly, that it goes wrongly; because we cannot perfectly understand it. He, however, ordains all very rightly, though to us it sometimes does not appear so.
§ IX. All men, the good ‘as well as the wicked, seek after the highest good. But the wicked are unable to come to the high roof of all goods for this reason, that they do not seek after it rightly. I know, however, that thou wilt on some occasion say to me, What injustice can be greater, than that he should permit it to come to pass, as it sometimes does, that to the good unmixed evil happens in this world, and to the wicked unmixed good; and at other times both mixed, as well to the good as to the wicked? But I ask thee whether thou
226 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX.
arcize hpepep pu pene } wniz mon pie spa andzecrull! $ he © meze onzican elene mon on pyht hpelc he pie. f he naupep — ne sie ne becvepa ne pypya Sonne he hiy pene. Ic pac Seah H hi — ne mazon. Ac peoppap ypipe ofc on pon ye sido. de ume men ~ yeczap P sie mede pyppe. sume men yeczap fH he pie pycer ~ pyppe. Deah hpa mzze onzican hpet open do. he ne mez pican hpec he Sencp. Deah he meze yume hry pillan onzivan. — ponne ne mez he eallne. Ic pemez eac peccan yum biypell be ~ pem } pu mht dy ypeocolop onzican. Seah hic unzerceadpiye © men onzican ne mezen. ‘f iy pop hpi se zoda lece yelle Sam halum men serene dpenc J ypetne. J oppum halum bicepne 7 ycpanzne. 3 hpilum ere pem unhalum. sumum hpne. pumum ycpanzne. sumum ypetne. yumum bicepne. Ie pat } ele papa pe Sone cperc ne can. pile pey pundpian fop hpy hi spa don. Ac iy ne pundpiap da lecay nauht. foppem hi piton } pa oppe nycon. foppeem hi cunnon elcey hiopa medtpumneyye on- zican Jj tocnapan.” 3 eac Sa cpeycay pe pep pip pceolon. Ppat ip yapla heelo. buce pihcpipnep. od8e hpet 1p hiopa uncpymney. buve unpeapay. Ppa iy ponne betepa lece pepe yaple. ponne he® Se hi zeyceop. ‘f iy Lod. he apap pa xzoban.* 7 picnap Sa yrlan. he pac hpey ale pyppe bip. my hic nan pundop. poppeem he og prem hean hpoge hit eall zephp. and ponan miycap aud meczap elcum be hiy zepyphcum :-
§ X.™ Deer pe Sonne harap p\ pd. Sonne ye xepceadpiya God. Se wlcey monney Seapfe pac. hpet pypcp odde xeparap pep Se pe ne penap.® And zec® ic pe maz yume bipne feapum popdbum reczan be pam? dele pe pio menmyce xepceadpiyney mez on- zican Sa zodcundneyye. ‘ iy Sonne P pe onzicap philum’ mon? on oppe piyan. on oppe hine Tod onzic.’? Ppilum pe tiohhiap he pie pe beryca,™ 4 ponne pac Lod f hic rpa ne bip. Donne hpeem hp cymp odde zodey’? odSe Yfeley mape ponne pe pincp } he pyppe me. ne bip pio unpyhepipner no on Trobe. ae ilo unzleapney bip on Se yelpum. $f Su hic ne canyc on pihe xecnapan. Orc zebypep peah P ce men onzicap man on pa ilcan piran. Se hme Lod onzic. Orc hic zebypep pP ce manize men biop ypa unzecpume.!® azpep ze on Mode ze on lichoman. $ _
m Boet. lib. iv. prosa 6.—Hine jam fit illud fatalis ordinis, &c.
1 Cott. andsicyull. 2 Cott. oncnapan. 3 Cott. re. * Cott. beem soodan. 5 Cott. nad. © Cott. sic. 7 Cott. bem.  § Cott. hplum. ® mon, deest in MS. Cott. 0 Cott. andsiz. "Cott. becpa. 1% Cott. soobdey. 13 Cott. untpume.
me § x. } . BOETHIUS. 20%
thinkest that any man is so discerning, that he is able to know every one aright, what he‘is, so that he may be neither better nor worse than he thinks hin? I know, however, that they cannot. Yet it is very often improperly the custom for some persons to say that @ man is deserving of reward, while others say that he is deserving of punishment. Though any one may observe what another does, he cannot know what he thinks. Though he may know some part of his disposition, yet he cannot know it all. I can moreover relate to thee an example, whereby thou mayest more clearly understand this, though un- wise men cannot understand it. That is: Why does the good physician give to this healthy man mild and sweet drink, and to another healthy man bitter and strong? And sometimes also to the sick; to one mild; to another strong; to one sweet; to another bitter? I know that every person who is unacquainted with the art will wonder at it, why they do so. But the physicians wonder not at it, because they know what the others are ignorant of. For they know how to discover and distinguish the infirmity of each of them; and also the arts which should be wsed with respect to it. What is the health of souls, but virtue? or what is their infirmity, but vices? Who then is a better physician of the soul, than he who made it, that 1s, God? . He honours the good, and punishes the wicked. He knows what each is deserving of. It is no wonder, because he from the high roof sees it all; and thence disposes and metes to each according to his deserts.
§ X. This then we call fate ; when the wise God, who knows every man’s necessity, does or permits anything which we ex- pect not. And yet I may give thee some examples, in few words, so far as human reason is able to understand the divine nature. That is, then, that we sometimes know man in one wise, and God knows him in another. Sometimes we judge that he is the best, and then God knows that it is not so. When anything comes to any person, either of good or of evil, more than it appears to thee that he deserves, the in- justice is not in God, but the want of skill is in thyself, that thou canst not rightly understand it. Yet it often happens that men know a man in the same manner that God knows him. It often happens that many men are so infirm, both in mind and in body, that they cannot of their own accord do
(a) ee
228 ’ BOETHIUS. CHAP, XXXIX. : |
: hi ne mazon ne nan goo! don. ne nan yre1 nyllap unnebize. 7 biop eac ypa unpyloize? } hi ne mazon nan eapfopa® xepyldelice abepan. foppem hic zebypep ofc f Lod nyle* pop hiy mildhe-__ optneyye nan unabepenbdlice® bpoc him any Peep dy ley ha poplecan® hiopa unyceaprulneyye.” 7 peoppan"™ pypyan. zip hi aycypede® biop 4 zeypenced.’? Sume men biop"? elcey cpepcey pull cpepoize and full hale pepar J puhcpiye. Sonne pmep p- Trobe unpiht } he ypelce’” ypence. ze puppum pone’ deap. pe eallum monnuim zecynte iy'* co polienne.” he _hm zedep yepcpan Sonne oppum monnum. spa yrpa z10 pum"? Py man?’ cpep. p ye sogeuste. anpeald zeppipode hip Siophnzay?® anh hy? yipepa yceade.”° 4 hn yeilbe spa zeopnlice. rpa rpa*? man dep Sone pl” on hi eazan. Maneze cilizap** Lode co cpe- manne co don _seopne ) hi pillmap. hiopa anum pillum. mani- peald eaprope™* co ppopianne. foppam pe hi pillmiap mapan ape. J mapan hhyan, 4 mapan peoppycipe mid Lobe to habbanne. ponne pa habbap”’ pe yogcop hibbap :-
§ XI.2 Ofc eae becymd ye anpeald”® Sippe populde co ypipe
zodum”’ monnum, foppem ye anpeald* papa yrlana”® peoppe copoppen. Sumum monnum Tod yellep®? ezpep xe x05"! ze yrel xemenzed. roppaem hi expper eapniap. Sume he bepearap hiopa pelan ypipe hpape. pay Se hi apeyc zepelize peonpap. py ley hi pop lonzum zeyelpum hi cto up ahebben. 4 Sonan on ofepmeccum peopsen. Sume he*® lec ppeazan mid heapdum bpoce. paec hi leopnizen Sone cpere zepylde** on Sam** lanzan xeypince. Sume him ondpadap eapfopu ypipop ponne hy pypfen. — Seah hi hi eape adpeozan mezen. Sume hi zebyczap peopplicne hhyan Siyyer andpeapdan liper mid hiopa aznum deape. foppaem hi penap bi naebben nan opep pioh Sey hhyan*® pyppe bucon
" Boet, lib. iv. prosa 6.—Fit autem sexpe uti bonis, &e.
1 Cott. 5000. 2 Cott. unsepyldige. 8 Cott. eapropu. * Cott. nylle. § Bod. nanum abependlic. © Cott. poplecen. 7 Cott. unpced- yulneyye. 8 Cott. peoppen. ® Cott. aycepede. ! Cott. serpencze. 1 Cott. beoS. 2 Cott. ypylee. '* Bod. bonne. —_™ Cott. 1p Secynde. 15 Cott. pohanne. yum, deest in MS. Cott. 17 Cott. mon. 18 Cott. seypiopode hipdeophngay. hip, deest in MS. Cott. 2° Cott. peeaze. 21 ypa, deest in MS. Cott. 22 Cott. eppel. *8 Cott. Manigze ciha’d. 24 Cott. eapyobu. 25 Cott. heebben. 26 Cott. anpalo. 27 Cott. soodum. 78 Cott. anpald. 29 Cott. yrelana. Cott. pele. 3! Cott. © 5000. 82 hi co up ahebben ¥ onan on oyepmeccum peopben. Sume he, desunt in MS. Bod. #8 Cott. sepyldelice. 34 Cott. bem.  % Bod. habben nan opepyi08 bey hhoyan.
§ xr. . BOETHIUS. 229 any good, or avoid any evil; and are, moreover, so impatient, that they cannot with resignation bear any troubles. There- fore it often happens that God, through his merey, wills not to impose on them any intolerable affliction, lest they should forsake their innocence, and become worse, if they are moved and troubled. Some men are full virtuous in all virtue, and full holy and righteous men. Then seems it to God unjust that he should afflict such; and moreover death, which is natural to all men to suffer, he makes more tranquil to them than to other men: as formerly a certain wise man said, that the divine power saved his darlings under the shadow of his wings, and protected them as carefully as man does the apple of his eye. Many so earnestly endeavour to please God, that they desire of their own accord to suffer manifold troubles ; because they desire to have greater honour, and greater fame, and greater dignity with God, than those have who live more pleasantly.
§ XI. Frequently also the power of this world comes to very good men, in order that the power of the wicked may be overthrown. To some men God gives both good and evil mixed, because they earn both. Some he bereaves of their wealth very soon, when they first are happy, lest through long felicities they should too much exalt themselves, and thence become proud. He permits some to be vexed with severe trouble, that they may learn the virtue of patience by the long affliction. Some fear difficulties more than they need, though they may easily bear them. Some purchase the honourable fame of this present life by their own death; because they think that they have no other price worthy of this fame, except their own life. Some men were formerly unconquerable, so that no one could overcome them with any
230 " BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX.
hiopa aznum fiope. Sume men peepon z10 unofepyprpedlice. rpa hi nan ne mihte’ mid nanum pice ofepypipan. 6a biynodon hiopa wfrep zenzum hi nepen. mid picum ofepypipde. on
» | Pree
Sem pey ypeocol } hi op heopa zodum peoncum hzfdon Sone — cperct } hi? mon ne mihce ofepypipon.* Ac pa yrelan* fop —
hiopa yplum peopcum peepon zepicnode ofep ypipe.® poppem Pp
Sa picu zeycipdon® oppum f hi spa don7 ne dopycen. 3 eac Sa —
zebecan pe hi Sonne bpociap. ip rpipe rpeocol cacn Sam*® pian ‘p he ne yceal lupian to unzemectlice Say populd zerelpa. pop- pem hi oft cumap co dem pypycan? monnum. Ac hp pille pe cpepan be dam’ andpeapdan pelan. Se ofc cymp co pam xooum." hpeec he eller sie bucan cacn Sep copeapdan pelan 7 Sey edleaner anzin Se him Lod zecihhod'” herp fop hiy xoban?* pillan. Ic pene eac } ce God yelle manezum yrlum'* monnum zeyeelpa roppeem pe’ he pac heopa'® zecynd and heona!® pillan ypa zepadne. } hi cop nanum eapmpum"’’ ne bip'® no dy beccpan.’® ac Sy” pypran. ac ye zoda lece. } ip Lod. lacnap hiopa Mod mid Sam"? pelan. ple hi onzicen hponan him ye pela come and olecce dem pyler he him pone pelan apeppe* 066e hine pam pelan. 7 pende hip Seapay to zode. 3 foplere Sa unpeapay 4} pa yrel de he ep fop hip epmpum dyde. Sume beop”’ Seah py pypyon xf hi pelan habbap. roppeem hn** ofep- mobdizap”> fon Sem pelan 3 hiy unzemeclice bpucad :-
§ XII.° Manezum men biop eac fopzipene foppam?® par populd?” zeyzelpa. ‘f hi peyle Sams zobum” leanian hiopa xod.*° J dam*! yplum hiona yrel. poppam®? prmle biop pa xodan** 7 Ba yplan unzeppaepe becpyh** him. ze eac hpilum Sa yrlan biop un- zepade becpuh him yelpum. ze puppum an yfel man bid hpilum®? unzeppeepe him yelrum. poppampe*® he pat ‘ he uncela ded. 7
© Boet. lib. iv. prosa 6.—Quibusdam permissum puniendi jus, &e.
1 Cott. meaht. * Cott. him. 5 Cott. meahze oyepypiban. 4 Cott. yylan. 5 Cott. yprSpe. © Cott. sereupden. 7 Cott. sedon. 8 Cott. bem. ° Cott. pypperctum. 1° Cott. bem. ™ Cott. 500dum,. 1}? Cott. ciohhod. 8 Cott. soodan. M4 Cott. menesum yrelum. 18 Bod. beah. 16 Cott. hiopa. 17 Cott.epmbum. 38 Cott. byoS. 9 Cott. becpan. 7° Bod. nena by. 2! Cott. bem. ” Cott. ayyppe. 23 Cott. bio’. 24 hi, deest in MS. Bod. 25 Bod. orepmodsiam. 28 Cott. yopbem. %7 Cott. peopuld. * Cott. bem. ” Cott. soobum. * Cott. 5000. 31 Cott. bem.  *? Cott. ropbem. ** Cott. soodan.  * Cott. bezpuh. %5 Cott. yumle, %6 Cott. oppaembe.
= -§ x11. BOETHIUS. 231
torment. These set an example to their successors that they should not be overcome by torments. In these it was evident that they, for their good works, had the strength that man might not overcome them. But the wicked, for their evil works, have been punished beyond measure, in order that the punishments might restrain others from daring to do so, and also might amend those whom they then afflict. It is a very clear token to the wise, that he ought uot to love these worldly goods immoderately, because they often come to the worst men. But what shall we say concerning the present wealth which often comes to the good? What is it else but a token of the future wealth, and a beginning of the reward which God has decreed to him for his good disposition? I suppose also that God gives felicities to many wicked men because he knows their nature and their disposition to be such, that they would not for any troubles be the better, but the worse. But the good physician, that is God, heals their minds with the wealth, until they learn whence the wealth came to them, and the man submits to him lest he take away the wealth from him, or him from the wealth, and turns his , manners to good, and forsakes the vices and the evil which he before through his poverty did. Some indeed are the worse if they have wealth, because they become proud on account of the wealth, and enjoy it without moderation.
§ XII. To many men also these worldly felicities are there- fore given, that they may recompense the good for their good, and the wicked for their evil. For the good and the wicked are ever at variance with each other, and also sometimes the wicked are at variance between themselves, and moreover a wicked man is sometimes at variance with himself. For he knows that he does amiss, and bethinks himself of the retribu-
232 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XXXIX.
pend him papa! leana. 9 nele? Seah pe zerpican. ne hit fup- — - pum him ne let hpeopan. 3 Sonne sop Sam yinzalan® eze ne mez no peoppan zeppeepe on him yelpum, Ofc hic eac* zebyped — ye ypla poplec hiy yrel pop yumey opper yeler monney® andan. — yoppam® he polbe mid py celan’ pone opepne } he onycunede — hip peapay. ypmep Sonne ymb F ypa he ypipoyc meez. ‘ he tiolap © unzelic to bion pam® oppum. foppam’ hic iy peey zodcundan anpealdey zepuna } he pypep of yrle x05. Ac hic my nanum men alered } he meze picon eall } Lod zetiohhod hyd. ne eac apecan } } he xepophc herp. Ac on dem hi habbap zenoz. co onzitanne } ye sceoppend"® 4 ye pealdend eallpa ze- ycearca pele. 7 pyhte zeyceop eall } he zerceop. 3 nan yrel ne pophce, ne zec ne pypcd. ac ele yfel he adpfp of eallum np pice. Ac zip Su epcep Sam hean™ anpalde ppypian™ pile Sey zlmihtizan'® Gober. ponne ne onzicye pu nan yrel on nanum pmze. peah Se nu pince $ hep micel on Siy'* middanzeapbde pie. foppem hic ip puhe p po zodan habban zo" edlean hiopa — zodey. J Sa yplan habban'® pice hoa vpler. ne bip } nan yfel. ‘p ce pyhe bip. ac bip zod. Ac ic onzize f 1c pe hebbe apmet nu mid piy lanzan ypelle.’” popSem pe lyyc nu hopa.’® Ac ~ onfoh hiopa nu. foppam! hic ip ye lacedom and ye dpenc de du lanze punodeyc. pac Su py ed meeze Seepe”® lane ongon:-
§ XIIIP Da ye iydom a pry ppell anehc*" heepde. pa onzan he ec pinzan. 4 puy cpap. Ing pu pillmze mid hlucpum mode onzican Sone hean anpeald. beheald pa cunzlu per hean heorney. Pealdap pa cunzlu pa ealdan yibbe Se hi on xzeyceapne pepon. ypa ‘p yo Fypene yunne ne onhpimp no defy Seley pay heoreney Se ye mona onipnp. ne ye mona no ne onhpinp per dele Se pio sunne onipnp. da hpile pe hio pep on bip. ne se yceoppa. Se pe hacap Upya. ne cymp nefpe on pam peycdeele. peah ealle oppe pceoppan fapen mid pam podope zfrep pepe * yunnan on pa eoppan. my hic nan pundop. roppam he ip yprpe neah pam up ende pape eaxe. Ac ye yceoppa Se pe hacap epenyceoppa. Sonne he bip perc Zeyepen. ponne cacnnap he
P Boet. lib. iv. metrum 6.—Si vis celsi jura tonantis, &e.
1 Bod. mapan. ? Cott. nyle. 3 Cott. bem yinsalum. 4 eac,
deest in MS. Cott. ® Cott. manner. 6 Cott. ropbem, 7 Bod. lecan. 8 Cott. bionne pam. 9 Cott. popbem. ' Cott. rerppend. 1" hean,
deest in MS. Bod. 2 Bod. anpealde peypian. 13 Cott. elmehzizan. 4 Cott. byp. 1 Cott. 500dan hebben 500d. 1 Cott. habban. 7 Cott, apecne mid by langan ypell 18 Cott. leoba. 9 Cott. popbam.
20 bene, deest in MS. Cott. 21 Cott. apeahev.
wee MDE S COLLEGE LIBRARY
§ xr1r. BOETHIUS. 233
tion, and yet will not cease therefrom, nor #mdeed suffer him- self to repent of it; and therefore through serpetual fear he cannot be at peace with himself. Frequently it also happens that the wicked forsakes his evil for hatred of some other wicked man; because he would thereby upbraid the other, by avoiding his manners. He labours then about this as he best may; that zs, he takes care to be unlike the other; for it is the custom of the divine power to work good from evil. But it is permitted to no man that he should be able to know all that God has decreed, or indeed to recount that which he has wrought. But in these things they have enough, to un- derstand that the creator and the governor of all things, guides, and rightly made all that he made, and has not wrought, nor yet works any evil, but drives away every evil from all his realm. But if thou wilt inquire concerning the supreme government of the Almighty God, then wilt thou not perceive evil in anything, though it now seem to thee that here is much in this middle-earth. Since it is just that the good have good reward for their good, and the wicked have punishment for their evil; that is no evil which is just, but is good. But I perceive that I have wearied thee with this long discourse, wherefore thou art now desirous of songs. And now accept them, for it is the medicine and the drink which thou hast long wished for, that thou mayest more easily receive the instruction.
§ XIII. When Wisdom had ended this speech, then began he again to sing, and thus said: If thou desirest with pure mind to understand the supreme government, behold the stars of the high heaven. The heavenly bodies preserve the ancient peace in which they were created; so that the fiery sun does not touch that part of the heaven in which the moon moves; nor does the moon touch that part in which the sun moves, so long as she is therein. Nor does the star which we call Ursa ever come into the west, though all other stars go with the sky after the sun to the earth. It is no wonder, for it is very near to the upper end of the axis. But the star which we call the evening star, when it is seen westwardly, _ then betokens it the evening. It then goes after the sun
234 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XL.
wyen. pepp he ponne efrep pepe sunnan on pepe eoppan
yeeade. op he ofipnp pa yunnan hinbdan. 7 cymp pip fopan pa
yunnan up. ponne hacen pe hine mopzenyceoppa. foppam he cymp eaycan up. bobdap pape yunnan cyme. Si0 yunne J ye © mona habbap cobzled bucpuht him pone Sez and pa mihtypipe — emne J ypipe zeppepelice picpiap puph zodcundan fopercea- punza J unappocenlice pioprap pam ewlmihtizan Lode op 5omer Sex. ron py hi ne lez Lod on ane healfe pay heogoney bion. — dy ley hi popdon oppa zeyceapca. Ac zeribruma Lod zemeczap ealla zeycearca 4 xeppeepap pa he becpuh him puniap. hplum lhc ye peta P opyze. hpilum he zemenzep  fyp bip pam cile. hpilum # leohte ryp 3 } beophte up zepic. 7 po heprze eoppe yic peep nipepe be per cynmzer zebode. bpenzd eoppe elcne peycem j xlc cudop zlce zeane. y ye hata pumop opyzp J zeappap yeed 7 bleda. 7 percmbepa hepreyt bpynzp pipa blebda. hezlay and ynapay J ye oft peda pen leccap da eoppan on pmctpa. foppam undepfehp pio eoppe P pad 3 xedep P hic xpepap on lenzcen. Ac ye mecod eallpa zeycearta fet on eoppan ealle zpopende percmay J ealle poppbpenzp. 3 xehyc ponne he pyle. 7 eopap Sonne he pile. 7 nimp ponne he pile. Da hpile Se pa xepcearca piopiap. pic ye hehyca pceoppend on hip heah yecle. panon he pelc pam zepealdlepepum ealle zercearcu. Nip nan pundop. fopsampe he iy cyning. 7 Spyhten. 3 epelm. J Fpuma. 7 x. J piydom. 3 pihcpiy dema. he sent ealla ze- yeearcu on hiy wpenda. 7 he hev ealle ert cuman. Det ye an zepcaedSeza cyninz ne ycapelode ealla zeycearca. Sonne pupdon hi ealle coylopene 3 corcencte. and to nauhte pupdon ealle xe- yeearca. Seah habbap zemenelice Sa ane lure. ‘} hi peopian rpucum hlaropde. and peezniap peer ‘p he heopa pealc. nip -} nan pundop. roppam hi ne mihton eller bion. xf he ne piopedon hiopa spuman. Da foplec ye Piy5om ‘p hop.t and cpap co me.
CAPUT XL4
§ I. DV ASDER Su nu onzice hpiden pior sppace pille. Da cpp ic. Seze me hpidep hio pille. Da cpap he. Ic pile eczan pec ele pypd bio zo0d.” yam hio monnum zob* pince. yam hio him yrel pmce. Da cpepic. Ic pene p hic eape ypa bion mexze. peah uy hpilum opep pince. Da cpap he. Nip pey nan cpy* p
4 Boet. lib. iv. prosa 7.—Jamne igitur vides, quid hac omnia, &e. 1 Cott. leod 2 Cott. 500d. Cott. 500d.  * Cott. tpeo.
§ 1. BOETHIUS. 235
into the earth’s shade, till it runs off behind the sun, and comes up before the sun. Then we call it the morning star, because it comes up in the east, and announces the sun’s ap- proach. The sun and the moon have divided the day and the night very equally between them; and they reign very harmo- niously through divine providence, and unceasingly serve the Almighty God till doomsday. God does not suffer them to be on one side of the heaven, lest they should destroy other creatures. But the peace-loving God regulates and adapts all creatures, when they exist together. Sometimes the wet flies the dry. Sometimes he mingles the fire with the cold. Sometimes the light and bright fire goes upwards, and the heavy earth is stationed beneath by the king’s command. The earth brings yearly every fruit, and every production; and the hot summer dries and prepares seeds and fruits; and the fruitful harvest brings ripe corn. Hails, and snows, and frequent rain moisten the earth in winter. Hence the earth receives the seed, and causes it to grow in spring. But the creator of all things nourishes in the earth all growing fruits, and produces ¢hem all; and hides when he will, and shows when he will, and takes away when he will. While the creatures obey, the supreme creator sits on his throne. Thence he guides with reins all creatures. It is no wonder; for he is king, and lord, and fountain, and origin, and law, and wisdom, and righteous judge. He sends all creatures on his errands, and he commands them all to come again. If the ouly steadfast king did not support all creatures, then would they all be dissolved and dispersed; and all creatures would come to nought. But they have in common one love in serving such a lord, and rejoice because he rules over them. That is no wonder, for they could not else exist, if they served not their author. Then ceased Wisdom the song, and said to me:
CHAPTER XL.
§ I. Dost thou now perceive whither this discourse tends ? Then said I: Tell me whither it tends. Then said he: I would say, that every fortune is good, whether it seem good to men, ov whether it seem evil to them. Then said I: I think that it perhaps may be so, though it sometimes ap- pears otherwise to us. Then said he: There is no doubt of
236 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XL. . le pypd biop z0d.! Sapa pe pihe 7 nycpyppe biop.? roppaem — zele pypd. yam hio sie pynrum. sam hio sie unpynyum. fon py cymp to pem zobum® # hio opep cpeza bo. odde hine ppeatize — co Son fH he bez bo. ponne he wp dyde. odSe him leamize he — zp cela by5e. And ere ele pypd papa pe co Sam* yplum cymp. — cymp* foppam tpam® pmzum yam hio pie pepe. yam hio pe? — pynyum. zip co Sam® yplum cymp pepu pypd. ponne cymp he to edleane hiy yrla. o38e co ppeatunze® 7 co lane f he ere’? spa — ne 60. Da onzann ic pundpizan and cpep. Ip p pop mpeapdlice puhc pacu p du pep pecyc. Da cpep he. Spa hit ip ppa pu yezyc. Ac ic polde. zip Su poldeyc. f pic unc pendon!! yume hpile co piyey folcey yppeece. pyleey hi cpeepon’? $ pic yppeecon’® ofep monney andzec.'* Da cpp ic. Sppec f du pille:-
§ 11.7 Da cpep he. Penyc Su } f ne pie zd." P nyc'® bip. : Da cpp ic. Ic pene pec hic pie. Da cpep he. Atle pypd™” ap nyc papa se aupep dep.'§ od%e lepp. odde pmicp.'? Da cpep ic. Dez iy yop. Da cpp he. S10 pipeppeapde pypd ip peem z0d*° pe pmnap pip unpeapar 3 pendap hi co zode.** Da cpep ic. Ne mez 1c peey opracan. Da cpep he. Ppaec pense pu be dene zodan” pypde. Se ofc cymp to zo5um** monnum on sje populde.** ypilce”> hic sie fonetacn ecpa zobda.?° hpepep pip pole meeze cpepan ‘f hic pie yfel pypd. Da ymepcode*’ ic*® 5 cpep. Ne cpip ‘} nan mon. ac cpep*? f hio pie ypipe z05.°° ypa hio eac bip. Da cpep he. Ppt pene pu be pepe unyepenlicpan*? pypde. pe ofc ppiecap’’ Sa yplan co prcnianne. hpepep pir fole pene ‘f f z0d** pypd pie. Da cpep ic. Ne penap hi no  *p x05 pypd sie. ac penap ‘} hio pie ypipe eapmlico. Da cpp he. Ucon healban unc ‘f pic ne penan ypa ypa piy role penp. Lig pic Sep penap pe Sip pole penp. ponne foplete pic elce zepceadpipneyye and elce pihtpipneyye. Da cpeepic. Ppi fopleece pic hi A** py®®
r Boet. lib. iv. prosa 7.—Nonne igitur bonum censes esse, &e.
1 Cott. 500d. 2 Cott. bid. 8 Cott. soodan. * Cott. bem. 5 cym%, deest in MS. Bod. 6 Cott. ropbaem cpeem. 7 Cott. yy. 5 Cott. peem. ® Cott. bpeunge. 10 Bod. sec. ™ Cott. penden. 12 Cott. cpepon. 1% Cott. rppecon. ™ Cott. 5emec. 1 Cott. 500d. 16 Cott, nic. 17 pypd, deest in MS. Cott. 18 Bod. apepdedS. 19 Cott. pyped. © Cott. 5005. 21 Cott. 500de. 22 Cott. s000an. —*3 Cott. so0odum., 4 Cott. peopulde. 5 Cott. ppylce. 26 Cott. alepa so0da. 27 Cott. ymeapcode. 8 1c, deest in MS. Cott. 7 Cott. cps. 8° Cott. so0d. 81 Cott. unpenlicpan. 32 Cott. ppeacad. 33 Cott. 5000. 34a, deest in MS. Cott. 35 Cott. pa.
§ 11. BOETHIUS. 237
this, that every fortune which is just and us_ful, is good: for every fortune, whether it be pleasant, or whether it be unpleasant, comes to the good for this reason, that it may do one of two things; that it may either admonish him, in order that he should do better than he did before; or reward him, because he before did well. And again, every fortune which comes to the wicked, comes on account of two things, whether it be severe or whether it be pleasant. Ifsevere fortune come to the wicked, then it comes for retribution of his evil, or else for correction and for admonition, that he should not do so again. Then began I to wonder, and said: Thisisa thoroughly right explanation which thou givest. Then said he: It is as thou sayest. But I am desirous, if thou art willing, that we should turn ourselves a little while to this people’s speech, lest they say that we speak above man’s comprehension, Then said I: Speak what thou wilt.
§ IT. Then said he: Dost thou think that that is not good which is useful? Then said I: I think that itis. Then said he: Every fortune is useful which does either of two things; either instructs or corrects. Then said 1: Thatis true. Then said he: Adverse fortune is good for those who contend against vices, and are inclined to good. Then said I: I cannot deny it. Then said he: What thinkest thou con- cerning the good fortune, which often comes to good men in this world, as if it were a foretoken of eternal blessings P Can this people say that it is evil fortune? Then smiled I, and said: No man says that, but every one says that it is very good, as it moreover is. Then said he: What thinkest thou of the more invisible fortune which often threatens to punish the wicked? Does this people think that this is good fortune? Then said I: They do not think that this is good fortune, but think that it is very miserable. Then said he: Let us beware that we think not as this people think. If we in this respect think what this people think, then shall we forsake all wisdom, and all righteousness. Then said I: Why shall we ever the more forsake them? Theu said he: Be-
238 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XL.
ma. Da peep he. Foppy’ foleiyce men yeczap } elce* pepu pypo J unpynyumu sie yfel. Ac pe ne yculon dey zeleran. fop-
pem peec® ele pypd bip z0d.* yrpa pe ep yppeecon. yam hio pie pepu.° sam hio pie pynrum. Da peapp ic apeped 3 cpep. Dat —
iy pop ‘P Su yezyc. Ic nat Seah hpa hic duppe® peczan Sypezum monnum. foppam’ hiy ne mez nan dyy1 man zeleran :-%
§ L118 Da onyac ye //iydom faplice 7 cpep. Foppy ne reyle nan piy monn fophzizan ne znopmian’ co hpeem hiy pire peoppe. od3e hpepen him cume pe pepu pypd de lipu.*° Son ma pe re hpava erne yrcyle ymb } znopmian. hu ofc he feohcan reule.” ne bip hiy’? log na dy leyye. ac iy pen } hic pe SY mane. spa bip eac pey pyyan med py mape. pe him ppappe pypd 7 peppe co becymp. Dy ne yceolde® nan pir man pillian** yercer hpep. zip he enizpa cperca pecp. odde zenizer peoppyerper hep fop populde.!® ode ecey lier aprep Sipe populde.® Ac ele pir mon ycyle apinnan zzpep ze pip pa pepan pypde ze pip Sa pm- yuman. py ley he hine pop Sepe pynruman pypde fpoptpupize. odSe sop Sape pepan fopepence.*® Ac him iy peapfp p he apedize’’ pone midmeycan pez becpyhy'S Sepe pepan pypde JF Sepe lipan. } he ne pilmize pynyumpan pypde 7 mapan opyoph- neyye Sonne hic zemeclic sie, ne eft co” peppe. poppeem he ne mez nappey?’ unzemet adpiohan.”! Ac hic iy on hiopa agenum”? anpealde hpappe**’ Sapa hi zeceoyan.”* Inf hi ponne pone mid- meytan pez apedian pillap. Sonne yeylan” hi yelpe him yelpum zemeczian pa pinyuman pypde. 7 Sa opropzan. ponne xemetzap him Gob pa pepan pypde ze on pire populde.”® ze on peepe co- peandan. Spa spa hi eape abpeoxan?’ mazan |-
§ IV.* fel la pryan menn pell. zap ealle on pone pex pe eop lepap da popemepan biyna papa zodena Zumena J pwpa peopp- xeopnena pena Se ep eop pepon. Eala ze eapzan J 15elzeopman. hpy ze ypa unnycce yion*® 4 ypa arpundene.”* hpy ze nellan®?
5 Boet. lib. iv. prosa 7.—Quare, inquit, ita vir sapiens, &e.
t Boet. lib. iv. metrum 7.—Bella bis quinis operatus annis, &e.
1 Cott. fopby be. 2 wlce, deest in MS Cott. 5 Cott. be. * Cott. 5005. 5 Cott. ry pebe. ® Cott. 5yppe. 7 Cott. popbem. 8 Bod. nele nan dSyyi5 mon. ® Cott. co ypibe ymb } snopmian. 10 Bod. pypban yeyle hpep him cume pepe bu pypd be hpu. 1 Cott. peyle. 12 hiy, deest in MS. Cott. 1% Cott. reyle. ' Cott.pilmian. 1° Cott. peo-
pulde. 6 Cott. yopbence. '7? Cott. apedie. 18 Cott. betpeoh. 190, deest _
in MS. Cott. 2° Cott. naubpey. 7! Cott. adprosan. 2? Cott. agnum. 28 Cott. hpaebpe. *4 Cott. Secloren. 25 Cott. yculon. 6 Cott. peopulde. 277 Bod. se adpysan. 28 Cott. yen. 9 Cott. aypundne. 8° Cott. nyllen.
‘ ;
§ 111. Iv. BOETHIUS. 239
cause vulgar men say that every severe and unpleasant for- tune is evil. But we should not believe it, since every fortune is good, as we before said, whether it be severe, or whether it be pleasant. Then was I afraid, and said: That is true which thou sayest. I know not, however, who dares to mention it _ to foolish men, for no foolish man can believe it.
§ III. Then replied Wisdom sharply, and said: Therefore no wise man ought to fear or lament, in whatever wise it may happen to him, or whether severe fortune or agreeable may come to him; any more than the brave man ought to lament about this, how often he must fight. His praise is not the less; but the opinion is, that it is the greater. So is also the wise man’s reward the greater, if more adverse, and severer fortune comes to him. Therefore no wise man should be desirous of a soft life, if he makes account of any virtues, or any honour here in the world, or of eternal life after this world. But every wise man ought to contend, both against the severe fortune, and against the pleasant, lest he through the pleasant fortune should be presumptuous, or through the severe, despair. But it is necessary for him that be seek the middle-way, between the severe fortune and the agreeable: that he may not desire more agreeable fortune, or greater security than is fit: nor again too severe fortune; because he is unable to bear excess of either. But it is in their own power, which of them they will choose. If, therefore, they desire to find the middle-way, then ought they themselves to moderate to themselves the pleasant and the prosperous for- tune. Then will God moderate to them the severe fortune, both in this world, and in that to come, so that they may easily bear 7.
§ IV. Well! O wise men, well! Proceed yeall in the way which the illustrious examples of the good men, and of the men desirous of honour, who were before you, point out to you. O, ye weak and idle! why are ye so useless, and so
24.0 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XI.
a
acyien eepoep Sam! pyum monnum and efcep Sam! peopp-
zeopnum. hpilce” hi pepon da Se ep eop pepon. and hpi® ze
Sonne nellon.* yippan ze hiopa peapar zeacrod habben.® him —
onhypian.® ypa xe ypipoyt mezen. foppzem hi punnon efcep pypprcipe”? on Biyre populde. 4 ciledon* zoder? hhyan mid
zobum’” peopcum. 3 pophton zobe!" bipne pam!” Se eepcep him ~
pepon. soppem hi puniap nu ofep pem cunzlum. on ecpe
eadizneyye. fop heopa’® zobum peopcum:- Pep endap pio.
feoppe'* boc Boeziey. and onzmnd" feo fifce :-
§ V." Daye f1ydom ba diy ypell apehc!® heepde. Sa cpep ic. Spipe pyhc’’ ay pin lap. Ac 1c polbe Se nu mynzian'® pepe manizrealdan’? lane pe Su me ep xzehece be pepe Loder popeciohhunze. Acic polde epeyt pican et pe hpepen p auhc”? yie } pe ofc xehionap } men cpepap be yumum pmzum > hit reyle pear zebypian. Dacpephe. Me pepe horpe”' p 1c onecce pip pey } ic Se morte zelawycan f 1c Se wp xehet. 3 pe morte zeteecan spa pceoptne” pez. ppa ic peypceyene fimban mihte*s co pinpe cydde. Ac hic ip ypa pypp** of uncpum peze. of pem peze pe pic zetiohhod habbap on to fapenne. } pet Su me ep bebe. hic” pepe Seah nyccpe to zecyppenne”® 7 co*” on- gicanne. Ac 1c ondpexde pic de lede hidper pidper on pa papa of pmum peze. P Su ne maze efc pmne pez anedian. Nip hic nan pundon Seah pu zecypize.”8 zip ic pe lebde be pam” pexe. Da cpep ic. Ne peappc pu no } ondpedon.*? Ac ic bio rprpe yeexzn®! zip Su me leedeye pidep ic de bidde. Da cpeep he. Ie pe pille laspan bi ypellum. ypa ic Se eallne pez dyde. 3 de peah yeczan pile. } hic nip nauht pec mon epip } exeniz Smz pear zebypize. foppam*” ele pmz cymp** of pamum Smzum. fop Sy hic ne bip pear xebyped. ac peep hic of nauhte ne come ponne peepe hic pear zebyped :-
« Boet. lib. v. prosa 1.—Tum ego, Recta quidem, inquam, &e. 1 Cott. bem. 7 Cott. hpylee. %Cott. hpy. * Cott. nyllen. 5 Cott,
hebben. 6 Cott. onhynan. 7 Cott. peop Sperpe. 8 Cott, ciolodon, 9 Cott. Roodey. 10 Cott. So0dum. 1 Cott. 500de. 2 Cott. bem. 18 Cott. hiopa. 4 Cott. plopbe. 5 Cott. onsm¥. —-8 Cott. apeahz.
17 Cott. phe. | Cott. mynds1an. 19 Cott. memigpealdan. 2° Bod. anuht. 7! Cott. leoype. 2? Cott. ycopcme. 23 Cott. meahze. 24 Cott. ypibe yeop. 25 hic, deest in MS. Cott. 6 Cott. secipanne. 27 <0; deest in MS, Cott. 28 Cott. Zec1opie. 29 Cott. bi bem. 30 Cott. ondpexodan, 31 Cott. Zepeesen. 32 Cott. poppeem. 33 Cott. cam’.
§v. BOETHIUS. 241
enervated ? Why will ye not inquire about the wise men, and about the men desirous of honour, what they were who were before you? And why will ye not then, after ye have found out their manners, imitate them, as ye best may? For they strove after honour in this world, and sought good fame by good works, and set a good example to those who should be after them. Therefore they now dwell above the stars, in everlasting happiness, for their good works. Here ends the fourth book of Boethius, and begins the fifth.
§ V. When Wisdom had ended this discourse, then said I: Very right is thy doctrine. But I would now remind thee of the manifold instruction which thou before promisedst me, concerning the predestination of God. But I wish first to know from thee whether that be aught which we often hear, that men say concerning some things, that it will happen by chance. Then said he: I would rather that I hastened towards this, that I might perform to thee what I before promised thee, and might teach thee as short a way, as I shortest might find, to thy native country. But this is so far out of our way, out of the way which we intended to travel, that it would be more expedient to return, and un- derstand what thou before askedst me. But I also fear that I should lead thee hither and thither in paths out of thy way, so that thou mightest not again find thy way. It is no wonder if thou shouldest grow weary, if I lead thee beside the way. Then said I: Thou needest not fear that: but I shall be very glad if thou leadest me whither I desire thee. Then said he: I will instruct thee by discourses, as I always did: and will say to thee, that it is naught that men say, that anything may happen by chance. Because everything comes from certain things, therefore it has not happened by chance: but if it had come from nothing, then it would have happened by chance.
5 242 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XL. _
§ VIY Da cpxd ic. Ac hponan com ye nama! epeyc. Da cpep he. Apipcoceley min deoplinge hic zepehte on pepe bec © pe Finca hacce. Da cpp ic. Pu pehce he hic. Da cpexé he. | Men cpzdon z10 Sonne him hpet unpenunza? zebypede. f H~ pepe pear zebyped. spelce hpa nu delpe eoppan. J mde pap Sonne zoldhopd. 3 yecxge ponne fH pie pear xebyped. Ie pac peah zip ye delpepe 6a eoppan no ne dulre. ne nan mon ep f zold pep ne hydbde. ponne ne funte he hit no. foppy hit ney na pear funden. Ac sio zodcunde fopectiohhunz lepde Sone pe he polde } pe zolb hydde. 3 eft pone pe he polde he hit punde :-
§ VII.Y Da cpep ic. Det 1c onzice hit ip ypa ypa pu yezyc. Ac ic polde de acpian hpeepep pe eenizne ppyoom* habban odde enizne anpeald hpet pe don. hpet pe ne ne don. de pio zodcunde fopeciohhung oppe pio pypd ur nede to Sam pe hit pilen:. Da cpep he. fe habbap micelne anpeald. niy nan ze- yceabpiy zerceapc  nebbe fneodom. ye pe xerceadpiyneyye herp. ye mez deman 3 corceaban hpec® he pilnian yeeal 7 hpeec he onycunian yceal. 3 ele mon hefp Sone fpiodom. * he pac hpeec he pile hpeec he nele. and Seah nabbap® ealle zercead- pire’ zepceapca xzelicne ppyosom. Enzlar habbap pihte domar 4 zone’ pillan. 4 eall hpac? hi pillmap'? hi bezicap yprpe eape. poppeem pe hi naney pozey!! ne pillmap.’” Nip nan zepceare pe heebbe pypdom!® 4 xzerceadpiynerre bucon enzlum 7 mannum. Da men habbap yrmle ppydom."* py mapan pe hi heopa Mod neap zodcundum Smzum letap. 7 habbap Sey py leyyan ypyoom.”* pe hi heopa Moder pillan'® neap Siyre populd’” ape lacap. Nabbap hi neenne fpyoom!® Sonne hi opal? agnum pllum hi yylpe unpeapum unbdeppeodap.”° Ac yona ypa hi heopa?! Mod apendap”? ppom ode. ‘ypa peoppap he** ablende mid unpipsbome. Spa peah ip an elmibtiz Lod on hip pepe hean ceycpe.”* ye zeyyhp?> alcey monney zepanc.”° 5 hip popd.
Vv Boet. lib. v. prosa 1.—An est aliquid, tametsi vulgus, &e.
w Boet. lib. v. prosa 2.—Animadverto, inquam, idque uti, &e.
1 nama, deest in MS. Cott. 2 Bod. hpesnunga. 3 Cott. ppeodom. * Bod. pe. % Cott. hpey. © Bod. habbad. 7 Cott. ealla serceadpiya. 8 Cott. soobne. 9 Cott. bec. 1 Cott. plmiad. 1 Cott. poy. 12 Cott. pilnia’s. 13 Cott. yprodom. 44 Cott. ypeodom. 15 Cott. pplodom, 16 Cott. pilla. '7 Cott. peopuld. —'§ Cott. speodom. _—_—!® Cott. heopa. 20 Cott. undeppiodas. 21 Cott. hiopa. 2% Cott. onpendad. 23 Cott. hi. 4 Cott ceaycpe. 25 Cott. 5epihd. 26 Cott. Sebohz.
2@ ect
oa
— § vi. vir. BOETHIUS. 243
§ VI. Then said I: But whence came the name first ? Then said he: My beloved Aristotle has explained it in the book called Physica. Then said I: How has he explained it ? Then said he: Men said formerly, when anything happened to them unexpectedly, that it happened by chance: as if any one should dig the earth, and find there a hoard of gold, and then say, that it had happened by chance. I know, however, that if the digger had not dug the earth, or man had not before hid the gold there, then he would not have found it. Therefore it was not found by chance. But the divine pre- destination instructed whom be would that he should hide the gold, and afterwards whom he would, that he should find it.
§ VII. Then said I: I perceive that this is as thou sayest : but I would ask thee whether we have any freedom, or any power, what we may do, and what we may not do? or whether the divine predestination, or fate, compels us to what they will? Then said he: We have much power. There is no rational creature which has not freedom. Whosoever has. reason, is able to judge and discern what he ought to desire, and what he ought to shun. And every man has this freedom, that he knows what he wills, avd what he wills not. And yet all rational creatures have not equal freedom. Angels have right judgments and good will; and whatever they desire they very easily obtain, because they desire nothing wrong. There is no created being which has freedom and reason except angels and men. Men have always freedom; the more as they lead their mind nearer to divine things; and they have so much the less freedom, as they lead the will of their mind nearer to this worldly honour. They have not any freedom when they, of their own accord, subject themselves to vices. But as soon as they turn away their mind from good, so soon do they become blind with folly. But one Almighty God exists in his high city, who sees every man’s thought, and
R2
|
244 BOETHIUS. CHAP, XLT.
4 uy deba coycec. 3 zylc’ eleum epcep hiy zepyphcum.— Da ye /iydom pa pry ypell gi heyde. pa onzann he ymzan 7 pur cpep. me
CAPUT XLIx g
§ I. DEAD Omepuy ye zoba pceop. pe md Cpecum relepe pey. ye pay Fipzihey laneop. re Fipzihuy pey mid Leeden papum yeleyc. peah Omepuy on hiy leopum ypipe hepede pepe punnan— zecynd. J hiope cnefcay. 3 hiope biophco. ne mez heo peah ealle zeycearca zeycinan. ne pa zepcearra. pe heo zepeman mez. ne mez hio ealle endemeyc zerciman. ne ealle mnan zeond-— yeoman. Ac ny pam elmihtizan Lobe spa. pe yy peyppend ealpa zerceapca. he zeyeop 3 puphyeop ealle hip zercearra endemeyc. Sone mon mez hacan bucon leare yope Sunne !-
§ I1.y Daye Piydom pa siy leop ayunzen heepde. pa zerpy- zoe” he ane lycle hple. Da cpap ic. Sum cpeo me® herp ypipe zedpered. Da cpap he. pec ip ye. Da cpep ic. Pic ip  } pu yeziyc* f Lod yylle ellcum ppydom® ypa zod® co donne. 17a. yrel. ypepep he pille. and puyezrc eac ‘p Lod pice ele? pmz- zp® hic zepyppe.” 3 pu yezyc!® eac nan pmz pyppe!! buce hic Lod pille odSe zepapize."” 3 Su yexyc’® -p hic yeyle eall papan—
rpa he zeciohhod habbe.'* Nu pundpie ic per hpy he xepaprze pa yrelan men habban! pone pnybom!é hi mazon!? d50n ypa x05 ypa yrel rpepep rpa hi pillan. Sonne he ep pac ‘ hi yrel 5on pulap. Da cpep he. Ie pe my ypipe eape xeandpypdan peep ypelley. Ju polde pe nu lician'® zip hpyle ppipe pace cyning pepe - J neyde neenne ppyne’” mon on eallon hiy pice. ac paspon ealle peope. Da cpap ic. Ne puhve hic me nauhc”? pibclic. ne eac zepiyenlic.”! zip him yeeoldan peope men penizan. 2 Da cpep he. Ppa pepe unzecyndlicpe.”* zip God neepde on eallum hip pice nane fpize pcearc”* undep hip anpealde. poppeem he ze- yceop tpa xerceadpiyan”> zercearca pmo.” enzlay 3 men. pam
x Boet, lib. v. metrum 2.—Puro clarum lumine Pheebum, &e.
Y Boet. lib. v. prosa 8.—Tum ego, En, inquam, &e.
1 Cott. ile. 2 Cott. Serpusode. 3 Bod. uma. 4 Cott. presye. | 5 Cott. yelle eleum men ypeodom. ® Cott. 5000. 7 Cott. pesrs B | pice wle, *® Bod. epep. 9% Cott. sepeopbe. 1° Cott. paspe.  ™ Cott. sepeopbe. 12 Cott. sebayie. 13 Cott. paesyc. ' Cott. hebbe. — 16 Cott. hebben. 16 Cott. ppeodom. 7 Cott. magen. 8 Bod. he nu locian. 19 Cott. ppeone. 20 Cott. no. 21 Cott. nauht semiyenlic. 22 Cott. pbeman. 7 Cott. Dect pepe uncynlicpe. * Cott. serceayc.  *5 Cott. seyceadpiya. 6 Cott. ppeo.
SX. 1. BOLTHIUS. 245
discerns his words and his deeds, and renders to every one according to his works. When Wisdom had made this speech, then began he to sing, and thus said:
CHAPTER XLI,
§ I. Tuover Homer the good poet, who with the Greeks was the best, he was Virgil’s master; Virgil was with the Latin men the best, though Homer in his poems greatly praised the nature of the sun, and her excellences, and her brightness; yet she cannot shine upon all creatures, nor those creatures which she may shine upon, can she shine upon all equally, nor shine through them all within. But it is not so with the Almighty God, who is the maker of all creatures. He bebolds and sees through all his creatures equally. Him we may call, without falsehood, the true sun.
‘§ 11. When Wisdom had sung this lay, then was he silent alittle while. Then said I: A certain doubt has much troubled me. Then said he: What is that? Then said I: It is this, that thou sayest that God gives to every one freedom as well to do good as evil, whichsoever he will: and thou sayest also that God knows everything before it comes to pass; and thou sayest also, that nothing comes to pass unless God wills and permits it: and thou sayest that it must all proceed as he bas ordained. Now I wonder at this, why he permits that wicked men have the freedom that they may do either good or evil, whiehsoever they will, since he before knows that they will do evil. Then said he: I can very easily answer thee this inquiry. How would it please thee, if there were some very powerful king, and he had not any free man in all his realm, but all were slaves? Then said 1: I should not think it at all right, or moreover suitable, if men in a state of slavery should serve him. Then said he: How much more unnatural would it be, if God had not in all his kingdom any free creature under his power? ‘Therefore he created two rational creatures free,
di. ALBER!) 5 COLLEVE LIDNKANT
246 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XII.
he zeaz micle zipe ppeobomer. } hi moycon! bon ypa Zod ypa
f hee
yrel ypepop? ypa hi poldon.*® he yelde* ypipe perce zipe J ypipe
feyte 2 mid pepe zie elcum menn? op hiy enbde. ip ye ppyoom.® pec te’ mon mot don f he pile. and f ip plo e P zile
Pat
zlcum men be hiy zepyphctum ezpep ze on Siyye populde ze on | pepe copeapdan ypa x0d° ypa yrel Jpepep he dep. 7 men mazan® —
bezican puph pone ppydom’° ypa hpeet ypa he pillap. bucon deap
hi ne mazon yopcyppan. ec hi hme mazon mid zodum!! pe- —
opcum zeleccan ‘f he py’? lacop cymp. ze fuppum op opeldo hi hine hpilum leccap xf mon to zodum"’ peonce ne onhazie habban zodne™ pillan. } ip z0d. Da cpep ic. fel pu me heepye apetne on Sam Tpeon. J on pepe Zedperfedneysye pe 1c zp on pey be pam fppeodome. Ac 1c eom nu zet on micle mapan ze- dpepedneyye zeunpotyod. yulneah op opmodneyye. Da cpp he. Ppeec ip plo micle unpocney.” Da cpep ic. Pic!® iy ymb pa Loder popectiohhunze. foppam!™ pe zehepap hpilum yeczan f hit yeyle eall spa zepyppan}® ypa spa Lod et ppuman zetiohhod hyde. } hic ne maze nan mon apendan.'*? Nu dSmcp me H he 60 poh. Sonne he apap pa zoban.”° 4 eac ponne he picnap da yrelan. zip ‘} yop ay. ‘H hic him ypa zerceapen pey ‘fp hi ne moycon elley 50n. unnytlice pe ypmeap Sonne pe uy Zebiddap. j Sonne pe feycad. odde elmeyyan yellap. zip pe hy nabbap sy mapan Sanc. ponne*! pa pe on eallum Smzum padap on hiopa azenne pillan. 3 apcep” hiopa hchoman luyce 1pnap :-
§ III.” Da cpep he. Diy iy pio ealde propung pe Su lonze plopodoyc.”* 4 manize eac wp Se. papa par sum Mancury. oppe naman Tullruy. ppiddan naman he pay zehacen Liceno. de** pey Romana hepecoza. ye pey uppicva. ye pey ypipe abipzod mid Sepe ylean yppece. Ac he hi ne mihte bpmzan co nanum ende on pone ciman.” foppy heopa Mod pay*® abirzod on Siyye populde pillnunza.2” Ac ic Se yecze. zip yop ip ‘} xe recap. p hit py unnet zebod on xodcundum bocum } Lod beads p
% Boet. lib. v. prosa 4.—Tum illa, Vetus, inquit, Ge.
1 Cott. moyzen. 2 Cott. ypaben.  % Cott. polden.  * Cott. pealde. 5 Cott. men. ° Cott. ypeodom. 7 Cott. pe. 8 Cott. 5005. 9 Cott. maxon. 1° Cott. ypeodom. 1! Cott. s000um. 1 Cott. be. 1% Cott. so0dum. Cott. soodne. 15 )Ypeec yp io micle unpocney, desunt in MS, Bod. © Bod, Diy. 17 Cott. popbeem. 18 Cott. Sepeopban. 19 Cott, onpendan, 20 Cott. Soodan. 21 Cott. by. 2% hiopa asenne piulan. J weycep, desunt in MS, Cott. 23 Cott. plooder. *4 Cott. ye. 25 Cott. yoppy he ne meahte ne nan mon on bone timan pa pppece to
nanum ende bpungan. 26 Cott. pep. 27 Cott. peopulde pilnunga. 28 Cott. bebead. Y
§ 111. BOETHIUS. 247
. angels and men. To these he gave the great gift of freedom,
that they might do either good or evil, whichsoever they would. He gave a very sure gift, and a very sure law with the gift, to every man until his end. That is the freedom, that man may do what he will; and that is the law, which renders to every man according to his works, both in this world, and in that to come, good or evil, whichsoever he does. And men may attain through this freedom whatsoever they will, except that they cannot avoid death. But they may by good works delay it, so that it may come later: and more- over, they may sometimes defer it till old age, if they do not cease to have good will to good works, that is, good. Then said I: Well hast thou set me right in the doubt, and in the trouble wherein I before was concerning freedom. But I am
~ still disquieted with much more trouble, almost to despair.
Then said he: What is this great disquiet? Then said I: It is concerning the predestination of God. For we sometimes hear say, that everything must so come to pass as God at the beginning had decreed, and that no man can alter it. Now methinks that he does wrong, when he honours the good, and also when he punishes the wicked, if it is true that it was so ordained to them that they could not do otherwise. In vain we labour when we pray, and when we fast, or give alms, if we have not therefore more favour than those who in all things walk according to their own will, and run after their bodily lust.
§ IIL. Then said he: This is the old complaint, which thou hast long bewailed, and many also before thee: one of whom was a certain Marcus, by another name Tullius; by a third name he was called Cicero, who was a consul of the Romans, He was a philosopher. He was very much occupied with this same question: but he could not bring it to any end at that time, because their mind was occupied with the desires of this world. But I say to thee, if that is true which ye say, it was a vain command in divine books, which God commanded, that
248 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XLL
mon ycealde! roplaetan yrel 7 50n z0d.? 7 efe ye cpide de he — cpep. spa mon ma ypincp. spa mon mapan mede onrehp. 3 1¢ : pundpuze hpi pu haebbe fopzicen eall  $ pic ep pppecon. Pic — yedon zp  yio zodcunde fopetiohhunz ele zo pophte. and — nan yfel. ne nan ne tiohhode co pypcenne.* ne nefpe ne- pophce. ze puppum p pic zepeahcon* co zobde.® pet foleireum — monnum yrel puhte. | per } mon ppece and picnode hpone yop hur yfle. Pu ne yeede® pic eac on’ Size ican bec. PH Lod heybde zeciohhod ¢pyoom co yyllenne* monnum. ¥ ypa dyde.® 5 zip hit? Sone fppydom cela zehealdon.!! he hi polde ypipe peoppian mud ece pice.’” 7 zip hi Sone ppybom** fopheolden. H he hi Sonne polde picnian mid deape. Pe ceohhode™* zip ha hpec zerynzodon” on pam ypydome.!® f hi hic eft on Sam’? — ypeodome mid hpeoprunze zebecon.'® 4 z1¢ hiopa hpile!? pa heapdheopt pepe P he nane hpeoprunze ne dyde. P he ponne heerde puhclic pice. Ealla xepcearca he heepde xeciohhod Seope.*° buzon enzlum and monnum. fopdy 8a?! oppa xefcearta peope yinc. hi healbap” hiopa penunza op 5omey deez. Ac pa menn 7 $a engzlay. pe -peo”® ymc. fopletap hopa penunga.** Ppaec mazon men cpepan } yio zodbcunde fopetiohhung zetiohhod heepde Sey pe hio ne puphcuze. oSSe hu maxon hi hi aladizen.”* ‘) hi ne mazon zo0d*° don. nu hic appicen ip Lod zielde”? zlcum men epcep*® ny zepyphcum. Ppy yceal ponne enix monn bion 1del. } he ne peopce.*® Da cpp ic. Lenox pu me heyyc zeppylpob*” pepe cpeounze mmer Moder. be pepe ac- yunza®! Se ic Se acrode.*” Ac ic Se polde mec aycien*® yume yppece Se me ymb** rpeop. Da cpep he. Ppa iy f. Da cpeep ic. Lenoz me ip cup*® } Lod hic paz eall bepopan. ze zod** ze yrel. ep hic zepyppe.*” ac 1c nav hpeepep hic eall xepyppan*® yceal unapendendlice®” } he pac y xetiohhod harp. Da cpp he.
1 Cott. pceolde. 2 Cott. xo0d. *% Cott. pypeanne. 4 Bod. xemhton. 5 Cott. 5000um. ® Cott. paedon. 7 Cott.eac epon.  § Cott. ppeo- dom co yellanne. ® Bod. diode. 0 Cott. he. " Cott. ppeodom colange heoldon. 1 Cott. hye. 18 Cott. ypeodom, Cott. aohhode. 15 Cott. serynsosen. Cott. bem ppeodome. 17 Cott. bem. 8 Cott. hpeoprunsa sebecan. 1° Cott. hpyle. 2° Cott. beopu. 7 Cott. ropby be ba. 22 Bod. habba’. 23 Bod. bepyise. 24 Cott. besnunsa. 25 Cott. alatian. 7% Cott. mesen 5006. 27 Cott. selde. 28 Cott. be. 29 Cott. pypce. 39 Cott. Seppeolyod., 31 Cott. arcungsa, 32 Cott. shyade. 33 Cott. acpian. 34 Cott. ymbe. 35 Cott. cud me 1p. 36 Cott. 5005. 37 Cott. peopbe. 3 Cott. sepeopban. 39 Cott. unanpendendlice.
re e = : .
fines
—«<§ rr. BOETHIUS. 249
ae man should forsake evil and do good; and again the saying __ which he said, that as man labours more, so shall he receive
greater reward. And I wonder why thou shouldest have for- gotten all that we before mentioned. We before said that the
_ divine predestination wrought all good, and no evil: nor de-
creed to work, nor ever wrought any. Moreover, we proved that to be good which to vulgar men seemed evil: that is, that man should afflict or punish any one for his evil. Did we not also say in this same book, that God had decreed to give freedom to men, and so did; andif they exercised the freedom well, that he would greatly honour them with eternal power ; and if they abused the freedom, that he would then punish them with death? He ordained that if they at all sinned through the freedom, they afterwards through the freedom should make amends for it by repentance; and that if any of them were so hard-hearted that he did not repent, he should have just punishment. All creatures he had made servile except angels and men. Because the other creatures are servile, they perform their services till doomsday. But men and angels, who are free, forsake their services. How can men say that the divine predestination had decreed what it fulfils not? Or how can they excuse themselves that they should not do good, when it is written that God will requite every man according to his works? Wherefore, then, should
_ any man be idle, that he work not? Then said I: Thou hast
sufficiently relieved me from the doubting of my mind by the
-} ~~ questions which I have asked thee. But I would still ask
thee a question, which I am perplexed about. Then said he: What is that? Then said [: I am well aware that God knows everything beforehand, both good and evil, before it happens, but I know not whether it all shall unchangeably happen, which he knows and has decreed. Then said he: It
i~ &
250 BOELUIUS. CHAP. XLI.7 .
®
Ne’ peapr hic no eall zepioppon? unapenbendlice.* Ac pum hic
yceal zepeoppan unapendendlice.® $ bip } ce upe nydpeapg* bip. 7 hip pula bip. Ac hic ip yum ypa zepad } hip mip nan neodpeapp.?
J peah ne depap® no Seah hic zepioppe.” ne nan heapm ne bip. — Seah hic* no ne zepyppe.? Lepenc nu be pe yelfum hpepep pu emz ding spa peeyce!? zeciohhod hebbe } pe pynce!! } hic”
nzppe pinum pillum onpended!? peoppe. ne pu bucon beon ne
mzze. odde hpepen pu epc on enzum zepeahte spa tplopzde yle. } Se helpe hpepep hic zepyppe.’* pe hic no ne zepyppe.* Fela iy Sepa!’ pmza Se Lod eep pac ep hic zepyppe.!® 7 pac eac” hic depap!” hip zeyceagcum zip hic zepypp. nat he hic no poppy de he pille } hic zepyppe.'® ac fop py Se he pile fop- pypnan'® p hic ne zepyppe.*° ypa ypa zo0d yeiprcypa™? onzic micelne pind hpeoyre ep ep hic peoppe.”? 4 hec** fealdan Pp yezl. 3 eac hpilum leczan pone meyt. and lecan pa becinze.** zip he ap ppeoper pmbder bascce. paepnap*? he hime*® pip pedep ¢-
§ LV." Da cpep ic. Spipe pel Su mm heyy zeholpen ewe pepe yppece. and ic pundpize hpi spa meenize pipe men ypa rpipe ypuncen®? mid Sape yrppeece. and rpa licel*® xepy punden. Da cpep he. Ppay pundpayt du peep spa ypipe. ypa epe spa hic ly co Onzicanne. Pu ne payt Su ‘fp maniz dincz”® ne bip no on- zicen ypa ypa hic bip. ac spa spa Sey andzicey meep bip pe pap prep ypipap. Spile iy ye Viydom ‘} hme ne mez*’ nan mon oF pire populde*! onzivan. rpilene*” ypilce®® he ip, Ac ele pmd be hiy andzicey meepe f he hine polde onzican zip he mihte.** Ag ye Piydom mez uy eallunza onzican ypilce® ypilce*® pe pnd.** Seah pe hme ne mazon onzican eallunza ypilce ypilce*” he iy.
“ Boet. lib. v. prosa 4,—Cujus erroris causa est, &e.
1 Ne, deest in MS, Cott. 2 Cott. sepeoppan. % Cott. unanpendend- hee. ‘Cott. nedpeapp. 5 Cott. nedpeany. © Cott. depeS. 7 Cott.
sepeopbe. 8 hiz, deest in MS, Cott. ® Cott Sepeoppe. 10 Cott, yey. "Cott. bince. 12 Cott. onpendne. 1% Cott. bion. | Cott. sepeopbe. Cott. bapa. 16 Cott. 5epeoppe. 17 Cott. deped.
8 Cott. sepeopbe. | Cott. roppeopnan. 2° Cott. sepeopbe. 7! Cott. sood yeipycioepa. 7 Cott. on hpeope see ep ep hit sepeoppe. 73 Cott. hav. 24 Cott. beecinse. 25 Cott. papena’. 26 he hine, desunt in MS. Cott. 27 Bod. seppuncen. 28 Cott. lycel. *9 Cott. bing. %) Bod, JSpile ry ye Piydom ne mes. 31 Cott. peopulde. 32 Cott. rpylene. 33 Cott. rpylce. ** Cott. meahte. 35 Cott. ppylce. 86 Cott. pine. 37 Cott. rpylene ypylce.
§ tv. BOETHIUS. 251
need not all happen unchangeably. But some of it shall
happen unchangeably, that is, what shall be our necessity,
and shall be his will. But some of it is so arranged that it is not necessary, and yet hurts uot if it happen; nor is there any harm if it do not happen. Consider now concerning
| thyself, whether thou hast so firmly designed anything, that
thou thinkest that it never with thy consent may be changed, nor thou exist without 7¢. Or whether thou again in any design art so inconsistent, that it aids thee, whether it happen, or whether it happen not. Many a one is there of the things which God knows before it may happen, and knows also that it will hurt his creatures if it happen. He does not know it, because he wills that it should happen, but because he wills to provide that it may not happen. Thus a good pilot perceives a great storm of wind before it happens, and gives order to furl the sail, and moreover sometimes to lower the mast, and let go the cable, if he first restrain the perverse wind, and so provides against the storm.
§ IV. Then said I: Very well hast thou assisted me in this argument; and I wonder why so many wise men have so greatly laboured with this question, aud found so little cer- tain. Then said he: What dost thou so greatly wonder at, so easy as it is to understand? Dost thou not know that many a thing is not understood according as it is, but ac- cording to the measure of the understanding which inquires after it? Such is wisdom, that no man in this world can com- prehend it such as it is. But every one strives, according to the measure of his understanding, that he might comprehend it if he could. But wisdom is able to entirely comprehend us such as we are, though we cannot entirely comprehend it
252 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XLI.
foppem ye iydom ip Gob. he zerihp eall! upe pypc.? ze x08? ze veel. ep hiz zepopdens sien. o65e ruppon> zepoht. Ac he uy — ne nec® no py hpwpop’ co pam® $ pe nebe reylen® zod"° bon. — ne uy ne pypup!! f pe ygel don. poppam™ pe he uy yealde ppy-—
som.’* Ic de maz eac taecan yume bipne. } pu py ed'* onzivan muihc'> a yppeece. Ppaer!® pu payc  zepihc. 7 xehepnery. and zefpeoney onzicap Sone hchoman Sey monney. j peah ne on- zicap hi hme no zelicne. S¢ eapan onzitap ‘ hi xehiopap. 7 ne onzicap hi peah pone hchoman eallunza ypylene ypylce he bip. ylo zeppedney hme mez!’ zeznapian.'* 3 zeppedan f hic lichoma bip. ac hio ne mez zefpedan hpepep he bip Se blac de hpic. de pezep pe unpezep. Ac pio zeyihd ec ppuman ceppe.' rpa da eazan on beyiop. hio”? onzitap ealle Sone andplican per licho- man. Ac 1c pales zec peccan sume pace. Su piyye*? hpey pu pundpedeyt :-
§ V.> Da cpep ic. Ppxee iy HP. Da cpep he. Pic iy f ye an monn onzice”* } } he on oppum onzic ryndeplice. he hine on- zit puph Sa eazan yynoeplice. puph da eapan yyndeplice. Suph hip peedelyan yyndeplice. Suph Zerceabpiynesye syndeplice. Suph zepyy andzic. Monize pmt cpucepa”* zepcearca unyeypiende. ppa ypa nu yeylpiycay?? me. and habbap Seah pumne del andzicer. yoppeem hi ne mihcon” eller hbbon.”” zip hi nan zpot andzicer nepydon., sume mazon zepion. yume mazon xzehypon.”* sume xeypedon.*9 yume zercmean. Ac Sa yrymendan necenu ypmt monnum zelicnan. foppam hy habbap eall Sa unycryprendan habbap. 4} eac mape co. } ip. ‘P ho hypizap*? monnum. lupiap hi lupiap. and hatiap } hi haciap. 3 plyp** p hi haciap. 7 pecap ‘H hi lugiap. Da men Sonne habbap eall } pe ep ymbe pppecon.  eac co eacan Seem micle zpe Zerceadpiyneyye. Enzlay Sonne habbap zepiy andzic. Foppaem yinc pay peearta®? pur zepceapene. pa unycypiendan hi ne ahebben ofep Sa ytypiendan. ne him
> Boet. lib. v. prosa 4—5.—Neque enim sensus aliquid, &e. 1 eall, deest in MS. Cott. 2 Cott. peope. 3 Cott. 500d. 4 Cott.
sepopdene. 5 Cott. yupbum. ¢ Cott. ned. 7 Cott. hpabop. & Cott. -
peem. ® Bod. nyde. 0 Cott. 500d. 1 Cott. pepn’d. 12 Cott. yopbeem. 18 Cott. ypeodom. Cott. be v0. 6 Cott. meahce. 16 Bod. Dec. 7 ypylene ypylce he biS. pio seppedner hine mes, desunt in MS. Bod. 18 Bod. sespapiasd. 19 Cott. ppumceeppe. 20 Bod. et Cott. hi. 21 Bod, piyceyt. 22 Cott. pundpode. 23 Cott. ousic. 24 Bod. cucepe. 25 Bod. pireay. 2 Cott. meahton. ” Cott. hbban. 28 Cott. sehipan. 7% Cott. seypedan. © Cott. hi onhyad. 8! Cott. yhos. 5 Cott. sepceayca.
§ v. BOETHIUS. _ 253
such as it is. For wisdom is God. He sees all our works, both good and evil, before they are done, or even thought of. But he does not compel us the more, so that we necessarily must do good, nor prevent us from doing evil; because he has given us freedom. I can also show thee some examples, whereby thou mayest more easily understand this discourse. Thou knowest that sight, and bearing, aud feeling, perceive the body of a man, and yet they perceive it not alike. The ears perceive that which they hear, and yet they perceive not the body altogether such as it is. The feeling may touch it, and feel that it is a body, but cannot feel whether it be black or white, fair or not fair. But the sight in the first instance, as the eyes look thereon, perceives all the form of the body. But I would still give some explanation, that thou mayest understand that which thou wast wondering at.
§ V. Then said I: Whatisthat? Then saidhe: It is that the same man perceives in separate ways what he perceives in others. He perceives it through the eyes separately ; through the ears separately; through his imagination separately ; through reason separately, through intelligence. Many living creatures are unmoving, as, for instance, shell-fishes are, and have, nevertheless, some portion of sense, for they could not otherwise live, if they had no particle of sense. Some can see;.some can hear; some can feel; some can smell. But the moving beasts are more like to men, because they have all which the unmoving have, and also more; that is, that they imitate men: love what they love, and hate what they hate; and fly from what they hate, and seek what they love. But men have all that we before mentioned, and also, in ad- dition thereto, the great gift of reason. But angels have in- telligence. On this account are the creatures thus formed, that the unmoving may not exalt themselves above the
;
254 BOETHIUS. CHAP. XLI. °
pp ne pmnan. ne pa scypiendan orep Sa men, ne da men oe
6a enzlay. ne 6a enzlay pip Lod. Ac } iy eapmlic } ye meyra oz] monna ne yeep on } } him fopziren iy. } ip xepceadpiyneyy. ne $ ne yeep! } him ofep iy. f xy } enzlay habbap J piye men. } iy zepyy andzec. Ac meyct monna nu’ onhypep* nu neacum on pem hi pillmiad populd luyca ypa spa nevenu. Ac zip pe nu hepdon enizne del untpiogendey andzitey spa ypa enzlar habbad. ponne mihce pe onzicon ‘) } andzec bip micle becepe Sonne upe zerceadpiyneyye.* Deah pe rela ymean.® pe habbap licellne zeapopican buton tpeon. ac pam enzlum nip nan tpeo naney pepa dmza pe hi picon. fop 61 if hiopa zeapopito ypa micle becpa Sonne upe zeyceadpiyneyye. ypa upe xeceadpipnejye iy becepe ponne nycena® anbdzit sie. oSSe pey zepitcey znix deel Se him fopziren iy. aupep odd5e hpopum neatum oppe unhpo- pum. Ac ucton nu habban upe Mod up ypa spa pe ypemeye mezen pip Sey hean hporey pey hehycan andzicey. } pu meze hpedlicoyc cumon 4 epelicoyt to pinpe azenpe cydde ponan pu zp come. pep mez pm (Mod Jy pm xZeypceaodpipney xereon openlice } ‘} hic nu ymb cpeop exlcey Singer. ezpep xe be Sepe yodcundan foperceapunze. pe pe nu ofc ymb yppecon. ze be upum fpydome.’ ze pa be eallum Sinzum :-
§ VL.* Da ye Piydom %a piy ypell apaed heepde. pa onzan he
ymzan J pur cpep. Ppec pu mic onzican  maniz pyht ip
muiyclice fepende zeond* eoppan. 4 ymet ypipe unzelicey hipey. J unzelice papap. yume liczap mid eallon lichaman on eoppan. J
ypa ynicende fapap ‘p him naupep ne fec ne pipepay ne ful-
cumap. J sume bip cplogecte. ume fiopepfece. sume fleozende.. 4 ealle peah biop of dune healde pip pepe eoppan. 7 pidep pillmap. oppe pay pe hi lyyc. oppe pay pe hi bepupfon. Ac ye mann ana zep uppihce. } cacnap ‘p he pceal ma pencan up ponne nypep. or ley Pp Mod pre mioponop ponne pe hchoma, Da ye fiyoom piy® leop arunzen herde. Sa cpep he.
© Boet. lib. v. metrum 5.—Quam variis terras animalia, &e.
1 Cott. recad. 7? nu, deest in MS. Bod. % Bod. onypzypeS. 4 Cott. serceadpipneyyie. 5 Cott. pmeasen. © Cott. necan. 7 Cott. ppeo- dome 8 Bod. 5eon. 9 Cott. ye Viydom ha pry leo’,
‘§ vi. BOETHIUS. : 255
moving, or strive with them: nor the moving, above men; ‘nor men above the angels; nor the angels against God. But it is wretched that the oreatest part of men do not look on that which is given them, that 1s reason: nor regard that which is above them, that is, what angels and wise men have, namely, intelligence. But most men imitate cattle, inasmuch as they follow worldly lusts, like cattle. But if we had any portion of undoubting intelligence, as angels have, then might we perceive that that intelligence is much better than our reason. Though we contemplate many things, we have little understanding free from doubt. But to the angels there is no doubt of any of the things which they know; therefore is their understanding as much better than our reason, as our reason is better than the understanding of cattle is, or any portion of that intellect which is given them, either to prone cattle, or to those not prone. But let us now elevate our minds, as we highest may, towards the high roof of the supreme intelligence, that thou mayest most readily and most easily come to thine own country, whence thou before camest. There may thy mind and thy reason see plainly that which it now doubts about in everything, both concerning the divine foreknowledge, which we have often discoursed about ; and concerning our » freedom ; and concerning all things.
§ VI. When Wisdom had ended this speech, then began he to sing, and thus said: Thou mayest perceive that many an animal moves variously upon the earth, and ¢hey are of very dissimilar form, and go differently. Some lie with the whole body on the earth, and so go creeping, because neither feet nor wings support them: and some are two-footed; some four-footed ; some flying; and all, nevertheless, are inclined downwards towards the earth, and then seek either what they list, or what is needful for them. But man alone goes up- right. This betokens that he ought more to direct his thought upwards than downwards, lest the mind should be inferior to tlle body. When Wisdom had sung this lay, then said he:
i
256 BOETHIUS.
CAPUT XLII# :
FOR py pe yceoldon eallon’? mzzne rpipian* efcep Tobe. p
pe pyyen® hpeet he pepe. peah hic upe mep ne pie f pe pican — hpeec* he sie. pe pculon peah be Sey andzicer mepe. Se he up —
xigp. pundizan.® ypa spa pe ep cpepon.® $ mon yceolde’ ele — Smz onzican be hi andzicer mepe. poppam® pe ne mazon zwle —
Smz onzican ypc ypilce® hic iy.1° Alle zeycearc Seah wzpep ze Zeyceadpiy xe unzerceadpiy ‘P ypeotolap P Lod ece ip. poppem neeppe spa maneza zeycearca and ypa micla J ypa!! pezpal? hi ne undeppiodden leyyan zercearca ¥ leyypan anpealde ponne hi ealle ymdon. ne fuppum emn miclum. Da cpep ic. Ppt ip ecney. Da cpep he. Du me ahyayct muicler J eapfoper co on- zicanne. zp Su hit onzican’® pilc. Su ypeealc habban ep Smep moder eazan clene 7 hluccpe.’* Ne meg ic Se nauht helan pey peic pac. aye Su p ppio pmz pmbdon on Sip middaneande.!® An ir hpilendhic pet herp ezpep!® ze ppuman ze enbe. 3 1¢!7 nac Seah nan puht pey de hpilendlic 1y naupep ne hiy ppuman
ne hiy ende. Opep pinz iy ece. } harp ppuman J nefp nenne
ende, ¥ 1c!” pac hponne hit onzmp. J pat ‘P hit neefpe ne Ze- endap. } ymmc engzlay and monna yapla. Dpidde ping ip ece bucon ende 7 bucon anzmne. ‘f iy Lod. Becpuh pam!'* ppm ip rpipe micel coycead. Ing pic ‘fp ealle rculon aymeazan.’* ponne cume pit lace to ende pire bec. odde nappe:. Ac an Sinz pu yeealc nyde° pap ep*! pican. pop hpy God ip zehacen po hebyce ecner. Da cpepic. Ppy. Da cpep he. Foppon pe picon ypipe lycel pay pe ep uy pey. bucon be zemynde. 7 be Ze- arcunze.”? and zec leyye pey Se epcep up bip. ‘} an ur ip ze- pilice andpeand ‘} te ponne bip. ac him yp eall andpeapd. ze
ce xp) py. ze fp ce nu ip. ze pce epoep up bid. eall hic ip him ©
andpeapd. Ne pexp”’ hip pelena. ne eac nefpe ne panap. Ne oyman he nefpe nan** puht. fopdem nefpe nauht he*® ne
4 Boet. lib. v. prosa 6.—Quoniam igitur, uti paulo ante, &.
1 Cott. ealle. 2 Cott. ppypian. 3 Bod. piyton. ‘ Cott. hpyle. 5 Cott. pandian 6 Cott. cpedon. 7 Cott. rcolde._ * Cott. ropbaem. 9 Cott. ppylce. 1 Cott. bi’. 11 ypa, deest in MS. Bod. 12 Bod. ypespa. 18 Cott. pcan. ™ Cott. bluzop. 15 Cott. middanzeapde.
16 Bod. bey be esbep. 17 1c, deest in MS. Cott. 18 Cott. betpeoh haem. 19 Cott. copmeagan. 7° Cott. nede. 7! Cott. an. ?% Cott. seaypcum. 23 Cott. ycencd. 4 Cott. nane. 25 Cott. oppeem he neype nauhz,
-OHAP. XLII, BOETHIUS, : 257
CHAPTER XLII.
THEREFORE we ought with all our power to inquire con- cerning God, that we may know what he is. Though it may not be our lot that we should know what he is, we ought nevertheless, according to the measure of understanding which he gives us, to strive after it: for, as we have already mentioned, man must know everything according to the measure of his understanding, since we are not able to know everything such as it is. Every creature, however, whether rational or irrational, testifies this, that God is eternal. For never would so many creatures, and so great and so fair, submit themselves to an inferior being, and to less power than they all are, nor indeed to equally great. Then said I; What is eternity? Then said he: Thou askest me about a great thing, and difficult to understand. If thou wouldest understand it, thou must first have the eyes of thy mind clean and clear. I cannot conceal from thee anything which I know. Knowest thou that there are three things in this middle-earth ? One is temporary, which has both beginning and end; and I nevertheless know nothing of that which is temporary, neither its beginning nor its end. Another thing is eternal, and has beginning, and has no end; and I know when it begins, and I know that it never will end: that is, angels and men’s souls. The third thing is eternal, without end, and without beginning, that is, God. Among the three is a very great difference. If we should inquire into the whole of it, then should we come late to the end of this book, or never! But one thing thou must necessarily first know, why God is called the highest eternity. Then said I: Why? Then said he: Because we know very little of that which was before us, except by memory, and by inquiry; and still less of that which shall be after us. That alone is truly present to us, which at the time is: but to him all is present, both what was before, and what now is, and what after us shall be; it is all present to him. His riches increase not, nor, moreover, do they ever diminish. He never recollects any-
=
} :
258 BOETHIUS.  OHAP. XLT. ” .
yopzeac.! Ne yecd he nanpuhc. ne ne smeap. foppam? Se he hic
paz eall, Ne yecp he nan puhz. ropSam* he nan pub ne fop- :
lear. Ne eht he nanpe puhcte. pop py hme nan puht ne mez- plon. Ne ondpec he nanpuhc.* popdem he ned: nenne
1 7
picpan. ne fuppum neenne zelican. Simle he bip zipende. j ne
panap hyy> neppe nauhe. Simle® he bid elmihtiz. poppem he- ymle® pile zod’ and nefpe nan yrel. Niy him naney Singer nedpeapf. Simle* he bid lociende. ne ylepp he nefpe. Simles he bip zelice manppepe. Simle* he bip ece. roppam neppe pio uid ney ‘} he nape. ne nefpe ne pypp. Simle® he bid ppeoh. ne bip he co nanum peopce zeneded. Fon hiy zod5cundlicum an- pealde he iy ezhpep andpeapd Piy micelneyye ne mez nan monn amecan. my ‘P Seah no hchomlice? to penanne. ac zaytlice. pa ypa nu piydom ip J pibtpipney. foppem he ip yelp. Ac hpaec ofepmodize xe ponne. odde hpy ahebbe ze eop pip ypa heane anpeald. roppampe xze!® nauht pip hme don ne mazon, foppem ye eca 7 ye elmihcza pmle" pic om pam!? heah yecle hiy anpealder. ponan he mez eall zeypion. and zile zelcum be dam pyhte" apcep hip zepyphtum. foppam hic nyt no unnyc’’ Sec pe hopien co Lobe. roppem he ne penc!® no ypa ypa pe dop. Ac abiddap!? hine eadmobdlice. foppeem he ip ypipe pummod and ypiSe mildheopc. Pebbad eopen Mod co him mid eopum hondum ¥ bibdap Sey Se piht pie and eopep peapf ple. foppam!* he eop nyle’® pypnan. haciap ygel 4 plop”? ypa ze
ypipoyt mazon. lupiap cperray J folziap Seem. Ire habbap micle Seappe*! pac ze yrmle” pel don. foppaem ze prmle? befopan—
pam ecan j pam elmehcizan Lode dop eall ‘p } ze Sop. eall he hic zeyihp J eall he hic popzile. AMEN :-
- Cott, nepop sZeaz. 2 Cott. ropbem. 5 Cott. poppy. * Cott. he him nane puhc. 5 Cott. hip. § Cott. Symle. 7 Cott. 5000. § Cott. Symle. Cott. hcumlhce. 1 Bod. hi. ™ Cott. elmehtsa pymle. 12 Cott. peem, ' Cott. ppibe phe. “4 Cott. niy. 16 Cott, unnic. 16 Bod. pelz. 17 Cott. biddav. 18 Cott. popbam. 19 Cott. nele. 20 Cott. pleo’. 21 Cott. nedbeapre. 22 Cott. pymle.
’ OHAP, XLII. BOETHIUS. 259
thing, because he never forgets anything. He neither secks nor inquires after anything, because he knows it all. He searches for nothing, because he has lost nothing. He pur- sues not anything, because nothing can fly from him. He _ fears nothing, because he has none more powerful, nor indeed ~ any like him. He is always giving, and nothing of bis ever decreases. He is always Almighty, because he always wills good and never any evil. There is not need to him of any- thing. He is always seeing, he never sleeps. He is always equally gracious. He is always eternal, for the time never was when he was not, nor ever will be. He is always free; _ nor is he compelled to any work. By his divine power he is everywhere present. His greatness no man can measure; yet this is not to be understood bodily, but spiritually, even as wisdom is, and righteousness, for he is that himself. But what are ye then proud of, or why litt ye up yourselves against so high power? For ye can do nothing against him. For the Eternal and the Almighty always sits on the throne of his power. Thence he is able to see all, and renders to every one with justice, according to his works. Therefore it is not in vain that we have hope in God;-for he changes not as we do. But pray ye to him humbly, for he is very bountiful and very merciful. Lift up your minds to him _ with your hands, and pray for that which is right, and is needful to you, for he will not refuse you. Hate, and fly from evil as ye best may. Love virtues and follow them. Ye have great need that ye always do well, for ye always in the presence of the Eternal and Almighty God do all that ye do. He beholds it all, and he will recompense itall. Amry
82
260 BORTHIUS. CHAP. XLII.
DRIPTEN elmiheiza Lod. pyphta 3 pealsend ealpa ze- ycearca. ic bidbde Se fon pipe micelan mildheoptneyyan. 3 fop- pzpe halezan pode cacne. 3 rop Scam Mapian mezp habde. and yop Scem Michaeler zehypyumneyye. 3 Fop ealpa pmpa halzena’ lupan 7 heopa eapnunzum. } pu me zepyypize bet ponne ic apyphve co pe. J zepyya me co Smum pillan and co minpe yaple peapre bec Sonne ic yylp cunne. J zeycapelamim Mod co Smum
:
plan 3 co minpe yaple peapre. 3 zeycepanza me pip peey deorler — coycnunzum. and afyppa ppam me da fulan zalnyyye 3 ele un- |
pubcpiynyyye. J zercylbe me pip mmum pipeppmnum Zere-
penlicum ¥ unzerepenlicum. j caec me Sinne pillan co pypcenne. ic meze Se npeandhice lufian co Fopon eallum pmzum mid clenum zepance j mid clenum hchaman. foppon pe du eapt min yceoppend. J min aleyend. min fulcum. min Fpofep. mim cpepney. j mim co hopa. yi pe lop J puldep nu 3 4 4 4 co populde bucon ezhpilcum ende. AMEN :-
FINIS8.
CHAPS KLIT  - BOETHIUS. 261
O Lord God Almighty, Creator and Ruler of all creatures, I beseech thee by thy great mercy, and by the sign of the holy cross, and by the virginity of Saint Mary, and by the obedience of Saint Michael, and by the love of all thy saints, and by their merits; that thou wouldest direct me better than I have done towards thee: and direct me to thy will, and to my soul’s need, better than I myself know: and make steadfast my mind to thy will, and to my soul’s need: and strengthen me against the temptations of the devil; and re- move from me impure lust, and all unrighteousness; and defend me against mine enemies visible and invisible; and teach me to do thy will; that I may inwardly love thee before all things, with pure mind, and with pure body; for thou art my Creator, and my Redeemer, my Help, my Com- fort, my Trust, and my Hope. To thee be praise, and glory now and for ever, world without end. AMEN.
THE END.
ae
a
ST. ALBERT’s COLLEGE Lypy:
SRARY
THE ANGLO-SAXON VERSION
OF
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS,
WITH
AN ENGLISH FREE TRANSLATION,
BY
MARTIN F. TUPPER, ESQ., D.C.L.,
PROGMIUM.
DUS Ailpped ur. ealo-ypell peahte. Lyning f/eyc-sexna. cpeeze meldode. leod-pyphea lic. Pim pey luyc micel.
peec he pioypum leodum.
leod ypellose. - monnum mypzen. muylice cpidar. py ley elinge. ucaodpure. - yelplicne yecz. ponne he ypelcery lyc. xym6 yop hip zilpe. Ic yceal ziec yppezan. fon on ficce. fole-cudne peed. helepum yeczean. hliyce ye pe pille.
&e. &e. &e.
INTRODUCTION.
Tus to us did Alfred sing A spell of old;
Song-craft the West-Saxon king Did thus unfold:
Long and much he long’d to His people then [teach
These mixt-sayings of sweet The joys of men; [speech,
That no weariness forsooth, As well it may,— .
Drive away delight from truth, But make it stay.
So he can but little seek For his own pride:
A fytte of song I fitly speak, And nought beside:
A folk-beknown and world- I have to say; [read thing
To all the best of men I sing,— List, ye that may.
. 264
METRUM I.
Pic pey Zeapa iu. perce Locan eaycan. oF Scidpia.
ycelday leeddon. ppeate zeppunzon. peod-lond moniz. yeccon yudpeander. yize-peoda cpa. Lozene pice. zeap-melum peox. heepdan him zecynbe. cyninzay tpezen. Reedzod and Alepic. pice zepunzon.
Da pey ofep muncziop. moniz acyhtebd. Loca xylpey yull. zuse zelyyced. pole-zepinney.
pana hpeaprobe.
yeip on pcearce. yceotend pohcon. Icalia.
ealle’ zezonzan. lind-pizende. hizeleeycan.
ypua epne ppom munczop.
od pone mepan peanod, peep Sicilia. yee-ycpeamum im. ezlond micel.
epel meepyas.
Da peey Romana,
pice zepunnen. abpocen bupza cyyc. beabu-pmeum per. Rom zepymed. Reedzoc and Alepie. fopon on pees feeycen,
< wot
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
METRE I. OF ROME AND BOETHIUS.
It was long of yore That the Gothie rout, Forth from Scythia’s eastern” shore, Led their shieldmen out, Thronged with swarms of war The lands of many a clan, And in the South set firm and far, Two tribes to trouble man.
Yearly waxed and grew Those Gothic kingdoms twain, And Alaric and Rhedgast too, Right royally did reign.
Then down the Alps the Goth Made haste to force his way, In haughty pride all fiercely wrath And lusting for the fray.
Their banner fluttered bright, While all Italia through Shot ruthless in their linden
might The shielded warrior crew, Forth from the Alpine drifts - To great Sicilia’s coast, Where in the sea-stream it uplifts, Its lofty island boast. Then Rome’s old rule was crush’d, Her costliness despoil’d, And by that host, with battle flush’d, The city’s beauty soil’d.
1 Cott. ealla.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 265 ©
fleah Larepe.
) mid pam epelinzum.
uc on [pecar.
Ne meahcze pa reo pea lap. pize Fopycandan.
__ Lozan mid zuse.
~ x10 monna zeycpion. yealoon unpillum.
epel peapbday.
halize apar.
pey zehpeepepery paa. Deah py mazo-pinca. mood mid Imecum.
zip hi leod-ppuman.
__ leycan dopycen.
 Scod ppaze on pam.
| peod pay xepunnen.
pintpa meenizo.
06 pet pypd zerepar. pec pe Peodpice. peznay and eoplay. hepan yceoldan.
Vey ye Pepecema. L[piycte zecnobden. cyning yelpa onrenz. fulluhc peapum. Feznodon ealle. Rompapa beapn.
and him pecene to. Fpipey pulnedon.
Pe him feycte zehec. peec hy eald-pihca. zlcey moyten.
pyppe sepunizen.
_ on pepe pelezan byprz. penden Lod puolbte. peec he Isodena zepeald. axan moyte.
De peer eall aleaz. pey peem zepelinze. Appuianer.
Alarie and Rhedgast The fastness first they seek, © While Cesar with his chiefs fled fast For safety to the Greek.
Then could the wretched band, Left mournfully behind, No more the warring Goth withstand, Nor much of mercy find.
Unwillingly their trust The warders then gave up, None to his oath was true and just ; And full was sorrow’s cup.
Yet to the Greek outyearn’d The people, as at first, And for some daring leader burn’d To follow whom they durst.
The people wore their woes Many a wintry year, Till weird-ordained Theodoric rose, Whom thane and earl should hear.
To Christ the chief was born, And water-wash’d the king, While all Rome’s children blest the morn That peace with it should bring.
To Rome he vowed full fast Her old-time rights to yield, While God should grant his life to last, The Gothic power to wield.
266 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
xedpola leone. ponne Dpiheney 2. _ Pec Iohanney. zoone Papan. hearde beheapon. ney P heplic ded. eac pam pep unpim., odper maney.
‘p ye Loa ppemebte. zodpa zehpilcum. Da pey picpa yum. on Rome bypiz. aheren Pepetoza. hlapopde leor. penden LCyneycole. [peacay pioldon.
Deec pey pibtpip pme.
pey' mid Rompapum, yinc-zeora sella, yiSpan lonze he.
pey pop peopulde pip. peopo-mynpa zeopn. beopn boca zleap. Borciuy.
ye hele hace.
ye pone hliran zepah.
Vey him on zemynbde.
mela zehpilce.
yrel and edpic.
peec him elpeodze. kyninzay cyS5don.
peey on Cpeacar hold. zemunode papa ayia. and eald-pihta.
pe hiy eldpan.
mid. him ahcon lonze. luran and hiyya.
Anzan pa lycum ymbe.
pencean peaprlice. hu he pidep meahce.
He did forswear all that: The Atheling he lied,
To please Arius God forgot, And falsely slipp’d aside.
He broke his plighted oath, And without right or ruth, ~
Good John the Pope against
all troth
Beheaded for the truth.
A shameful deed was there; And heaps of other ill
Against the good this Goth did In wickedness of will. [dare
des a
I tome
A man there was just set For heretoch in Rome, Loved by the lord whose bread he ate, And dear to all at home:
Dear also to the Greek, When he the town did save; A righteous man, whom all would seek, For many gifts he gave.
Long since was he full wise, In worldly wit and lore, Eager in worth and wealth to rise, And skill’d on books to pore. Boethius was he hight ; He ate shame’s bitter bread, And ever kept the scorn in sight Outlandish kings had said. He to the Greek was true, And oft the old-rights told, Which he and his forefathers too From those had won of old.
1 Cott. ney.
oy ey
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
_ Epecar onceppan.
peec ye Larepe.
ere anpald ofep hi. azan moyce.
yende zpeno-Zepnic.
_—ealo-hlapopdum. - ~ dezelice. and hi fop Dpihcne bed.
ealbum cpeopum. peec hi fc co him. comen on pa ceayepe.
~ lece Lpeca pican. _ peetan Rompapum.
puhcey pypse.
— leve pone leodycrpe
Da pa lane onzeacz. Deodpic Amulinz.
and pone pezn ofepreng hehe yeeyclice.
_ fole-zeyrpay.
healbon pone hepe-pine. pey him hpeoh yera. exe fpom pam eople. he hine mne.
hehz on capcepne. cluycep belucan.
Da pey mob-yeya. miclum zedpereo. Boeciuy.
bpeac lonze zp. plencea undep polcnum. he by pypy meahce.
_polian pa ppaze.
pa hio rpa peapl becom.
_ Py pa opmod eopl.
ape ne pende.
ne on pam feeycene. Fpofpe semunbde.
ac he neopol aycpeaht. nipep of Sune.
- reol on pa lone.
267
Carefully then he plann’d To bring the Greek to Rome, That Cesar in his rightful land Again might reign at home.
In hidden haste he plied With letters all the lords, And prayed them by the Lord
who died, To heed his earnest words,
Greece should give laws to Rome, And Rome should Greece
obey ; The people longed to let them come To drive the Goth away.
But lo! the Amuling Theodoric found out all, And bid his fellows seize and bring This high-born chief in thrall.
He feared that good earl well, And straightly bade them bind Boethius in the prison cell, Sore troubled in his mind.
Ah! he had basked so long Beneath a summer sky, Ill could he bear such load of wrong, So heavy did it lie.
Then was he full of woe, Nor heeded honour more; Reckless he flung himself below Upon the dungeon floor ;
268 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
rela popda rppeec. poppohz peanle. ne pende ponan zfpe.
cuman of pem clammum.
cleopode co Dpihcne. zeompan ycemne. zyooode pur :-
METRUM II.?
Ppeec ic hoésa rela. luyclice zeo.
yane on yeelum.
nu yceal piopizende. pope zepazeo.
ppeccea Ziomon. jynzan sap-cpidar.
Me proy piccecunz harasd. azzleb per zeocya.
‘p ic pa xed ne mez. xepezean ypa peexzpe. peah 1c rela z10 pa, yecce yod-cpida.
ponne 1c on yeelum peer. Ofc ic nu miycyppe. cude pppece.
and peah uncudpe.
zep hpilum pond.
me pay populd yelda. pel hpzp* blindne.
on piy dimme hol. oye poplebddon.
and me pa bepypton. pedey and fporpe.
pop heopa uncpeopum. pe ic him eeppe becyc. cpupian yceolde,
hi me copendon. heopa bacu bizepe.
® Boet. lib. i. metrum 1.— Carmina qui quondam studio florente per-
Much mourning, there he lay,
Nor thought to break his
chains,
But to the Lord by night and
AF Sang thus in sighing strains.
METRE II.
A SORROWFUL FYTTE,
Lo! I sang cheerily In my bright days, But now all wearily Chaunt I my lays; Sorrowing tearfully, Saddest of men, Can I sing cheerfully, As I could then?
Many a verity In those glad times Of my prosperity Taught I in rhymes; Now from forgetfulness Wanders my tongue, Wasting in fretfulness Metres unsung.
Worldliness brought me here
Foolishly blind,
Riches have wrought me here
Sadness of mind ; When I rely on them,
Lo! they depart,— Bitterly, fie on them!
Rend they my heart.
egi, &c.—The metrez of Boethius, strictly speaking, begin here,
1 Cott. hpay.
a
¢. 0
4
e
and heona bhyye fpom.
_ Fophpam polbe ze.
_ peopuld ppynd mine.
_ yeczan odpe yinzan.
pec ic zeyeellic mon.
__ pepe on peopulde.
ne yynt pa popd ros. yimle zepunizan.
METRUM III
fala on hu zpimmum. - and hu zpunbdlearum. __ yeade ypinced. pec speopcende mod. _ ponne hit pa ycponzan. ycopmary beaczas. _ peopuld-biyzunza. } ponne hic pmnenbde. hi agen leohc. _ an popleced. and mid uua Fopgzic. pone ecan zefean. ppinz6 on pa pioycépo. pyye populde. - fopzum zerpenced. ypa ip piyyum nu. mode zelumpen. nu hit mape ne pac. pop Lode zober. buton znopnunze. fpembpe populde. him iy Fpogpe peapF.
nu pa zeyeelpa ne maxon.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 269
Why did your songs to me, World-loving men,
Say joy belongs to me, Ever as then P
Why did ye lyingly Think such a thing,
Seeing how flyingly Wealth may take wing?
METRE III. A FYTTE OF DESPAIR.
Alas! in how grim A gulf of despair, Dreary and dim For sorrow and care, My mind toils along When the waves of the world Stormy and strong Against it are hurl’d. When in such strife My mind will forget Its light and its life In worldly regret, And through the night Of this world doth grope Lost to the light Of heavenly hope. Thus it hath now Befallen my mind, I know no more how God’s goodness to find, But groan in my grief Troubled and tost, Needing relief For the world I have lost.
b Boet. lib. i, metrum 2.—Heu, quam precipiti mersa profundo, &e,
270
METRUM IV<
ZEala pu yerppend. yeippa cunzla.
hefoney and eoppan.
pu on heah-yecle.
ecum picyayt.
and pu ealne hpese. heron ymbhpeapreyc. and puph pine halize mihe. cunzlu zenedeyc.
pec hi pe co hepad. ypylce yeo yunne. ypeapcpa mihta.
ploycpo adpeerced.
puph pme mehc. blacum leohze.
beonhte ypceoppan. mona zemecxa0d.
puph pmpa meahza yped. hpilum eac pa punnan. ymey bepearad. beophcan leohcey. ponne hic zebypizan mez. pec ypa zeneahyne. nede peoppad.
ypelce pone mepan. mopzenyceoppan,
pe pe odpe naman. wpenyceoppa.
nemnan henas.
pu zenedeyc pone.
pec he pepe yunnan, rid bepizize.
zeapa zehpelce. .
he zonzan yceal. beropan fepan.
Ppeec pu feedep pepnceyc. yumup-lanze Sagar. ypide hace.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
METRE IV.
A PSALM TO GOD.
—
O Thou, that art Maker of —
heaven and earth,
Who steerest the stars, and hast given them birth;
For ever Thou reignest upon Thy high throne,
And turnest all swiftly the heavenly zone.
Thou, by Thy strong holiness drivest from far ;
.
In the way that Thou willest —
each worshipping star ; And, through Thy great power, the sun from the night Drags darkness away by the might of her light.
The moon, at Thy word, with his pale shining rays Softens and shadows the stars
as they blaze,
And even brightness bereaves, Whenever upon her too closely
he cleaves.
So also the Morning and Even- ing Star
Thou makest to follow the Sun from afar,
To keep in her pathway each year evermore,
And go as she goeth in guidance before.
© Boet, lib, i. metrum 5.—O Stelliferi Conditor orbis, &e.
the Sun of her
LHE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 27%
pem pintep-Sazum. punopum yceeopca. cida Zeciohhayc.
Du pem cpeopum yeleyz.
yupan and peycan.
pa ep ye ypeapta pconm.
noppan and eaycan. benumen hepbde. leara xehpelcey. puph pone ladpan pind. €ala hpeet on eoppan. ealla zepcearca.
“hypad pmpe here.
_ 506 on heofonum ypa some. —— mode and meezne.
bucan men anum.
ye pS pum pillan. pypced oftoyc.
ella pu eca.
and pu almihviza. ealpa zeycearta. yceppend and peccend. apa pinum eapmum. eoppan cuope.
monna cynne.
puph pmpa mehca yped. Ppi pu ece Lod.
zeppe polde.
pec yio pypd on zepill. pendan yceolde.
yylum monnum. ealley ypa pide.
hio ful oft Seped. unycyloezum.
Siccad yfele men. ziond eopd-picu,
on heah-yeclum. halize ppiccad.
undep heopa focum. pipum uncus.
bpi pio pypd ypa po.
Behold too, O Father, Thou workest aright
To summer hot day-times of long-living light,
To winter all wondrously or- derest wise
Short seasons of sunshine with frost on the skies.
Thou givest the trees a south- westerly breeze,
Whose leaves the swart storm in its fury did seize
By winds flying forth from the east and the north
And scattered and shattered all over the earth.
On earth and in heaven each creature and kind
Hears Thy behest with might and with mind;
But man, and man only, who Cinect still
Wickedly worketh against Thy Ly wise will.
For ever, Almighty One, Maker, and Lord,
On us, wretched earthworms, Thy pity be poured ; Why wilt Thou that welfare to sinners should wend,
But lettest weird ill the un-
guilty ones rend?
Evil men sit, each on earth’s highest seat,
Trampling the holy ones under their feet ;
bar. THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
pendan yceolde.
Spa sinc zehydde. hep on populde. xeond bupza rela. beophce cpeercay. Unpihcpire.
eallum cidum. habba®d on hoype. pa pe him ymbon. pibcey piypan.
picey pypSpan.
Bid ‘ leaye loc. lanze hpuile. beppizen mid ppencum. Nu on populde hep. monnum ne depiad. mane apay.
Ing pu nu paldend ne pile.
pipde yceonan.
ac on yelp-pille.
yizan leceyc.
ponne ic pac pet ce pile. populd-men cpeozan. zeond foldan-pceat. bucon fea ane.
€ala mm Dpyhcen.
pu pe ealle opeppihyc. populde xeycearva.
plic nu on moncyn. milbum eazum.
nu hi on monezum hep. populde ypum.
pynnad and ypincasd, eapme eopd-papan,
apa him nu pa.
Why good should go crookedly _
no man can Say,
And bright deeds in crowds —
should lie hidden away. _
The sinner at all times is scorning the just,
The wiser in right, and the |
worthier of trusts ; Their leasing for long while — with fraud is beelad,
And oaths that are lies do no
harm to the bad.
O Guide, if thou wilt not steer fortune amain,
But lettest her rush so self- willed and so vain,
I know that the worldly will
doubt of Thy might,. And few among men in Thy rule will delight.
My Lord, overseeing all things
from on high,
Look down on mankind with —
mercy’s mild eye ;
In wild waves of trouble they struggle and strive,
Then spare the poor earth- worms, and save them alive !
+ only
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 273
METRUM V.4
Du meahc be pape sunnan.
- ypeocole zepencean, and be ezhpelcum. oSpum yceoppan.
"papa pe epcep bupzum.
beophcoys pemed. Ing him pan rope. polcen hanzas.
ne meen hi ypa leohtne.
leoman anyendan. eep. ye picca miuyc. pmpa peopde.
Spa oft ymylze yee.
- yupepne pind.
zpexe zlay-hludpe. zpimme zedpered. ponne hie zemenzad. micla yyca.
onhpepad hpon-mepe, hpioh bié ponne.
yeo pe xp xlabdu. on-yiene py.
Spa ofc eeypppinze. ucapealles.
of clipe hapum.
col and hlucop.
and zeneclice.
pihce floped.
ipned pid hip eapbder. 08 him on innan Feld. muncey mezen-yean.
and him on middan zelized. acpendlod of pem coppe.
he on cu yidpan. coyceaden pyps. yeip bid zedpered. bupna zeblonden. bpoc bi6 onpended.
METRE V. OF TROUBLE AND ITs CURE.
Ye may learn by the stars and the sun Shining on cities so bright, If the welkin hangs dreary and dun, To wait in the mist for the light.
So too, the calm sea, glassy
grey, The south wind all grimly makes riot ; And whirlpools in strife stir
away The whale-pond that once was so quiet.
So also, outwelleth a spring, All clear from the cliff and all cool, Till midway some mountain may fling A rock to roll into the pool.
Then broken asunder will seem The rill so clear-running before, That brook is turned out of its stream, And flows in its channel no more.
So now, in thy darkness of mind,
Thou willest my wisdom to spurn,
4 Boet. lib. i, metrum 7,—Nubibus atris, &e.
yp
Res |
274 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. j of ly phe pyne. Withstanding, by tronblg pypum coflopen. made blind,
ypa nu pa piorcpo. The lessons thou never wilt pipe heopcan pillas. learn. + minpe leohzan. : lane pidSyctondan. Yet now, if ye will, as ye may, — and pin mobd-zeponc. The true and pure light miclum zedperan. clearly know, : Ac zig pu nu pilnaye. Let go the vain joys of to-day, pec pu pel maze. The weal that brings nothing pet yose leohc. but woe.
ypeocole oncnapan.
leohte zelearan. And drive away bad unbelief, pu foplecan ycealc. The fears of the world and idle ofep-yeelpa. its care,
unnycne zefean. And be thou not given to grief, pu ycealc eac ypelne exe. Nor yield up thy mind to an-poplecan. despair.
populd-eanpopa. ne moyt pu peran son pem. Nor suffer thou glad-going
ealley co opmobd. things
ne pu pe eppe ne lev. To puff thee with over-much plenca zepaecan. pride, pe lay pu peopSe pop him. Nor worldliness lifting thy mid ofep-meccum. wings, epe zercended. To lure thee from meekness and co upaharen. aside ; yop opropzum. populd zeyzelpum. And let not, too weakly again, Ne erz co paclice. Ills make thee despair of the zeopcpeope. ood, enizey zodey. When hunted by peril and ponne pe pop populte. pain, pipeppeapda meeyc," And haunted by misery’s pmza ppeaze. brood. and pu pe yelfum. ‘
ypipoye onyicce. For always the mind of a man foppaem yimle brs. Is bound up with trouble ye mood-rera. below,
miclum zebunden mid. 1 Cott, mey'd.
Be xcspernerre. ge Zip hme dpeccean moc. _ pyya yrla hpeepep. -innan ypencan. FOppsem pa cpezen cpezan. _ teod co yomne. pid pec mod ronan. muiycey Spoleman. pec hic yeo ece ne mot.
yunne fop pem ypeancum
METRUM VI
Da ye //ipdom erc. popd-hopd onleac. yanz yod-cpibdar.
and puy yelra cps. Donne yio sunne. ypeocoloye yeinesd. hadpoyc of hefone. hpede bios apiycpod. ealle ofip eoppan. odpe pceoppan. foppem hiona biphcu ne bis. aubc [biphcneyre. |
to xepeccane.
pd peepe sunnan leohc. Donne ysmolze bleyps. yupan and peycan pind. undep polcnum.
ponne peaxed hpase. elder bloycman. peexzen pec hi moton. Ac ye yseeapca ycopm. ponne he ycpong cyms. noppan and eaycan.
he zenmmed hpase. pepe poyan plice.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
hinan zeond yernan. [muiycum.
zp pem hi zeypidpad peoppen.
275
If riches or poverty can Engraft it with sin or with woe.
Because the twin evils make dun The mind in a misty swart shroud, That on its eternity’s sun Is dim till it scatters the cloud.
METRE VI. OF CHANGE.
Then did Wisdom again Unlock his word-hoard well,
And sang in soothful strain The truths he had to tell.
When with clearest blaze The sun shines in the sky, The stars must quench their rays Over the earth so high.
For that, set in the light Of her that rules by day, Their brightness is not bright, But dimly dies away.
When the wind South-west Under the cloud blows low,
Field-flowers wax their best, Fain to be glad and grow.
But when by East and North, The stark storm strongly blows, He speedily drives forth All beauty from the rose.
€ Boet. lib. ii. metrum 3.—Cum polo Phebus roseis quadrigis, &e. "2
276
And eac pa puman ye. noppepne yyc.
nede zebzeded.
pec hio ysepanze zeond sryped. on ycapu beaced.
Eala } on eoppan.
auhc yeyclicey.
peopcer on populde.
ne punad zppe.
METRUM VII‘ Da onzon ye //iydom. hiy xepunan yylzan. zlio-popdum ol. zyd wv! ypelle. yonz yoo-cpida. yumne pa Zeta. Lp he ne hepoe. peec on heanne? munc. monna eeniz. meahcte ayeccan. healle hyop-peeyce. Ne peapr eac helepa nan. penan pey peoncey. pec he prydom maze. pS ofepmetra, wppe zemenzan. PDepdey pu eppe. pet ce wemiz mon. on yond beopzay. yeccan meahce. peeyce healle. Ne mez eac pipa nan. piybom cimbpan. pep pep populd-zicpunz. beopz opepbpzeded, bapu yond pillad. pen ropypelzan.
THE METRES OF.BOETHIUS.
So, with a stern needs-be < The northern blast doth dash é And beat the wide waste sea That it the land may lash.
Alas, that here on earth Nothing is fast and sure ;
No work is found so worth That it for ever endure.
METRE VII. OF CONTENT AND HUMBLENESS.
Again, as his wont, began Wisdom a song,
And spoke out his spells as he wander’d along,
He said: On a mountain no man can be skill’d
With a roof weather-proof a high hall to up build.
Moreover, let no man think ever to win
By mixing pure wisdom with over-proud sin.
Heard ye that any built firmly on sand,
Or caught hold of wisdom with gain-getting hand ?
The light soil is greedy to swallow the rain ;
So now doth the rich, in his measureless gain
£ Boet. lib, ii. metrum 4.—Quisquis volet perennem, &e.
1 Cott. wyv.
2 Cott. heane.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
— Spa de8 picpa nu. zpunbdleay zcpunz. _ zulpey and ehva. zeopinced co Spyzzum. Speoyenodne pelan. and peah pey peapran ne bid. pupyc aceled. Ne mzz helepa zehpem. huy on munte. lanze zeleeycan. Foppeem him lungzpe on. Tpize pmd ypaped. Ne bid yond pon ma. pis micelne pen. manna enzum, huyey hipde. ac hic hpeoyan pile. pigan yond efcen pene. Spa bios anpa xehpey. monna mood-yefan. miclum apezebde. of hiopa yoede poypede. ponne he ycponz dpecesd. pind undep polenum. populd-eapropa. odéde hi’ ere ye pepa. pen onhpeped. yumey ymbhozan. unzemec Zemen. Ac ye pe pa ecan. azan pille. yopan zerzlpa. he yéeal pide lion. pure populse plice. pypce him ypidpan. hiy mobdey hur. pep he meeze findan. eadmecca scan. unzemecpeyene.? zpund-peal zeapone.
1 Cott. hic.
277
Of honours and havings, drink deep of such weal,
Yea, down to the dregs, and still thirsty will feel.
A’ house on a hill-top may never long stay,
For quickly the swift wind. shall sweep it away,
And a house on the sand is no better at all;
In spite of the house-herd, in rain it shall fall.
So failing and fickle is every mind
When rack’d by the rage of this world-trouble wind,
And measureless cares, as a quick-dropping rain
Unstopping, stir up the mind’s welkin with pain.
But he who would have ever- lasting true bliss,
Must fly from the glare of a world such as this:
And then let him make a strong home for his mind,
Wherever true Lowliness’ rock he can find;
2 Cott. unis mecyeycne,
278 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
y ye to-zldan ne peapr. '_ peah hic pecze pd. populd-eapropa.
~ 066e ymbhogena. opmece pen.
Foppzem on pepe dene.
Dpuhcen yelya.
papa eadmecza. eanodpeye punizad. pep se fiydom 4. punad on zemyndum. Foppon opyopg hr. ealniz lebdad. populd-men pire. bucon pendinze. ponne he eall ropyihd. eopSlicu z005.
and eac pana yrela. opyroph punad.
hopad co pam ecum. pe pep wzpcep cumad. Pine ponne zzhponan. zlmuihciz Good. yinzallice.
yimle zehealded. anpunizendne.
hiy azenum.
mobdey zeyelpum. puph mecobdey zipe. peah hime ye pind. populd-eappopa.
rpise pence.
and hine yimzale. xemen zzele.
ponne him zpimme on.
populd-yzelpa pid. ppade blaped.
peah pe hme ealnez. ye ymbhoza pyyya. populd-ralpa. ppade opecce.
A settled ground-anchur that never shall slide,
Though trouble attack it by tempest and tide ;
For that, in Lowliness’ valley
so fair,
The Lord, and mind-wisdom—
for ever live there.
Therefore leads always a quiet- like life
The wise in the world, without changes or strife,
When hoaion alike of earth’s good and earth’s ill,
He watches in hope of an after-
world still.
Such an one evermore God ever —
kind
Happily keeps in the calm of his mind;
Though wild winds of sorrow against him are hurl’d,
Though always annoyed by the cares of the world,
Though wrathful and grim are these trouble-dark gales, And Care in its anguish and
anger assails,
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 279
METRUM VIILs# Sona ypa ye //iydom. par popd heerbde.  ypecole apeahce. _ he pa prSpan onzan. ymgan yod-cpiday. and puy yelpa cped. Ppzec pio fopme eld. fold-buenodum. zeond eoppan-yceac. _ exhpam dohre. "pa pa anna zehpeem.
on eopd-peeycemum. zenoh puhce.
ny hic nu pa yrpele.
nepon pa zeond peonulde.
pelize hamay.
ne miylice.
meccay he opincay. ne hi papa hpezla. hupu ne zem6on.
pe nu opihc-zuman. o1onoys lead. foppem hiopa neniz. neey pa gleta.
ne hi ne zeyapon. yund-buenbde.
ne ymbucan hi.
apen ne hepdon. hpeec hi prpenluyca. fpecene peepon. buzon ypa hi meahzon. zemeclicoyc.
pa zecynd began.
pe him [pyc zeyceop. and hi zene on deze. secon symle.
on efen-uid.
eoppan peycmay.
METRE VIII. OF PRIMAL INNOCENCE.
Soon as Wisdom thus had sung,
He began, with plainer tongue,
Sooth to sing his sayings thus,
And himself to speak to us.
O how full of blessing then
Was the first glad age to men!
When earth’s fruitful plenty came,
Not as now, to all the same;
When through all the world were there
No great halls of costly care ;
No rich feasts of meat or drink ;
Neither did they heed or think
Of such jewels, then unknown,
As our lordlings long to own;
Nor did seamen aye behold,
Nor had heard of gems or gold.
More; with frugal mind they fi ired ;
And for pleasures only cared,
As at Christ’s and Kindred’s voice
They were bidden to rejoice.
Once in the day, at eventide,
They ate earth’s fruits, and nought beside ;
No wine they drank, their stoup was clear;
No cunning slave was mingling near
& Boet. lib. ii. metrum 5.—Felix nimium prior extas, &e.
280
puder and pypta.
nalley pm d5puncon,
ycip of yceape.
ney pa ycealca nan.
pe mete od6e dpinc. menzan cude.
peectep pid hunize.
ne heopa paeba pon ma. yloloce ypiopian.
ne hi siapo-cpefrum. zodpeb zipedon.
ne hi zimpeced.
yeccon yeanolice.
ac hi yimle him.
eallum cidum.
uce ylepon.
undep beam-yceade. Spuncon bupnan peecep. calde pellan.
neniz cepa ne yeah. oyep ean-zeblond. ellendne peapod.
ne hupu ymbe yeip-hepzar. yee-cileay ne hepdon.
ne yuppum fipa nan. ymb xzereohe yppecan. ney peoy eopdse bepmicen apep pa zeta.
beopney blode.
pe hi ne? bill-pubde.
ne cuppum pundne pep peopuld-buende. xeyapan undep yunnan. neemz yrSpan peey. peops on peopulde.
zip mon hip pillan onzeaz. yrelne mid eloum.
he pay ezhpeem lad. €ala peer” hic pupde. odde polde Lod.
1 Cott. hine.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
Meats and drinks, to glut their greed,
Or make the heated honey- mead ;
No silk-sewn weeds wish’d | they to wear ;
No good-webs dyed with craty :
care ;
tin LT eine mnaned
fb pmodd
Nor set on high with skilful
power
The mighty dome, or lofty tower.
But under the sweet shade of trees
They slept at all times well at ease,
And, when thirsting, gladly took
Water brook ;
Never trader wandered o’er
Seas to seek a foreign shore,
Never had one heard, indeed,
Of ships to till the briny mead ;
Nowhere yet with blood of men
Was the earth besmitten then,
Nowhere had the sun beheld
Steel that struck, or wound that well’d.
Those who work’d an evil will
Won not worship for their ill ;
All would then have loathed them sore:
O that this could be once more!
from the running
2 Cott. bep.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 281
pec on eoppan nu.
uyya cida.
_ xeond pay pidan peopuld. _ pepen ezhpep! yrpelce.
undep yunnan.
Ac hit ip peempe nu.
pee peoy zicyunc hagas.
xumena zehpelcery.
mod amepped.
pec he manan ne pecd.
ac hit on pice.
peallende bypns.
epne yio Zicyunz.
pe neenne zpunbd harad.
ypeante ppeeped.
yumey on lice.
efne pam munce.
pe nu monna beapn.
€cne hacas.
ye on izlonde.
Sicilia.
ypeple bypned.
pec mon helle ryp.
hazed pide
poppem hic simle bid.
yin-bypnenbe.
and ymbucan hic.
odpa yoopa.
blace ropbepnd.
bicepan leze.
€ala hp ye popma.
peoh-zicrene.
peepe on ponulte.
ye pay ponz-ycebdar.
Spor epcen zolde.
and efcep ZIm-cynnum
hpzec he ppecnu zeycpeon.
punde meenezum. beppizen on peopulte. pecepe o66e eonpan.
O that God would now on earth Make us all so purely worth! But, alas! men now are worse ; Lust of getting sets a curse As a clog upon each mind, Reckless other good to find. Lust of gain unfathomed glows In the heart with bubbling throes ; Swart it lies, and sweltering deep, Like old Etna’s boiling heap, Which in Sicily’s broad isle, Burns with brimstone many a mile, So that men around it tell, Of its fires as fires of hell, For that ever still it burns Bitter everywhere by turns. , Woe! that ever should have been In this world the sinner seen, Who was first so basely bold As to dig for gems and gold: Cares for many then he found Darkly hidden in the ground, Dangerous wealth and deadly worth In the deeps of sea and earth.
1 Cott. eshpey.
282 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
METRUM IX.
Ppeec pe ealle picon. hpelce zpleyze.
xe neah ze freon. Nepon pophte. Rompapa cyning.
pa hiy pice pey. hehyt undep heofonum. co hpype monezum. Velhpeoper zeped. pey pul pide cud. unpihc-haemed, apleayca rela.
man and moppop. muiydezda popn. unpihcpiyey. mpid-poncar.
Pe hec him co zamene zeapa popbeepnan. Romana bupiz.
yio hip picey peer. ealley epel-ycol.
Pe pop unpnyccpum. polde pandian.
zip P pyp meahce. lixan ypa leohze.
and ypa lonze eac. peadpa yetcan.
ype he Romane. yeczan zehepbde.
pec on sume Tide. Tpoia bupz. ofepcozen heepde. leza leohcoyc. lenzeyc bupne.
hama undep heronum, Ney pac heplic ded.
pec hine ypelcey zameney.
zilpan lyyce.
METRE IX
NERO.
All know too well, abroad or
near at home,
What evils Nero wrought, that
King of Rome,
When, highest under heaven,
his rule was then
The dread and overthrow of —
many men.
The madness of this savage bred betimes
Lust, murder, vile misdeeds, a bad man’s crimes; —
He gave the word of old to wrap in flame
Rome’s self, his kingdom’s seat, to make him game;
Wishing in wicked wantonness to know
Whether the fire so long and red would glow
As erst in Troy, he heard that Romans said,
The mounting fire burn’d longest and most red.
Base deed, in such fierce frolic to delight,
Aimless and vain, unless to mark his might.
And, once it happened, at a certain hour,
He would again show forth his frantic power,
» Boet. lib. ii, metrum 6.—Novimus quantas dederit ruinas, &e
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 283
pa he ne eapnade, elley puhce.
bucon pee he pol6e. oFep pep-plode.
luy aney hupu. anpald cypan.
€ac hic zereloe.
ec yumum cieppe pec ye ilca hec. ealle acpellan.
pa picoycan. Romana pican.
and pa wpeleycan. eopl zebypoum.
pe he on pam rolce. zerpizen heepde.
and on uppan. azene bpopop.
and hiy modop mid. meca eczum. billum of-beacan. De luy bpyde ogyloz. yelp mid ypeopde. and he yymle pey. micle pe bliépa.
on bpeoyc-coran.
ponne he yspylcey mopSper.
meyc zeppemede. nalley popzobde. hpepep yrdpan a. mihzuiz Dpihzen. ametan poloe.
ppece be zepyphcum. poh-fpemmendum. ac he on fepde rezn. facney and yeapupa. peelhpiop punobde. Yiold emne ypa peah. ealley pyyyey meepan. mubdoan-zeapoey.
ypa spa lyfe and lagu.
And bade the richest men of Rome be slain,
Each earl of highest birth, each wisest thane:
With swords and bills he hewed until they died,
His mother, brother, yea, and his own bride,—
Ever the blither in his own baa breast
When he had done such mur- ders cruellest.
Nothing reck’d he that soon the mighty Lord
Would mete out wrath to sin- ners so abhorr’d,
But in his mind, that fed on wicked wiles,
Remain’d a savage, wreath’d in cunning smiles.
Still, even he so ruled this middle- earth,
Far as the land hath air, and sea for girth,
Far as the sea surrounds all men and things,
The seats of warriors, and the thrones of kings,
That from the South, and Hast, and furthest West,
And earth’s high headland reaching northernest,
284. THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
land ymbclyppas. zap-yecz embe-zypt. xumena pice.
yecze yiclu.
yud-earc and peyc. 06 pa nopdmeycan. neyyan on eoppan. eall pec Nepone. nede 0dde luycum. heapo-pinca zehpile hepan yceolde.
Pe hede him cto zamene ponne he on zylp aycaz. hu he eopd-cynmzar. ypmbde and cpelmbde. Venyc pu } ye anpald. eade ne meahce. Loder elmiheizer. pone zelp-ycapan. pice bepeedan.
and bepearian.
hiy anpaldey.
puph pa ecan meahc. odde him hiy yreley. eller zeyciopan.
Eala zp he pole. pec he pel meahce. pec unpihe him, eade popbiobdan. Eapla ‘p ye hlapopo. hepiz zoc ylepce. spape on pa ypypan. ynpa pexzena.
ealpa pana heelepa. pe on hip cidbum. zeond par lenan popold, liban yceolbdon.
Pe on unycylozum. eonla blooe.
hur ypeopd yelede. ypide zelome.
All this to Nero willing wor-— ship gave,
And every chief by force be- came his slave,
Till ’twas his game, when pride had puff’d his mind
To hunt and kill the kings of human kind.
But thinkest thou that God’s all holy might
Could not with ease this haughty sinner smite,
And scathe his pride, and drive him from the helm,
Or quench his guilt, and so berid the realm ?
O that he would, as well he might with ease,
Ever forbid such wrongful works as these!
Woe! that this lord should cast so heavy a yoke
On all men’s necks, both thanes and serving folk,
Who, for the harmful season of his power,
Lived in this world their quickly passing hour:
Woe! that his sword was often weltering then
With blood of high-born earls and guiltless men!
Clearly in this, our saying shone out bright,
THE METRES OF BORTHIUS. 285
Dep py ypise rpeocol. pec pe yeedon orc.
pec ye anpald ne ded. apihc zobder.
apye pelnele. —
pe buy zepeald haras.
METRUM Xi
Lig nu helepa hpone. hhyan lyyce.
unnycne zelp.
azan pille.
ponne ic hine pole. popoum biddan.
pec he hine ezhponon. ucan ymbe pohce.
_ Tpeotole ymb yape. yud-eayt and peyc
hu piozil pm. polenum ymbucan. heoroney hpealre. hize-ynocpum.
mez eade pincan. pect peor eopse pie. eall pop pac opep. unzemec! lycel.
peah hio unpiyum. piozel pince.
bn ycede cponzlic. yceopleayum men. peah mez pone piyan. on zepic-locan.
pepe gicyunze. xelpey ycamian. ponne hine pey hhyan. heapdoyc lyyced.
and he peah ne meg. pone cobpedan.
That power can do no good, as well it might,
If he who rules, wills not to rule aright.
METRE X. OF FAME AND DEATH.
If any man will be so vain As now for fame to lust, The empty praise of men to ain
And in such folly trust,
Him would I bid to gaze around The circle of the sky, And think how far above the ground The heaven is wide and high.
How small this world to wis- dom’s ken Set against that so vast, Though ours may seem to wit- less men Huge, wide, and sure to last.
Yet may the wise in heart feel shame That once his thirst was strong For silly greediness of fame That never lasteth long.
Such lust of praise he may not spread Over this narrow earth,
i Boet. lib. ii, metrum 7.—Quicumque solam mente precipiti petit, &e.
1 Cott. umizmev.
286 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
ofep pay neapopan, neenize pinza. eoppan-yceatar.
iy pew unnet zelp. €ala opepmodan. hpi eop alyyce.
mid eoppum ypipan. yelppa pillum.
pet yppeepe Zoc. yymle undeplucan. Ppy xe ymb pec unnec. ealuiz ypincen.
pec ze pone hhyan. habban ciliad.
ofep pioda ma. ponne eop pean sie. peah eop nu zeyele. pet eop sud odde nod. pa yomeycan. eopd-buenbde.
on moniz piodiye. miclum hepien. Deah hpa epele pie. eopl zebypdum. pelum zepeonpas. and on plencum pio. ouzupum dione. dead pay ne sepiped. ponne him pum fopleec. podopa paldend.
ac he pone pelezan. pedlum zelice.
epn meyne zedes. elcey pinzey.
Ppep pint nu peey piyan.
Pelandey ban. peey xold-pmuper. pe pes Zeo meepoye
poppy 1¢ cpeed pey piyan.
Velanodey ban. Foppy enzum ne meg.
Tis folly all, and of the dead, _
A glory nothing worth.
And you, O proud, why wish | 4
ye still And strive with all your care
The heavy yoke of your own
will
Upon your necks to bear? — ~
Why will ye toil yet more and more For glory’s useless prize,
And reach your rule from shore —
to shore Unneeded and unwise ?
Though now ye reign from South to North, And, with an earnest will,
The furthest dwellers on the —
earth Your dread behests fulfil ?
The greatest earl of wealthiest praise However rich or high,
Death cares not for him, but —
obeys The Ruler of the sky ;
With even hand right swift to strike, At His allowing word, The rich man and the poor alike, The low-born and his lord.
Where are the bones of We- land now, So shrewd to work in gold P Weland, though wise, to death must bow, That greatest man of old:
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 287
eopd-buendpa. ‘ye cpeere loyian. pe him Epiyc onleend.
Ne mez mon eppe py ed.
zenne ppeeccan.
_ hip cpercey beniman.
pe mon onceppan mez. yunnan onypifan.
ano. piyne ypipcan jodop. of hip piht-pyne.
- pinca eniz.
Ppa pact nu peey pian. Velanbdey ban.
on bpelcum in hleepa. hpuyan peccen.
Ppzep ip nu ye pica. Romana pica.
and ye apooa.
pe pe ymb yppecad. hiopa hepecoza.
ye zehacen pey.
mid pem buphpapum. Bpucuy nemned. Ppp ip eac ye piya. and ye peops-zeopna. and ye peeyo-peeda. folcey hypoe.
ye pey udpica.
zelcey pinzer.
cene and cpefeig. pem pey Lacon nama. Pi pepon zefypn. fopd-zepicene.
nat neniz mon. hpzep hi nu ysimoon. Pp ip hiopa hene. bucon ye hliya an.
re ip eac co lycel. ypelepa lapiopa.
Foppem pa mazo-pincary.
mapan pypde pepon.
Though wise, I say; for what Christ gives Of wisdom to a man, That craft with him for ever lives Which once on earth began :
And sooner shall a man’s hand fetch The sun from her due course, Than steal from any dying wretch His cunning skill by force.
Who then ean tell, wise We- land’s bones Where now they rest so long P Beneath what heap of earth and stones Their prison is made strong P
Rome’s wisest son, be-known
so well, Who strove her rights to save, That mighty master, who can tell ;
Where Brutus has a grave P So too, the man of sternest
mould, ; The good, the brave, the wise, His people’s shepherd, who hath told
Of Cato, where he lies ? Long are they dead: and none
ean know More of them than their name : [now
Such teachers have too little Of all their worthy fame.
288 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
on populde. Now too, forgotten every-_ Ac hit iy pypye nu. - where,
pec zeond pay eoppan. The like to them have found ~
zezhpeep yindon.
hiopa zelican.
hpon ymb yppece. yume openlice.
ealle popzicene.
pec hi ye hliya. hip-cude ne mez. fOpe-meepe pepay.
fops zebpenzan.
Deah ze nu penen
and pilnizen.
pec ze lanze ad. libban mozen.
hpxt 10p efppe py bec. bio od%e pince.
foppzm pe nane roplec. peah hic lanz pince. dead epcep Sozop-pime.
ponne he herd Dmbeney lease.
Ppeec ponne heebbe. heelepa enix.
zuma 2c pem zilpe. zip hme zezpipan moc. re eca dead.
wpcep pyyum populde.
METRUM XIL« An yceppend 1p. bucan elcum cpeon. re ip eac pealdend. populd-zepcearta. heoroney and eoppan. and heah ye. and ealpa papa. pe peep m punias. unzeyepenlicpa.
But little kindly speech or care From all the world around;
So that, however wise in worth, Such foremost men may stand, No home-felt praises bring them forth For fame throughout the land.
Though now ye wish long time to live, And pine to have it so, What better blessing can it
give Than now ye find below ?
As Death lets none go free at last When God power, If Death for ever follows fast, How short is this world’s hour!
allows him
METRE XI. OF GOD’S WISE GOVERNMENT.
One, only One, made all the heavens and earth; Doubtless, to Him all beings owe their birth ; And guided by His care, Are all, who therein dwell un- seen of us,
k Boet, lib. ii, metrum 8.—Quod mundus stabili fide, Ga
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
ano eac ypa same. pana pe pe eazum.
on locias.
ealpa zercearca.
ye ip elmuiheiz.
pzem oleccad.
ealle zeycearce.
pe pey ambehcey. apuhc cunnon.
xe eac spa same.
pa pey auht nycon. pees hi peey peodney. peopay yimoon.
ye uy Zeyecze.
yioo and peapay. eallum zeycearcum, unapendenodne. pinzallice.
pibbe zecynée.
pa pa he polte.
pec p he poloe.
rpa lanze ypa he polte. peec hic peyan yceoloe. ypa hic eac co populte yceal. punian’ fops. FOPpem zppe ne magon. pa unycillan. populd-zepcearca. peoppan zeycilde.
of peem pyne onpend. pe him podepa peand. endebypoey.
eallum xeyecce.
heefd ye alpealoa. ealle zeycearca. zebzec mid hiy bpidle. harad bucu zedon. ealle zemanobde.
and eac zetozen.
paec hi ne moten,
289
And these whom we can look at, living thus In land, and sea, and air.
He is Almighty: Him all things obey, : That in such bondage know how blest are they ; Who have so good a king ; Those also serve, who thereof know not aught Dutiful work, however little thought, As bond-slaves they must bring.
He hath set out in kindred kindness still Duties and laws to work His changeless will, And, after His own mind, That which He will’d so long as will He would, He will’d that everything for ever should Thenceforward keep .its kind.
Never may restless things to rest attain, And from that settled circle turn in vain Which order’s God hath given, He hath set fast, and check’d them each and all By the strong measured bridle of his call To rest, or to be driven,
1 Cott. puma’.
U
7
290 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. -:
ofep mecobder eye. zppe zeycillan.
ne eyz eallunza. rpipop yoypan.
ponne hi przopa-peapd. hiy zepeald-lepep.
pile onlecten.
he harad pam? bpidle. bucu beranzen.
. heogon and eoppan. and eall holma-bezonz. Spa hed zeheapepod. hefon-picey peapd. mid hiy anpealde. ealle zercearca.
pet hiopa ezhpile. pis opep pind.
and peah pimnende. ppepiad peeyce. aexhpile opep.
ucan ymbclyppes.
py ley hi corpifen.
foppem hi symle yeulon.
pone ilcan pyne.
epe Zecyppan.
pe xv ppymse.
peedep zZeT10be.
and ypa ednipe.
epe Zeploppan.
ypa hic nu fazas, ppean eald zepeone. pec ce pmnende. pipeppeapd zepceare. feeyce yibbe.
pops anhealdad,
ypa nu Fyp and peecten. polbe and lazu-rcpeam. manizu oppu Zeyceare. ern ypidse him.
ziond pay pidan? populse.
1 Cott. be.
As He, great word, the leathern. reins of might j Holds loose in His right hand,— or draws them tight ; * For He hath streteh’d along His bridle over earth, air, sea, and beach, That all things, leaning fastly each on each, By double strife stand —
strong.
For, ever as at first, the Father — bade, In the same ways of running that He made Still changing though un- changed, By strife most steady keeping peace most true Our Free-Lord’s handicraft, so— old yet new, Is evermore arranged.
Thus earth and sea-stream, fire and water thus, : And all great things about or far from us, Betwixt themselves hold strife, Yet sogood-fellowship all fastly keep, And render bondage true, and duty deep To Him who lent their | life. | Nor only thus, that each the rest to please, Whitberward things together dwell at ease, 2 Cott. piday.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
pinnad becpeox him. and ypa peah mazon. hiopa peznunza.
and zerepycipe.
Feyce zehealdan.
Nyy hic no # an.
pec spa eade mex. pipeppeapd zeyrceare. peyan eczeedene. yymbel zerepan.
ac hic iy yellicpe.
pec hiopa eniz ne mez. bucan oppum bion. ac yceal puhca zehpile.
pipeppeapoey hpzecv-hpuzu. habban undep heofonum.,
peec hiy hize. -
Suppe zemeczian.
zp hic co micel peopse. Peeps ye eelmihziza. eallum zeycearcum. pec zeppixle zeyec.
pe nu punian yceal. pypta spopan.
leay zpenian.
pec on hepreyc erc. hpeyz and pealupasd. pincep bpinzesd.
pedep unzemez calo. ypipce pindar.
Sumop zpcep cymes. peapm zepidepu.
Ppeec pa ponnan nihc. mona onlihzes.
odpet monnum bez. yunne bpinzed.
zlond pay pidan Zeyceare. Pers ye ilca Lod. eoppan and petepe. meapice xepecce. mepe-sopeam ne deap.
U
291
But far more strange than SO, Nor one, but on its thwarter still depends, And lives on that which while it harms befriends, Lest it too great should erow.
Wisely the mighty Framer of the world ; Hath set this turn-about for ever twirl’d, Yet ever still to stay ; The sprouting wort shoots greenly from its root, And dying, then, in harvest yields its fruit, To live another day.
Winter brings weather cold, swift winds and snow; Summer comes afterward with warming glow; By night outshines the moon ; Till o’er this wide-seen world the day up-springs, And to all men the sun return- ing brings Her welcome brightness soon.
So also, God hath bounded sea and land: The fishy kind, except at His command, On earth may never swim : Nor can the sea earth’s thresh- old overleap, Nor can the earth, beyond the tide at neap, [rim. O’erstep the sea’s wide 2
292
oFep eoppan yceac. eapd zebpeebdan. yiyea cynne.
bucan fpean leare. ne hio eppe ne moc. eoppan pypyc-polo. up ofep yceppan.
ne pa ebban pon ma. polbey meapce ofep. fapan mocon.
pa zepecneyya. yizopa pealdend. hyey leohc ppuma. lec penden he pile.
zeonod pay meepan geyceaye.
meayice healden.
Ac ponne ye eca. and ye elmihciza. pa zepeald-lepepu. pile onlecan.
erne papa bpidla,
pe he zebacce.
mid hiy azen peone. eall 2c ppymde. pec ip pipeppeaponey. puhce zehpelene.
pe pe mid pam bpidle. becnan cilad,
zip ye proden lec. pa coylupan.
yona hi roplecad, lupan and pibbe. pey serepyerper. fpeond-peedenne. cilad anpa zehpile. azney pillan, populd-zepcearza, pinnad becpeox him. odpet pioy eopde, eall poppeopped. and eac ypa same.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
These things the Source and
Spring of life and light } The Lord of wielded might, " His will’s right, Biddeth their bounds to
kee
P, i Until the Ever - living One
makes burst The curbing bridle set on all at first, And so unreins the deep.
By rein and bridle in a hint I teach The waywardness of all thing each on each ; For, if the ‘Ruler will’d The thongs to slacken, things would soon forsake
All love and peace, and wilful
evil make
Instead of good fulfill’d.
Fach after its own selfish will would strive,
Till none of things on earth
were left alive Insuch bewrestling stern ; And in like manner other things unseen
Would be as if they never then -
had been, : All brought to nought in turn.
But the same God, who meteth all things thus,
Makes folk to be at peace with
all and us, In friendship true and fast :
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 293
odpa zercearra. peoppad him yelre.
__-yépan co nauhcze.
Ac ye ilca Loo. ye p eall meczad.
- ye zerehd rela. folca co yomne. and mid Fpeonoycipe. Feyce zezadpao. zeyamnad ypinycipar. pibbe zemenzed. cleenhice lure.
ypa ye cpeepoza eac. xerepycipar.
peyce zeyamnad.
peec hi hiopa rpeonbycrpe.
pops on symbel. uncpeorealde. tpeopa zehealdasd. pibbe yampade. €ala yizopa Lod. pep piy moncyn. miclum zeyehz.
zip hiopa mod-yera. meahce peoppan. ycapolpeeyc zepeahc.
puph pa ycponzan meahc.
and ze endebyps.
ypa ypa oopa pine. populd zeycearca. peepe hic la ponne. mupze m1d monnum. zip hic meahce spa.
METRUM XII!
Se pe pille pypcan. percmbepe lond. avlo OF pem ecepe. epeyt yona,
He knits together in a love most fond Unending wedlock, and the kindred bond For evermore to last.
So too, the skill’d All-worker well unites The fellowship of men in friendly rights, That they may live at peace, In simple truthfulness and single strength Thenceforth for ever of one mind, at length To make all evil cease.
O God All-conquering! this lower earth Would be for men the blest abode of mirth If they were strong in Thee, As other things of this world well are seen; O then, far other than they yet have been, How happy would men be!
METRE XII. USES OF ADVERSITY.
Whoso wills to till a field, Well to bear a fruitful yield,
1 Boet. lib. iii, metrum 1.—Qui serere ingenuum volet agrum,&e.
294 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
yeapn and popnar. Let him first pluck up and ~ and fypyay spa same pio. burn
pa pe pillas. Thorns and thistles, furze and - i pel hpep Sepian. fern, clenum hpece. Which are wont clean wheat — - py ley he cipa-lea. to hurt, >| licze on peem lanbe. Lying lifeless in the dirt.
Ty leoba zehpem.
pioy odSpu byyen. And this other likeness too
ern beheru. Well behoves us all to view,
pec ip pec ce pynced. Namely, that to those who eat pexna zehpelcum. Honeycomb, it seems more hunizey bi-bpead. sweet,
healre py specpe. If a man before the tear
zip he hpene ep. Of honey, taste of bitter cheer. hunizey teape.
bicpey onbypzed. So it falls, that all men are
Brd eac spa same. With fine weather happier far monna ezhpile. If a little while before
micle py peezenpa. Storms were spread the welkin lipey peSper. o’er,
zip hme lycle zp. And the stark wind, east by ycopmay zepcondad, north,
and ye yteapca pind. Lately rush’d in anger forth. noppan and eaycan.
Nenezum puhze. None would think the daylight bez on ponce. dear zip slo Simme niht. Tf dim night they did not fear > ep ofep elbum. So, to every one of us,
ezeyan ne bpohce. On the broad earth dwelling Spa pcs anna zehpeem. thus,
eopd-buendpa. Joy more joyous still is seen
plo pode zeypeeld, After troubles once have been. rymle pe becene.
and py pynyumpe, Also, thine own mind to please,
pe he pica ma. Thou shalt gain the greater heapdpa henpa, ease,
hep adpeozed. Du meahz eac mycle py ed. on mod-yefan.,
yopa zeyeelpa.
w%
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
ypeocoloy: zecnapan. and co heopa cydde.
— becuman pidpan.
Zip pu up acybysd, zepeye yona.
- and pu apyptpalayc.
oF Zepic-locan.
leaya zeyelpa.
ypa spa londey-ceopl. of hip eecene lycd. yrel peod moniz.
_ Sidpan ic pe secze.
px pu ypeocole meahc, yopa zereelpa.
- yona oncnapan.
and pu eppe ne pecyc. zenizey pinzey.
ofep pa ane.
zip pu hn ealley onzicyc.
METRUM XIII1™
Ic pille mid z155um. get secypan.
hu ye elmihziza. ealpa zeycearva. bpypd mid hiy bpidlum. bez6 pidep he pile. mid hiy anpealoe.
xe endebypd. pundoplice.
pel xemeczad.
harad spa zeheaponad. heorona pealdend. ucan beranzen.
ealla zepcearca.
zepeped mid hip pacencan.
pec hi apedian ne mazon. pec hi hi zppe him. og aylepen.
295
And shalt go where true joys grow,
If all false joys thou forego ;
As ill weeds are pull’d with toil
By the land-churl from the soil.
And hereafter, thee I tell,
True joys there await thee well;
Ay and here, if these be first,
Thou for nought beside wilt thirst,
But all else shall fail to please
If thou truly knowest these.
METRE XIII. OF INWARD LIKINGS.
I will with songs make known How the Almighty still Bridles all things from His throne And bends them to His will, By His wielded might Set wonderfully right.
The Ruler of the skies Hath well girt all things so, Binding them in such strong ties, Aside they cannot go, And may not find the way Whereby to slip astray.
m Boet. lib. iii. metrum 2.—Quantas rerum flectat habenas, &c.
26. THE METRE ané peah puhca zehpile, ppizad co-heald. ylopa zepcearta. ypide onhelded. pid pay xecynber. pe hi cynmg engzla. Fedep wc ppymeoe. feeyte zeT10de. ypa nu pinza zehpile. pidep-peapd pundad. ylopa zeycearca. buzon sumum enzlum. and moncynne. papa micler co feola. popolo-pumiendpa, pind pid zecynde. Deah nu on lone. leon zemece. pynyume pihe, pel acemebe. hipe maziycep. miclum lurize. and eac ondpede. dozopa zehpelce. zip hic eeppe zepeeld. per hio senizey. blobey onbypze%. ne peapy beopna nan, penan pepe pypde. pec hio pel yrSpan. hipe caman healbe. ac 1c tiohhie. pec hio pay nipan caman. nauhc ne zehiczze. ac pone pilban zepunan. pille zepencan.* hipe eldpena. onzind eopneyce. pacencan ylican. pyn gpymecigan,
1 Cott
S$ OF BOETHITS.
And each living thing On this crowded earth
Firmly to the bent doth chogy
i
Which it had at birth From the Father’s hand, King of Angel-land.
~
Thus each one we find Of beings in their turn, Save some bad angels and ane kind, ; Thitherward doth yearn; But those too often force
Against their nature’s—
course.
A lioness may be such
A tame and winsome beast, | That she may love her master —
much,
Or fear him, at the least; But if she taste of gore She will be tame no more:
Let it not be thought That she will then be mild, But back to her old likings brought Be as her elders wild,
md pe
In earnest break her —
chain,
And rave and roar amain. ~
Will first her keeper bite, And then all else beside,
. Sebincan.
and eepeyc abic. __hipe azeney.
- hurer hipte.
and hnade yiSpan. helepa zehpilene. pe ho zehencan mez.
| nele hio popleecan.
__ hbbenbdey puhc. _ neata ne monna. nim eall } hio pine.
Spa 603 pudu-ruzlar..
* peah hi pel yien. cela acemede.
zig hi on cpeopum peoppas.
holce to midder.
_ hpese bi06 yoprepene. heopa lapeopar.
pe hi lanze ep.
cyoon 7} cemedon.
hi on cpeopumi pilde.
_ eald-zecynde.
& pops yrspan.
pillum punias.
peah him polte hpile.
] _ heopa lapeopa.
liycum beobdan. - pone ilcan mece.
pe he hi 2pop mis. came zeTede.
him pa tpizu pincad. emne ypa mepze.
peer hi pey mecery ne pecs.
pincé him co pon pynyum. pec him ye peald oncpyo. _ ponne hi zehenas. hleoppum bpeezoan.
iz odpe ruzelar.
hi heopa azne. yoepne prypias. younad eal zeadon. pel-pinyum yanc.
=< tga
THE METRES OF BORTHIUS. L | B
Cattle or men, each Bat wight, Will seize, whate’er betide, All she can find will seize, Her ravening to appease.
So the wood finches too, Though timely tamed they be, If to the woods escaped anew, Again they flutter free ;
However train’d and taught,
Their teachers then are nought:
But wilder evermore,
They will not leave the wood,
Though by their trainers, as of yore,
Enticed by tempting food ; So merry seem the trees, That meats no more may
please.
All winsome then is found The wide weald sounding strong With other birds that sing around, And so these find their song, Stunning one’s ears with noise Ot their woodland joys.
‘ 298
pudu eallum oncpys. Spa bid eallum cpeopum. pe him on epele bid, pec hiz on hole. hyhyz zepeaxe.
peah pu hpilene boh. byze prd eoppan.
he bid uppeapbder.
ypa pu an popleceyc. piou on pillan.
pent on zecynbe.
Spa 5e6 eac pio sunne.
ponne hio on yize peopped.
ofep midne deez.
mepe condel.
ycyfe on ofbdzele. uncusne pez.
nihtey zeneped.
nops ere 7 eaye.
eloum ocepe’.
bpencd eops-papum. mopzen mepe cophrne. hio ofep moneyn yehd. & uppeapdey.
08 hio ere cyme’d.
pep hine yfemeyc bid, eapd-zecynde.
Spa ypa ele zepceare. ealle mezene.
zeond pay pidan populd, ppizad 4 hizas.
ealle mexene.
eye yymle on lyc.
pis hip zecynder.
cymd co ponne hit mez. Niy nu ogep eoppan. wnezu Zepceare.
pe ne pilmie pac hio. polbe cuman.
co pam eande.
pe hio of becom.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
Thus too, every tree, Grown high in its own soil, — Though thou shalt bend ites boughs to be
Bow’d to the earth with toil, -
Let go, it upward flies At its free will to rise.
Thus also, when the sun, Great candle of the world, After the mid-day down doth
run To unknown darkness hur!’d, Again she brings to earth Bright morn, north-east- ern birth.
Upward she ever goes, Up, to her highest place: So, every creature kindly grows According to its race,
once
e
And strives with all its
might To take its nature’s right.
There is not now one thing Over this wide earth That doth not all its longings fling About its place of birth, And safely there find rest In God Almighty blest.
There is not one thing found Over this wide world
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 299
pec iy opropznery. ano €cu peyc.
pec ip openlice. zelmihei Lod,
Niy nu ofgep eoppan.
- eenezu Zeycearc.
pe ne hpeanpize.
ypa ypa hpeol ded.
on hipe yelgpe. foppon hio rpa hpeapyas. pec hio ers cume. pep hio epop pey. ponne hio epeyz pie. ucan behpepred. ponne hio ealley pyps. ucan becepped.
hio yceol efz don. pec hio ep dye.
ano eac peyan.
pec hio zpop per.
METRUM XIV
Ppzec bid peem pelezan. populd-zicrepe.
on hir mode pe bec. peah he micel aze. zoloey J x1Imma.
and zo0ba xehpey. eehta unjum.
and him mon epizen ycyle.
eexhpelce dz.
eecepa puyend.
Deah per middan zeand. ano piy manna cyn.
yy undep yunnan.
yuo peyc 7 ear.
hiy anpalde eall. unbdeppieded.
ne moc he papa hypyca.
But on itself with endless round It, like a wheel, is twirl’d, So turning to be seen As it before hath been:
For when at first it moves, Right round it turns amain ; And, where it once has gone, behoves To go that way again ; And as it was before, To be so evermore.
METRE XIV._ THE EMPTINESS OF WEALTH.
‘What is a man the better, A man of worldly mould,— Though he be gainful getter Of richest gems and gold, With every kind well filled Of goods in ripe array, And though for him be tilled A thousand fields a day P Though all this middle-earth be .
Beneath his wealdom
thrown, And men and all their worth be Lown,
South, east, and west, his
2 Boet. lib. iii, metrum 3.—Quamyis fluente dives auri gurgite, &e.
ST. ALBERTS COLLEGE LIPS"
800
hiona ne lebdan.
of pyre populde.
puhte pon mape. hopd-zercpeona.
ponne he hipep bpohcze. Da ye isdom pa pir hod ayunzen herpbde. pa onzan he ez ypellian and cpzd,
METRUM XV
Deah hine nu.
ye yrela unpihcpiya. Nepon cynincz.
nipan zeyceppte. plicezum paedum. pundonplice.
zolde zezlenzde.
and zm-cynnum.
peah he py on populte. picena zehpelcum.
on hiy lip-bazum.
laS and unpeops. plepen-rull,
hpeec ye peond ypa peah. hiy d:oplingar.
ouzupum ycepte,
ne mez 1c peah zehyezan. hpy him on hize poprce. apy yeel peyan.
peah hn sume hpile. secupe butan cpefoum. cyningza dyyezayc. neepon hy py peopSpan. picena senezum.
peah hine ye dyyiza.
do TO cyninze.
hu mex 'P zeyceadpiy. ycealc zepeccan.
pec he him py yelpa. yle 058e pice.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
He cannot of such treasure, _
Away with him take aught,
_Nor gain a greater measure —
Than in his mind he brought.
Wisdom having sung this lay, Again began his spell to say. —
METRE XV. NERO’S BASENESS.
Though Nero now himself, that evil king Unrighteous, in his new and glittering robe Deck’d wonderfully for ap- parelling With gold and gems and many a brightsome thing, Seem’d to be greatest of this earthly globe, Yet to the wise man was he full of crime, Loathly and worthless in his lite’s daytime :
And: though this fiend his darlings would reward With gifts of rank, my mind I cannot bring To see why he to such should grace afford : Yet if some whiles a foolish king or lord Will choose the simple all the wise above, A fool himself, to be by fools ador’d, How should a wise man reckon on his love ?
© Boet. lib. iii, metrum 4,—Quamvis se Tyrio superbus ostro, &e,
a ~~
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 301
METRUM XVI?
Se pe pille anpald azon.
ponne yceal he epeye cian.
peer he hiy yelper. on yeran aze.
~ anpald mnan.
py ley he eyfpe pie. hiy unpeapum. eall undeppyoed. ado of hiy mode. miylicna rela. papa ymbhozona. pe him unnez pie. lece yume hpile. ylogunza.
and epmpa pinna. Deah him eall sie. pey middan zeano.
Jp spa mepe-ycepeamay.
ucan beliczas.
on ehe zipen. epne ypa pide.
ypa ypa peymeyc nu. an izlond hzé.
uc on Zapyecs. pep neenzu bid. niht on yumena. ne puhte pon ma, on pincpa oz. coceled tidbum. peer ip Tile hacen. peah nu anpa hpa. ealley pealde.
pey izlanbder.
and eac ponan.
06 Inbdear. eayce-peapde. peah he nu # eall. azan mote.
METRE XVI. OF SELE-RULE.
He that wishes power to win, First must toil to rule his mind, That himself the slave to sin Selfish lust may never bind:
Let him haste to put away All that fruitless heap of care : Cease awhile thy sighs to-day, And thyself from sorrow spare.
Though to him this middle- earth For a garden all be given, With the sea-stream round its girth, © East and west the width of heaven ;
From that isle which lies out-
right Furthest in the Western
spray, Where no summer sees a
night,
And no winter knows a day ;
Though from this, far Thule’s isle, Even to the Indian East, One should rule the world awhile, With all power and might increas’d,
P Boet. lib. iii. metrum 5.—Qui se volet esse potentem, &e.
302
hpy bid hip anpalo, auhte py mana.
zip he prSpan nah, hiy yelper zepeald. mgepancey.
and hine eopneyze. pel ne bepapenad. popoum J db5um. pid pa unpeapar.
pe pe ymb yppecasd.
METRUM XVII.1
Det eopdpanan. ealle heepbden. pold-buende. Fpuman Zelicne. hi of anum ctpeem. ealle comon. pepe 7 pire. on populd mnan. and hi eac nu zec. ealle zelice. on populd cumas, plance 3 heane, niy ‘Pp nan pundop. FOppzem pican ealle. pec an Lod yy. ealpa zeycearta, fpea moncynney. faedep and ycippend. ye peepe yunnan leohe. yeled of heoponum. monan 4} pyyum!? mepum yceoppum.
ye zZeyceop men on eoppan.
and zeramnaode, yaple co lice. et Epuman epeye.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
How shall he seem great or
strong / If himself he cannot save, ~
Word and deed against all
wrong, But to sin is still a slave ?
METRE XVII. TRUE GREATNESS
All men and all women on earth Had first their beginning the same, Into this world of their birth All of one couple they came:
Alike are the great and the small ; No wonder that this should be thus; For God is the Father of all, The Lord and the Maker of
us.
He giveth light to the sun, To the moon and the stars as they stand; The soul and the flesh He made one, When first He made man in the land.
Well-born alike are all folk Whom He hath made under the sky ;
4 Boet. lib. iii, metrum 6.—Omne hominum genus in terris, &c.
1 Cott. byr-
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 8038
pole undep polenum. emn pele zerceop, zshpilcne mon. Ppy xe ponne eype. ofep oSpe men.
| Ofepmoodizen.
bucon andpeopce, nu ze unepelne. zeniz ne mezad.
__ Ppy xe eop pop epelum.
up ahebben nu. On pm mote bid. monna zehpilcum. pa pihz epelo.
pe ic pe pecce ymb.
naley on peem fleyce. fold-buendpa.
Ac nu ezhpile mon. pe mid ealle bis,
hiy unpeapum. undeppieded.
he foplec epeyz. liyey ypum-yceage. and hiy azene.
epelo ypa yelpe.
ano eac pone feebden.
pe hine ec fpuman zerceop.
foppem hine anzpelas. zelmihziz Lob.
pec he unepele,
a ops panan.
pypd on peopulte.
co puldpe ne cyms.
METRUM XVIII"
Eala } ye yrla. “unpihta zede5. ppapa pila.
poh-haemecter.
Why then on others a yoke Now will ye be lifting on high P
And why be so causelessly proud, As thus ye find none are ill- born P Or why, for your rank, from the crowd Raise yourselves up in such scorn P
. In the mind of a man, not his
make, In the earth-dweller’s heart, not his rank, Is the nobleness whereof I spake, The true, and the free, and the frank.
But he that to sin is in thrall, Ill-doing wherever he can, Hath left the first life-spring
of all, His God, and his rank as a
man: And so the Almighty down- hurl’d [sin,
The noble disgraced by his Thenceforth to be mean in the world, [win. And never more glory to
METRE XVIII. OF SINFUL PLEASURE.
Alas! that the evil unrighteous hot will
r Boet. lib, iii. metrum 7,—Habet omnis hoc vyoluptas, &e.
804 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
pec he mid ealle zedpzers.
anpa zehpylcey. should still
monna cynney. Be a plague in the mind : mod fulneah pon. each one!
hpeec yio pilse beo. ¢ peah piy pie. The wild bee shall die in her anunza yceal. stinging, though shrewd, __ eall poppeoppan. So the soul will be lost if the zip hio yppingza. body be lewd, apuhe yomzed. Unless, ere it wend hence, the ypa yceal yapla zehpile. heart be imbued
ySpan loyian. With grief for the deed it
zip ye lchoma. hath done. poplezan peopped.
unpihc-hemebe.
buce him ep cume.
hpeop co heoptan.
zp he hionan pende.
METRUM XIX3 METRE XIX. seek pa nen ons. WHERE TO FIND TRUE JOYS. gece bea ta Oh! it is a fault of weight,
5 he. : wee <a ape Let him think it out who
ey will, shi i ec i And a danger passing great of pem pihcan pexe. Which can thus allure to ill pecene aleded. Bote men from the right way, ae ae Swiftly ever led astray. zold pat peade. Will ye seek within the wood on zpenum cpiopum. Red gold on the green trees Ic paz ypa peah. tall? | pec hic picena nan, None, I wot, is wise that could, pidep. ne yeced. For it grows not there at all : foppeem hic peep ne pexd, Neither in wine-gardens ne on pinzeapdum. reen plicize z1mmap. Seek they gems of glitter- Ppy ze nu ne ysecvan, ing sheen.
8 Boet. lib. iii. metrum 8.—Eheu, quam miseros tramite devio, &e.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 3805
_ on yume dune.
-Fiye net eoppu. _ ponne eop fon lyzed.
leax odde cypepan. Me xelicoye pincd.
— peer ce ealle picen. eopd-buenbte. poncol-mobde.
pec hi pep ne yinc. pepep ze nu pillen. pepan mid hundum. on yealcne ye.
ponne eop yecan lyyc.
_ heopocay 4 hinba. — pu zehyczan meahc. | pec ze pillad pa.
on puda yecan.  oftop micle.
ponne uc on ye.
Iy } pundophe.
pee pe pican ealle. pzec mon yecan yceal.
be yee-panosde.
and be ea-ofpum. epele zimmar.
hpice and peade. and hipa zehpey. Ppeec hi eac picon. hpeep hi ea-riycay. yecan pupran.
and ypjlepa rela. peonuld-pelena.
hi p pel 508. zeopurulle men. zeana zehpile.
ac p iy eapmlicoyc. ealpa pinza.
pzec pa oyyexzan pint. on xzedpolan popdene. eyne ypa blinde.
Would ye on some hill-top set, When ye list to catch a trout. Or a carp, your fishing net ? Men, methinks, have long found out That it would be foolish fare, For they know they are not there.
In the salt sea can ye find, When ye list to start and hunt = With your hounds, the hart or hind P It will sooner be your wont In the woods to look, I wot, [are not. Than in seas where they
Is it wonderful to know That for crystals red or white, One must to the sea-beach go, Or for other colours bright, Seeking by the river side Or the shore at ebb of tide P
Likewise, men are well aware Where to look for river-fish, And all other worldly ware Where to seek them when they wish ; Wisely careful men will know Year by year to find them so.
But of all things ’tis most sad That the foolish are so blind, So besotted and so mad
pect hi on bpeoycum ne mazon. That they cannot surely find
xX
306
eade zecnapan.
hpep pa ecan z006.
yopa zeyeelpa.
ymodon zehydba.
Foppem hi egpe ne lyye. zepoep ppypian.
yecan pa zeyelpa.
Venad yampire.
pec hi on jiy lenan mezen.
liye ¢mbdan.
yopa zeyeelpa.
peer ip yelpa Lod.
Tc naz hu ic mee. neenize pingza.
ealley ypa yprde.
on yefan minum. hiopa dyy1z celan.
ypa hic me 60n lyycesd, ne ic pe spa ypeocole. xeyeczan ne mez. yoppeem hiz' ymc eapmpan. and eac dyrexzpan. unzeyeelizpan.
ponne 1c pe seczgan meeze. Pi pilniad.
pelan and ehta.
and peopdycipey.
co Zepimnanne.
ponne hi habbad pac. hiopa hize yeced, penad ponne.
ypa zepicleaye.
pec hi pa yopan. xeyelpa hebben.
THE METRES OF BOETIIIUS.
Where the ever-good is nigh
And true pleasures hides | -lie.
Therefore, never is their strife After those true joys to
spur; In this lean and little life They half witted deeply err, Seeking here their bliss to gain, That is, God Himself, in vain.
Ah! I know not in my thought How enough to blame their — sin, Nor so clearly as I ought Can I show their fault within, For, more bad and vain are they, And more sad than I can say. All their hope is to acquire Worship, goods, and worldly weal ; When they have their mind’s desire Then such witless joy they
feel, That in folly they believe Those true joys they then receive.
1 Cott. hic.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 307
METRUM XX-.t
€ala min Dpihcen.
pect pu eapt elmihciz.
micel mobdilic.
meppum Zefppeze.
and pundonlic.
picena zehpylcum.
Ppzec pu ece Lod.
ealna zeycearca.
pundonplice..
pel zerceope.
unzeyepenlicna.*
and eac ypa same.
- xeyepenlicna.
yorce pealderc.
yeippa zercearca.
mid Zerceadpiyum.
meezne J cpeyce.
Du pyyne middan zeapd. Fpom f¢puman epeyc.
Fops od enbde.
cidum codelbder.
ypa hic zeceyoyc peep.
endebypoer.
pec hi ezhpepep.
xe appanas.
ze epccumad.
Du pe unycilla.
axgna zeycearta.
co pinum pillan.
piylice aycypeyc.
and pe yelp puneyt.
ypide yuille.
unanpendenbdlic.?
4 fops yimle.
niy nan mihcizpa.
ne nan meppa.
METRE XX, OF GOD AND HIS CREATURES.
O thou, my Lord Almighty, great and wise,
Well seen for mighty works, and marvellous
To every mind that knows thee, Ever Good!
Wondrously well all creatures Thou hast made,
Unseen of us or seen; with softest band
Ofskilful strength thy brighter beings leading.
Thou from its birth forth onward to its end
This middle-earth by times hast measured out
As was most fit; that orderly they go
And eft soon come again. Thou wisely stirrest
To thine own will thy changing unstill creatures,
Unchangeable and still thyself for ever!
No one is mightier, greater than Thou art,
No oue was made thine equal : need was none,
t Boet. lib. iii. metrum 9.—O qui perpetua mundum ratione gubernas, &c.
1 Cott. ungeyepenlica.
2 Cott. unanpendendhca yopd yumle. >. 4
308 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
ne zeond ealle pa zercearc.
epnlica pin.
ne pe ez ned-peapf ney.
eppe zlec ealna. papa peopca. pe pu zepophe harayc. ac mid pinum pilan. pu hic pophzey eall. and mid anpalbde. pmum azenum. peopulde zepophceyc. and puhta zehpec. peah pe nenezu. ned-peanf pape eallpa. papa meeppa. Iy } micel zecynd. pmey zoodey. pencd ymb ye pe pile. foppon hic iy eall an. zlcey pmezey. - pu yf pm zood. hic iy pm azen. yoppem hic my? ucan, ne com auht co pe. Ac 1¢ zeopne pac. pzec pm zoodney Ip. xImihciz x005. eall mid pe yelpum. Pic ip ungelie. upum zecynde, uy ip ucan cymen. eall pa pe habba®. z00da on Zpundum. ypom Lobe yelpum, Neyc pu co enezum., andan Zenumenne,
foppam pe nan ping nip.
pin zelica. ne hupu enix, wlcpeprizpe.
ae i
% 5 |
Of all these works which Thow hast wrought, to Thee;
But, at the willing of thy: power, the world
And everything within it didst thou make,
Without all ‘need to Thee of :
such great works.
Great is Thy goodness, — thinks it out who will;
For it is all of one, in every- thing, Thou and Thy good; Thine own; not from without; Neither did any goodness come to Thee: ,
But, well I know, Thy good- ness is most good
All with Thyself: unlike to us” in kind;
To us, aie outwardly, from God Himself,
Came all we have of good in this low earth.
Thou canst not envy any; since to Thee
Nothing is like, nor any higher skilled ;
For Thou, All Good, of Thine own thought didst think,
And then that thought didst-
work. Before Thee none Was born, to make or unmake anything,
. 1 Cott. hiy.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 309
Foppzem pu eal zo0d. - aney zepeahte.
piney zepohzeyc
and hi pa popheerc.
_ ney eponp pe.’ enezu Zerceare.
pe auhc ode nauhc. aupep pophce.
Ac pu buzan byyne. bpezo moncynney.
vl elmihciz Lob. -eall zepophceyc.
pmz peaple x00, eapt pe yelpa. »
pec hehyce z005. Ppeec pu haliz peedep. eptep pinum pillan. populd zerceope. piyne middan Zeapod. meahcum pinum. Veopada Dpihcen. ypa pu poldeyc yelp. and mid pinum pillan. pealdeyz ealley. foppeem pu yopa Lob. yelpa dzeleyc.
xoobda eezhpile. Foppem pu Zeapa ep. ealle® zercearta. eepeye xepceope.
ypide zelice.
yumey hpzeppe peah. unzelice.
nembdeyc eall ypa peah. mid ane noman.
ealle cozbdene.
Vopuld undep polenum.
Ppzec pu puldper Ir0d. pone anne naman. efc codeloer.
But Thou without a model madest all,
Lord God of men, Almighty, very good,
Being Thyself of all the highest good!
Thou, Holy Father, Thou, the Lord of Hosts,
After Thy will, and by Thy power alone,
The world, this midway gar- den, didst create; And by Thy will, as now Thy wisdom would, Wieldest it all! For Thou, O God of truth,
Long time of old didst deal out all good things,
Making thy creatures mainly well alike,
Yet not alike in all ways; and didst name
With one name all together all things here,
“The World undertheclouds.” Yet, God of glory,
That one name, Father, Thou didst turn to four:
The first this Earth-field; and the second water;
Shares of the world: third fire,
_and fourth, air:
This is again the whole world
all together.
1 Cott. ney apoppe. 2 Cott. ealla.
310 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
Feedep on Feopep. pey pana folde an. and peetep ope. populde deler.
and Fyp Ip ppidde. and feopepde lyre. pec ip eall peopuld. epe TOZedepe.
Pabbasd peah pa reopen.
ppum-ycol hiona. ezhpile hiopa. agenne ycebde.
peah anna hpile.
pid opep pie. miclum zemenzed. and mid meezne eac. peedep elmihcizey. peeyce zebunden. zepiblice.
popce ToZeedepe. mid bebobde pme. bilepic feedep.
pec te heopa eeniz. opper ne dopyce. meapic opepzanzan. Fop mecodey exe. ac zeSpeopod inc, pesnay cozeedene. cyninzey cempan. cele pid heevo.
pec pis Spyzum. pinad hpeppe. pextep J eopde. peycmay bpenzad. pa ym on zecynde. cealda ba cpa. peecep pec 7 ceald. panzay ymbe-liczad. eonde zl zpeno. eac hpeppe ceald lyre. ly Zemenzed.
Yet have these four each one his stead and stool,
Each hath its place; though much with other mixt;
Fast by Thy might, Almighty Father, bound,
Biding at peace, and softly well together,
By Thy behest, kind Father! so that none
Durst overstep its mark, for fear of Thee,
But willing thanes and war- riors of their king
Live well together, howsoever strive
The wet with dry, the chilly with the hot.
Water and Earth, both cold in kind, breed fruits:
Water lies wet and cold around the field.
With the green earth is min- gled the cold air,
Dwelling in middle place: it is no wonder
That it be warm and cold, blent by the winds,
This wide wet tier of clouds ; for, in my judgment,
Air hath a midway place, ’twixt earth and fire,
All know that fire is uppermost of all
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
Foppem hio on middum punad niy ‘P nan pundop.
pec hio sie peapm J ceald. pec polcney ciep.
pide zeblonden. Foppeem hio ip on midle. mine zeppeze.
Fypey J eoppan.
Fela monna pac.
pec ce ypemeyc iy. eallpa zercearca.
FYP ofep eoppan.
polde neopemeyc.
Ip pec pundoplic. Vepoda Dpihzen.
pec pu mid zepeahce. pmum pypceyc.
pet pu pem Zercearcum. ypa xeyceadlice.
meapce zepecteye.
and hi ne menzdeye eac. Ppeec pu pem peccene. pectum 7 cealbum. poloan co flope.
peeyce xepecteyc. foppem hic unycille. zzhpiden polde.
ploe toycpipan.
pac and hneyce.
ne meahce hic on him yelfum. yod 1c Zeape pac.
zeppe zepcanoan.
ac hic yio eopse.
hilc 7 ypelzed eac.
be yumum dele.
pec hio yispan mez. Fop pem yype peoppan. zelehc lypcum.
roppem lear 7 zepy. bned zeond Bnecene. bloped 3 zpopes.
811
Over this earth, and ground is nethermost. Yet is this wonderful, O Lord of Hosts, Which by thy thought thou workest, that distinctly Thou to Thy creatures settest mark and bound And dost not mingle them: the wet cold water Thou fixest it the fast earth for a floor; For that itself, unstill, and weak, and soft Alone would widely wander everywhere, Nor, well I wot it sooth, could ever stand. But the earth holds and swills it in some sort, That through such sipping it may afterward Moisten the aéry-lift: then leaves and grass Yond o’er the breadth of Bri- tain blow and grow, Its praise of old. The cold earth bringeth fruits More marvellously forth, when it is thawed * And wetted by the water: if not so, Then were it dried to dust, and driven away
312
elbum to ape.
Eopse pio cealde,
bpenzd peeycma rela. pundoplicna.
foppem hio mid paeem pzecepe. peoppad zepapened.
zp P neepe.
ponne hio pepe.
FOpopuzod co ouyte.
and codpirfen yrdpan.
pide mid pinde.
pa nu peoppad ofc.
axe ziond eoppan.
eall coblapen.
Ne meahte on pepe eoppan. apuhc libban.
ne puhte pon ma.
pecpey bpucan.
oneapoian.
_ wenize cperfce.
pop cele anum.
Zip pu cyning enzla. pid pype hpec-hpuzu. yolban 4 lazu-ppeam. ne menzoeyc TOTROSEpe. and Zemectzooeye.
cele 3 hao.
cpeepce pine.
pec ‘p pyp ne mez. polban 4} mepe-yopeam. blace popbaepnan. peah hic pid ba cpa pie. peeyce Zepexed.
peedep eald zepeone.
ne pics me ‘P pundup. puhce pe leyre.
pec pior eopde mez. and ezop-yepeam.
ypa ceald zeycearc. cpeefta nane.
ealley adpeercan.
THE METRES OF BOETHITS,
ashes now
Over the earth are blown : nor — = might on earth
Aught live, nor any wight by any craft
Brook the cold water, neither dwell therein,
If Thou, O King of Angels, otherwhile
Mingledst not soil and stream — with fire together ;
And didst not craft-wise mete — out cold and heat
yiyst (he
site dbl
So that the fire may never —
fiercely burn Earth and the sea- stream, though fast linked with both, The Father’swork of old. Nor is, methinks, This wonder aught the less, that earth and sea
Cold creatures both, can by no .
skill put out
The fire that in them sticks, fix’d by the Lord.
Such is the proper use of the salt seas
Of earth and water and the welkin eke,
And even of the upper skies above.
There, is of right the primal place of fire ;
Wide by the winds; as often =
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 313 ©
pec ‘} him on mnan yzicas.
Fypey gerezed.
mid ppean cperce. pec ip azen cpere. eazop-ycpeamer. pecpey J eoppan. ano on polcnum eac. ano erpne ypa same. uppe ofep podepe. Donne 1p peey fyper. fpum-ycol on pihe. eand ofep eallum. odSpum zeycearcum. xeyepenlicum.
zeond piyne yidan zpund.
peah hic pd ealle* sie. efc zemenzed. peopuld-zeycearza. peah palban ne moc. peer hic enize. eallunza fopoo.
bucon per leare.
pe uy pip lip code.
pet ip ye eca.
ano ye zlmuhciza. E€opse ip hepizpe. oopum Zepcearcum. picpe zeppuen. foppeem hio ppaze ycoe. ealpa zeycearra.
undep nipemeyc. bucon pem pobdepe.
pe pay puman zeyceare. zzhpylce deze.
uvan ymhpypres.
and peah pepe eoppan. eppe ne odpined.
ne hipe on nanpe ne moc.
neap ponne on odpe. scope zeyceppan.
Its birthright over all things else we see
Throughout the varied deep, though mixt with all
Things of this world,
it cannot over one
Rise to such height as to de- stroy it quite ;
But by His leave who shaped out life to us
The Ever-living, and Almighty One.
Earth is more heavy and more thickly pack’d
Than other things; for that it long hath stood
Of all the nethermost: saving the sky
Which daily wafteth round this roomy world,
Yet never whirleth it away, nor can
Get nearer anywhere than everywhere,
Striking it round-about, above, below,
With even nearness whereso- e’er it be.
Each creature that we speak of hath his place
Own and asunder, yet is mixt with all.
No one of them may be with- out the rest,
1 Cott. ealla.
314 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
yrpiced ymbucan. ufane J neopane. eren neah zehpepep. ezhpile zerceare.
pe pe ymb yppeca’d. heerd hir azenne. eapid on yundpan.
bid peah pid peem odpum.
eac zemenzed.
Ne mez hipa enix. bucan odpum bion. peah hi unypeocole. yomod eapdien.
ypa nu eopse J paecep. eayipod ceecne. unpiypa zehpeem. puniad on fype. peah hi ym an. ypeocole pam piyum, Ty ‘} Fyp rpa pame. feeyo on pem perce. and on ytanum eac. ycille zehebded. eappod hape iy. hpeeppe peep harad. peedep enzla.
Fyp zebunden.
epne TO pon feeyte.
pec hic prolan ne mez.
ere wc hip edle.
pep ‘p open Fyp.
up ofep eall pry.
eapd fey punad. yona hic foplecesd. pay leenan zerceare. mid cele ofepcumen. zic hic on cydse zepic.
and peah puhca zehpile.
piunad piden-peanod. pep hi mezde bid. meyct eczeodpe.
Though dwelling all together
mixedly : As now the earth and water dwell in fire,
j
A thing to the unlearned hard —
to teach,
But to the wise right clear: and in same sort
Fire is fast fixt in water, and in stones
Still hidden away and fixt, though hard to find.
Yet thitherward the Father of angels hath
So fastly bound up fire, that it may
Ree again get back to its own home
Where over all this earth sure dwells the fire.
Soon would it leave this lean world, overcome
Of cold, if to its kith on high it went;
Yet everything is yearning thitherward
Where its own kindred bide the most together.
Thou hast established, through Thy strong might,
O glorious King of Hosts, right wondrously
The earth so fast, that it on either half
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 315
Du zercapoladeyc.
puph pa pcponzan meahc.
Vepoda puldop cyning. pundonlice.
eoppan spa Feyce.
_ pec hio on eenize.
- healre ne helded.
ne mez hio hidep ne pidep.
yigan pe ypipop. pe ho yymle dybde.
Ppzec hi peah eopdlicer.
auhz ne halded.
y peah ern ese.
up ano of dune.
co yeallanne. foloan piyye.
peem anhicoyc.
pe on zze bid. zioleca on middan. zlided hpzppe.
ez ymbutan.
ypa scent eall peonuld. yale on calle. ycpeamay ymbucan. lazu-zloda zelac. lypce J cungla.
and yio ycipe ycell. yepiped ymbucan. dozopa xzehpilce. oyde lanze ypa. Ppeec pu pioda Tiros. ppieralde on uy. yaple zeyecceyc.
and hi prSépan eac. yrypeye and cihceyc.
puph pa ycponzan meaht
pec hipe py leyye.
on pem lyclan ne bis. anum finzpe.
pe hipe on eallum bis. pem lichoman.
Heeleth not over, nor can stronger lean
Hither or thither, than it ever did.
Since nothing earthly holds it, to this globe
*T'were easy up or down to fall aside,
Likest to this, that in an egg the yolk
Bides in the middle, though
‘ the egg glides round.
So all the world still standeth on its stead
Among the streams, the meet- ing of the floods:
The lift and stars and the clear shell of heaven
Sail daily round it, as they long have done.
Moreover, God of people, Thou hast set
A threefold soul in us, and afterward
Stirrest and quick’nest it with Thy strong might
So that there bideth not the less thereof
In a little finger than in all the body.
Therefore a little before I clearly said
That the soul is a threefold workmanship
316 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
Foppeem ic lycle ep. ypeocole yaede.
pec pio yapl pepe. ppierald zercearc. pezna zehpilcey. Foppem udpican. ealle yezzas.
pec ce an zecynd. zlcne yaule.
yprung pepe."
opep pununz.
ip slo ppidde zecynd. pem cpzem betepe. yo zeyceadpiypner. Niy P yeandhe cpere.
poppem hic neniz harad.
neat buton monnum, hey6 pa oppa cpa. unpim puhza.
heed pa pilnunza.
pel hpile necen.
and pa ypyrunza.
eac ypa yelfe.
poppy men habbes. zeond middan zeapo, eopo-zercearta.
ealle? ofeppunzen. poppem pe hi habbad. peey pe hi nabbas. pone znne cpere.
pe pe ep nemodon,
Sio zepceadpipney. rceal on zehpelcum. pepe pulnunze.
palban yemle.
and ipyunze.
eac ypa yelre.
hio steal mid zepeahte. pezney mode.
mid anodzite.
1 Cott. ypyunsepe.
Tn every man: } because the wise all say_
That ire is one whole part in
every soul; >
Another, lust ; another and the’ third :
Far better than these twain, wise-mindedness :
This is no song-craft ; for only man
Hath this, and not the cattle: the other two
Things out of number have as well as we;
For ire and lust each beast hath of itself.
Therefore have men, through- out this middle-sphere
Surpassed Earth’s creatures all; for that they have
What these have not, the one good craft we named.
Wise - mindedness in each should govern lust
Aud ire, and its own self; in every man .
With thought and understand- ing ruling him.
This is the mightiest mainstay of man’s soul,
The one best mark to sunder it from beasts.
Thou mighty King of peoples, glorious Lord,
2 Cott. ealla.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
 ealley paldan.
| hio ip } meyce meezen. '  monney yaule.
| and ye yeleyza.
yundop cpeerca,
Ppeec pu pa ysaule.
| yrzopa paldens.
peoda ppym-cyning. puy zerceope.
pec hio hpeaprote. on hipe yelgpe.
hipe ucan ymb.
ypa ypa eal de6.
pine ypipce podon. pecene ymbycpiped. dozopa xehpilce. Dpihcner meahcum. piyyne middan zeapo. Spa 5ed monney yaul. hpeole zelicoyz.
_ hpepred ymbe hy yelre. oft yMmeazenode.
ymb pay eopdlican. Dpihcney zeycearza. dazum 7 nihcum. hpilum hi relre. yecende ymead. hpulum erc ymead. ymb pone ecan Lob. yceeppend hipe. yepipende feps. hpeole zelicoyc. hpzpfs ymb hi yelfe. ponne hio ymb hipe yeyppend. mid zercead ymead. hio bid upahefen. ofep hi yelpe.
ac hio bid eallunza. an hine yelrpe. ponne hio ymb hi yelfe. yecende ymead.
317
Didst. fashion thus the soul, that it should turn
Itself around itself, as in swift race
Doth all the firmament, which quickly twirls
Every day around this middle- sphere,
By the Lord’s might:
so doth the soul of man
Likest a wheel whirl round about itself,
Oft-times keen searching out by day and night
About these earthly ereatures of the Lord:
Somewhile herself she probes with prying eye:
Somewhile again sheasks about her God,
The Ever One, her Maker; going round
Likest a wheel, around herself.
When she about her Maker heedful asks,
She is upheaved above her lower self:
She altogether in herself abides
When, seeking round, she pries about herself:
But furthest falls beneath her- self, when she
With love and wonder search- eth out this earth
whirling
318 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
hio bid yprde pion. hipe yelppe beneopan. ponne hio peey leenan, lugad 7 pundpas. eopdlicu ping.
ofep ecne peo.
Ppec pu ece Lod. eapd fopzeare. yaulum on heofonum. yeleyc peopdlica, zinpeeyta Zipa.
God elmihez.
be ze eapnungza. anpa zehpelepe.
ealle hi ycinas.
puph pa yeipan neahc. hadpe on heorenum. na hpeppe peah.
ealle epenbeophce. Ppeec pe ofc zey108. hadpum nihtum.
pec ce heofon-yceoppan.
ealle epenbeophce. wppe ne yemad. Ppeec pu ece Lod, eac Zemenzeye.
pa heoponcundan, hipep pid eoppan. yaula pid lice. ySpan puniad.
pir eopdlice.
and ‘P ece yamobd. yaul in fleece. Dpeer. hi yimle to pe. hiona! fundias. poppaem hi hidep of pe. epop comon. reulon efc co pe. yeeal ye lichama. layc peapodizan.
With its lean lusts, above the lore for ever!
Yea, more; Thou, Ever Good, to souls in heaven
Givest an heritage, Almighty God,
And worthiest lasting gifts, as each hath earned.
They, through the moonlit night, shine calm in heaven,
Yet are not all of even bright- ness there,
So oft we see the stars of heaven by night,
They shine not ever all of even brightness.
Moreover, Ever Good, Thou minglest here
Heavenly things with earthly, soul with flesh :
Afterwards soul and flesh both live together,
Earthly with heavenly :
ever hence they strive
Upward to Thee, because they came trom Thee,
And yet again they all shall go to Thee!
This living body yet once more on earth
Shall keep its ward, for-that it theretofore
Wax’d in the world: they — dwelt (this body and soul)
1 Cott. hi on.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 319
efe on eoppan. yoppem he ep of hipe.
- peox on peopulde.
punedon et yomne. eren ypa lanze.
ypa him lyped peer. Fpom pem elmihcizan. pe hi epop zio. zeyomnabde.
peec ip yod cyning.
ye pay foloan zeyceop. and hi zeryloe pa. ypise miylicum.
mine zerpeze.
neaca cynnum. nepzenod uyep.
he hi yrSpan ayiop. yeda monezum.
puda Jj pypta. peopulde yceacum. fopziz nu ece Lod. upum mooum.
pec hi mozen fo pe. mezod alpuhza.
puph’ par eapropu.
up aycizan.
and of piyum byyexzum. bilepiz paedep.
peoda paldend.
co pe cuman.
and ponne mid openum. eazum moten.
moodey upery.
puph pmpa mezzgna yped.
zepelm Zeyion. eallpa zooba.
pec pu eant yelpa. yize Dpihcen Lod. ze pa eazan hal. upey moodey.
So long together as to them gave leave
The Almighty, who had made them one before,
That is in sooth the King! who made this world,
And fill’d it mixedly with kinds of cattle,
Our Saviour and near Helper, as I trow.
Thence He with many seeds of woods and worts
Stock’d it in all the corners of the world.
Forgive now, Ever Good, and give to us
That in our minds we may up- soar to thee,
Maker of all things, through these troublous ways;
And from amidst these busy things of life,
O tender Father, Wielder of the world, Come unto Thee, and then through Thy good speed With the mind’s eyes well opened we may see
The welling spring of Good, that Good, Thyself,
O Lord, the God of Glory !— Then make whole
The eyes of our understand- ings, so that we,
« Cott. bups.
820
pet pe hi on pe yelpum. yiépan mocen,. apeeycnian.?
Feedep enzla.
codpif pone piccan muy. pe ppaze nu.
pid pa eazan fopan. uyyey moder.
hanzode hpyle.
hepig J pyycpe.
Onliht nu pa eazan. uyyey moder.
mid pinum leohte. lipey paldend.
foppeem pu eapc pio biphtu. bilepic feedep.
roper leohcep.
and pu selfa eapt.
plo feeyte peyc.
pedep eelmibciz. eallpa yodpaeycpa. Ppeec pu yorce zedeyt. pe hi pe yelyne. zeyion mocen.
Du eapc eallpa pinza. peoda paldend.
fpuma ‘j ende,
Ppec pu peedep engla, eall pinz bipeyc. epelice.
bucon xeypmce.
Du eapz rela pez.
and lacceop eac. lipgendpa zehpey.
and pio plicize ytop.
pe ye pex co hz.
pe ealle co.
A pundiad.?
men of moldan.
on pa meepan Zepceare.
1 Cott. epeyénian.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.,
Father of angels, fasten them on Thee! Drive away this thick ee
which long while now :
Hath hung before our mind’s” eyes, heavy and dark.
Enlighten now these mind’s” eyes with Thy light, >;
Master of life; for Thou, 0 tender Father,
Art very brightness of true light Thyself ;
Thyself, Almighty Father, the sure rest
Of all thy fast and true ones; winningly
Thou orderest it that they may see Thyself!
Thou art of all things origin and end,
O Lord of all men; Father of
angels, Thou Easily bearest all things with- out toil,
Thou art Thyself the way, and
leader too,
Of every one that lives, and the pure place
That the way leads to: all men from this soil
Throughout the breadth of being, yearn to Thee.
2 Oott. ayundias,
» |
ST. ALBERT’S COLLEGE LIBRARY THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 321 METRUM XXI" - METRE XXI.
Pel la monna beapn. Zeond middan Zeapo, Fpopa eezhpile. Fundie co pem. ecum Zobde.
pe pe ymb yppecasd. ano co pem zeyelpum. pe pe yeczad ymb.
Se pe ponue nu sie. neappe zeherced. mid piyyey meepan. middan Zeapoey.
2 unnyccpe lure.
yece him eyz hpzse. fulne ppiodom.
pec he fond cume. co pem xzerelpum. yaula peodey.
poppem ‘f ip pio ana? perc.
eallpa zerpinca. hyhzlicu hys. heaum ceolum. mooey uyyey.
mepe ymylza pic. pet ip pio ana’ hy®. pe zppe bis.
zepcep pam ypum. upa zeypinca.
yyca xehpelcne. ealmiz pmylcze.
peer ip yo fprs- aor and ylo Fpofop ana.* eallpa ypminza. eeptep pyyum. peopuld-zeypmecum. pec ip pynyum yop. eepoep piyyum ypmpum.
OF INWARD LIGHT.
Well,—O ye children of men in mid-earth ! Every freeman should seek till he find That, which I spake of, good endless in worth ; These, which I sing of, the joys of the mind.
Let him who ig narrow’d and prison’d away By love of this mid-earth empty and vain, Seek out for Faucet full free- dom to-day, That soul-feeding joys he may quickly attain.
For, such of all toil is the only one goal, For sea-weary keels hythe- haven from woes, The great quiet dwelling that harbours the soul, Still calm in the storm, and from strife a repose.
That is the peace-place, and comfort alone Of all that are harmed by the troubles of life A place very pleasant and win- some to own, After this Paral of sorrow and strife.
u Boet. lib. iii, metrum 10.—Hue omnes pariter venite capti, &e.
1 Cott. an.
ay:
322 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
co azanne.
Ac 1c zeopne pat.
pec ce zylben madm, yyloppen sine. ycan-yeapo zimma nan. middenzeandery pela. moodey eazan.
eefpe ne onlyhtas. auhc ne zebetas.
hiopa pceanpneyye.
TO pepe yceapunza. yoopa zepeelpa.
ac hi spipop zec. monna zehpelcey. moodey eazan.
ablendad on bpeoycum.
ponne hi hi beophtpan zebdon.
foppem ezhpile pms. pe on piy andpeapdan. lige licad.
leenu ymbdon. eopdlicu ping.
4 fleondu.
ac ‘p iy pundoplic. plice and beophctner. pe puhca zehpey. plice zebephred.
and epoey) peem. eallum palded.
_Nele ye paldend.
pec yoppeoppan yeylen. yaula uyye.
ac he hi yelra pile. jleoman onlihcan. lipey palbend.
Ing ponne heelepa hpile. hlucpum eazum. mobdey yiney mez. wppe ofpion. hioroney leohter. hlucpe beophco.
But right-well T wot thatlian
treasure of gold Nor borders of gem-stones, ~ nor silvery store, :
Nor all of earth’s wealth the —
mind’s sight can unfold, Or better its sharpness true joys to explore:
But rather, make blind in the breast of each man The eyes of his mind than make ever more bright, For, sorry and fleeting as fast as they can Are all who in this flitting earth can delight.
Yet wondrous the beauty and brightness is seen Of that which hath bright- en’d and beautified all So long as on this middle-earth they have been, And afterward happily holds them in thrall.
For the Ruler He wills not the soul should be nought, Himself will enlighten it, Lord of life given! If any man then with the eyes of his thought May see the clear brightness of light from high heaven,
tematic
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. Soa
_ ponne pile he yeezan.
_ pec pepe yunnan pie. beophtney pioycpo. beopna zehpylcum. co mecanne.
— pid ‘} micle leohc.
Loder elmibcizer. pec ip zayca zehpem. ece bucan enbde. eadezum yaulum.
METRUM XXII
Se pe zpcep pihce. mid Zepece.
pille mpeandlice. zepcoep ppypian.
ypa oeoplice.
pec hic codpizan ne mez. monna enix.
ne ameppan hupu. zmz eopdlic pincz. he epeyz yceal. yecan on him yelrum. pec he sume hpile. ymbucan hine.
zpop sohte.
yece pec yidpan.
on hiy yefan mnan. and poplece an.
ypa he orcoyc meeze. zlene’ ymbhozan. py him unnez pie. and zeyamnize.
ypa he ypipoyt meeze. ealle co pem anum. hip inzeponc. xerecze hip mod. pec hic meez pindan. eall on him innan.
Then will he say that the blaze of the sun Is darkness itself to the glory so bright Which Great God Almighty shines out on each one Of souls of the happy for ever in light.
METRE XXII.
OF THE INNER MIND AND THE OUTER SIN.
The man that after right with care Will inwardly and deeply dive, So that no earthly thing may scare, Nor him from such good seeking drive,
First in himself he shall find out That which beyond he some- while sought, Within his mind must search about, And leave behind each trou- blous thought ;
This at the soonest, as he may, Such care were harm to him and sin, Then let him haste and hie away To this alone, his mind within.
w Boet. lib. iii, metrum 11.—Quisquis profunda mente vestigat verum, &c. 1 Cott. wlepe.
eZ
824
pec hic ofcoye nu. ymbucan hic. ealnez yeced. zooba ezhpyle.
he onzit yrSpan. yrel J unnec.
eal } he heroe. on hiy meoran. zepop lanze.
erne ypa ypeotole.
ypa he on pa yunnan mez.
eazum andpeapoum. onlocian.
and hi eac onzic.
hip inzeponc.
leohcpe 7 bephtpe. ponne ye leoma rie. yunnan on sumepa, ponne ypexzler zm. hadop heogon-cunzol. hlucpoye pemesd. poppam peer lichoman. leahcpay J hepizney. ano pa unpeapay. eallunza ne mazon. OF mode action. monna enezum, puhcpiyneyre.
Deah nu pmca hpem. pey lichoman. leahtpay 7 hepiznep. and unpeapay.
ofc byyizen.
monna mod-yeran. meyc and ypipoyc. mud pepe yplan. ofopziocolneyye.*
maid zedpol-miyce. Opeopizne yefan. fopcis mod fopan.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
Say to his mind, that it may find
What oftest now it seeks around
All in, and to itself assign’d
Every good that can be found :
He then will see that all he had In his mind’s chamber thought and done, Was evil long afore and bad, © Clearly as he can see the sun:
But his own mind he shall see there Lighter and brighter than the ray Of heaven’s star, the gem of air,
The sun in clearest summer
day.
For that the body’s lusts and
crimes,
And all its heaviness in kind,
Utterly may not any times
Wipe out right wisdom from -
man’s mind
Though now in every man such wrong, Those lusts and crimes and fleshly weight, Worry the mind both loud and strong, And make it half forget its state.
' Cott. oropsiocolneype-
6 ae nee del
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 825
~ monna xehpelcer. _peec hic ypa beophte ne moc.
blican and! peman.
rpa hic polde zip.
hic zepeald ahze.
_ peah bis yum copn.  peeder zehealden.
_ yymle on pene ysaule.
yoopeeycneyye.
penden zadepcanz punad.
xayc on lice. per yeedey copn. bid pimle apeahc. mid aycunza.
~ -eac pdpan,
mid zooope lape. zip hic zpopan yceal. Pu mez eniz man. anoypape pimdan. pinga eenizey.
pezen mid zerceade. peah hine pinca hpile. puhcpiylice.
zepcoep ppizne.
zip he apuhc narzas. on hiy moo-yeran. mycley ne lycler. puhcpipneyyer.
ne Zepaoycipey.
niy peah zniz man. peer ce ealley ypa. pey xepadycipey. ypa bepearod sie. pec he anodypape. zenize ne cunne. findan on rephée. zip he ppugnen bis.
poppeem hic ip pihe ypell.
pec up peahce zo. eald udpica.
And though the mist of lies may shade Man’s dreary thought that it be dull, And be no more so bright arrayed An if ’twere pure and pow- erful,
Yet always is some seed-corn held Of sturdy truth within the soul, While flesh and ghost together weld, And make one fixt and ga- ther’d whole.
This seed-corn waxes ever-
more, By much asking quickened 80, As well as by good wholesome lore, That it quickly learns to grow.
How may a man right answer find To anything ask’d well and fit, Unless he keenly store his
mind That it have much or little wit P Yet is there no man so be- reaved Of knowledge, that he can- not bring [ceived
Some answer well to be re- If he be ask’d of anything.
1 Cott. an.
826
upe Plazcon.
he cps ce ezhpile. unzemynodiz. pibcpipneyye.
hine hpese yceolde. eft Zependan.
into yinum.
mobdey zemynbe.
he mez yrdpan.
on hiy pun-coran. puhcpipneyye.
pindan on fephce. peyce zehydbde.
mid zedpezneyye, oozopa zehpilce. mobdey yimey.
meyc J ypipoyc.
and mid hermeyre.
hiy lichoman.
and mid pem biyzum. pe on bpeorcum yryped. mon on mode.
mela xehpylce.
METRUM XXIII*
Sie P la on eoppan. alee pmzey. xeyeehz mon.
zip he zeylon meeze. pone hlucpeycan. heopon-cophtan yepeam. wpelne wzpelm. wlcey Zoodey.
and of him yelpum. pone ypeapcan muy. mobdey pioyepo.
mez apeoppan.
Ve yeulon peah zita. mud Loder pylyce. ealoum J leayum.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
Wherefore it is a spell of right
Which our own Plato, long ——
of old,
That ancient wise and worthy —
wight, To all of us most truly told;
He said, that each who wisdom —
sought, Forgetful, should to memory turn, And in the coffer of his thought Right-wisdom hidden would
discern,
Through all the drift of trouble there, And all this body’s heavy clay, And busy toil, and daily care,
Which stir the breasts of
men alway.
METRE XXIII. TRUE HAPPINESS.
Look! for on earth a happy man In everything is he, Who Heaven’s shining river ean Good’s high- born well- spring see ; And of himself may scatter back THis mind’s own mist of swarthy black.
By God’s good help, we wil yet
x Boet. lib. iii, metrum 12.—Felix qui potuit boni, &e.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. ont
pmne inzeponc. becan birpellum. pec pu pe bec meze. apedian To podopum. pihze yzize.
on pone ecan eapo. uyya yaula.
METRUM XXIV
Ic hebbe pispu.
fuzle ypipcpan.
mio pem ic fleozan mez. Feop Fpam eoppan. ofep heane hpof. heofoney piyyey.
ac pep ic nu moyce. mod zefedpan.
pmne fepd-locan. yedpum mmum.
odpec pu meahce. piyne middan Zea. zle eopdlic ping. eallunza fopyion. Meahcey ofep podopum. xepechice.
pedepum lacan.*
Feop up ofep.
polenu pmodan.
plican yiSpan uran. ofep ealle.
Meahcey eac fapan. ofep peem fype.
pe fela zeana yon. lanze becpeox.
lypce J podene.
ypa him et ppymbe. peedep zet10be.
Du meahczeyz pe yidpan. mid pepe sunnan.
With’spellsofolden leaven
Inform thy mind that thou mayst get
Toread the way to heaven ;
The right way to that happy
shore [more.
Our soul’s own country ever-
METRE XXIV. THE SOUL'S HERITAGE.
I have wings like a bird, and more swiftly can fly
Far over this earth tothe roof of the sky,
And now must I feather thy fancies, O mind,
To leave the mid-earth and its earthlings behind.
Stretch’d over the heavens, thou mayst with thy wings Sport in the clouds and look down on all things,
Yea, far above fire, that leth betwixt
The air and the sky, as the Father hath mixt.
Thence with the sun to the stars thou shalt fly,
Thereafter full quickly to float through the sky,
y Boet. lib. iv. metrum 1.—Sunt etenim penne volucres mihi, &e. 1 Cott. onlacan.
328 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
yapan becpeox.
oppum ctunzlum.
Meahceyc pe full pecen.
on pem podepe ufan.
yiSpan peoppan.
and ponne yamtenzey. xt pem el-cealdan.
anum yceoppan.
re yFmeyt iy.
eallpa cunzla.
pone Sacupnury.
yund-buende hazad,
undep heofonum.
he ip ye cealda.
eall iyiz cunzel.
yremeyc panopad.
oyep eallum uran.
oppum yceoppum.,
SiSpan pu pone.
pone upaharayc.
pops of¢ep-fapenne.
pu meaht feopyian.
ponne biyc pu yidpan.
yona ofep uppan.
podene pyne ypipcoum.
zip pu piht feepeye.
pu’ pone hehycan heoron.
behindan leecys. Donne meahz pu yiSpa. yopey leohzey. habban pinne del. ponan an cyning. pume picyad.
ofep podepum up. and undep spa same. eallpa zeycearra. peopulde palded. Dees ip py cyning. pec ip ye pe paldes. zlond pep-pioda.
To the lonely cold planet, which sea-dwellers call =
Saturn, in heaven the highest of all.
He is the icy cold star in the ~ highest ;
That wanders the furthest, and : yet as thou fliest ;
Higher, and further, and up — shalt thou rise,
Yea, to the top of the swift rushing skies !
If thou goest rightly, e’en these shalt thou leave:
And then of the true light thy share shalt receive,
Where up over heaven, the | Only King reigns,
And under it all the world’s being sustains.
This is the Wise King, this is He who is found
To rule o’er the kings of all peoples around ;
With his bridle ‘hath bitted the heaven and earth,
And guides the swift wain by His might driven forth.
He is the One Judge un- swervingly right,
Unchanging in power, and un- sullied in light;
1 Cott. be.
$ +,
wt pad «
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
ealpa opna.
eoppan cyninga.
ye mid hip bpidle. ymbe beeced hzex6. ymbhpyprc ealne. eoppan 3 heoroner. De hiy zepalo-lepep. pel zemeczad.
ye yeoped 4.
puph pa ycponzan meabc. peem hpzedpzene. heofoney and eoppan. ye an ema jy. xerox Opis. unanpendendlic. pliaiz 3 mepe.
Lig pu pypyye on. peze pibcum.
up TO peem eande. pec iy epele poop. peah pu hi nu zeza. popzicen heebbe. Sif pu eeppe.
epc peep an cymeyc. ponne pile pu yeczan. and ona cpepan. py ip eallunza.
min azen cys.
eapd and epel.
ic pey ep hionan. cumen Jj acenned.
puph pyyey cpefczan meahc.
nylle ic efpe hionan. uc pican.
ac ic yymle hep.
yorce pile.
mid fedep pillan. perce scondan.
Ing pe ponne efpe.
ere zepeoppes.
pec pu pile 066e more,
329
When to His dwelling-place back thou dost roam,
However forgotten, it still is thy home.
If ever again thou shalt thither- ward go,
Soon wilt thou say, and be sure it 18 so,
“This 18 mine own country in every way,
The earth of my birth, and my heirdom for aye:
“Hence was I born, and came forth in my time,
Through the might ‘of my Maker, the Artist sublime,
Nor will I go out evermore but stand fast,
At the will of my Father, come hither at last.”
And if it should aye be again that thou wilt
Come back to the world in its darkness and guilt,
Thou shalt easily see of these kings and these proud
Who worst have down-trodden this woe-ridden crowd,
330
peopolde pioytpo. efc fanoian.
pu meahz eade zeyion. unpihcpire.
eoppan cyninzay. and pa ofeyjimooan. oppe pican.
pe pir pepize role. pypye cucias.
pec he yymle bios. ypide eapme. unmehzize.
wlcey pinzey.
emne pa ican.
pe piy eapme yole. yume hpile nu. yplpoyt ondpzeded,
METRUM XXV#
Gehep nu an spell. be pam ofepmodum. unpihcpipum.
eoppan cyninzgum. pa hep nu manezum. and miylicum. pedum plice-beophcum. pundpum yemasd.
on heah-yeclum. hpope zecenze.
zolde zexepede.
and zimeynnum., ucan ymbe ycanbdne. mid unpime.
pezna 7 eopla.
pa biod zehypyce. mid hepe-zeatpum. hilde cophtum. ypeopdum ¥ fecelum. ypide zexzlende.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
That they too are wretched —
and wofully poor,
Unmighty to do anything any —
more, These, ay even these, beneath whose dread yoke
Now somewhile are trembling
this woe-ridden folk.
METRE XXV. OF EVIL KINGS.
Hear now a spell of the proud overbearing Kings of the earth, when unrighteous in mind: Wondrously bright though the robes they are wearing, High though the seats where their pomp is enshrined.
Gold-clad and gemm’d,and with hundreds round standing, Thanes and great earls with their chain and _ their sword, All of them chieftains in battle commanding,
Each in his rank doing suit
to his lord:
% Boet. lib. iv. metrum 2.—Quos vides sedere celso, &e.
yreend.¥
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 3831
and pexzniad. While in such splendour each ppymme mycle. rules like a savage, zle oppum. Everywhere threatening the and hi ealle him. people with strife, ponan mid py’ ppymme. So, this lord heeds not, but ppeatiad zehpidep. leaves them to ravage ymb-piccenda. Friends for their riches, and Oppa peoda. foes for their life! and ye hlaropd ne yepifs. pe pem hepe palded. Ay, and himself, like a hound Fpeonde ne feonde. that is madden’d, feope ne ehctum. Flies at and tears his poor ac he pepiz-mobd. people for sport,
_ peeyc on zehpilene. In his fierce mind too loftily pede hunbe. gladden’d puhza zelicoyc. With the proud power his Bid co upaheren. chieftains support. inne on mode. 4 yop pzem anpalte. But, from his robes if a man pe him anpa zehpile. should unwind him, hip cip-pma. Stripp’d of such coverings co fulcema®. kingly and gay, Ing. mon ponne polse. Drive all his following thanes him apindan of. from behind him, pey cyne-zepelan. And let his glory be taken clapa zehpilcne. away ; and him ponne oyzion. papa pexnunza. Then should ye see that he and pey anpalder. likens most truly pe he hep heerbe. Any of those who so slavishly
~ ponne meahz pu zeyion. throng pec he bid ypide zelic. Round him with homage de- yumum papa zumena. murely and duly, pe him zeopnoyz nu. Neither more right than the mid pexnungum. rest, nor more wrong.
ppinzad ymbe ucan. zip he pypyra ne bid. ne pene ic hiy na bevepan. Ing him ponne efpe. unmenbdlinza. peay zebepede. 1 Cott. ba.
332 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
pec him pupbde ofcozen. _ ppymmer ¥ peda. and pegnunza.
and pey anpaldey. pe pe ymbe yppecasd. zip him eniz papa. ofhende pyps.
1c pat ‘Pp him pmced. pet he ponne pie. becpopen on capcepn. 066e codlice. pacenctan zepezeped. Ic zepeccan mez. pec of unzemecte. zelcer pinzer.
piyce 7 peda. pm-zedpincey.
and of ypec-metann rpipoye peaxa’, pepe ppeenneyye. pod-ppaz micel.
ylo spide zebpeers. yefan inzehyzo. monna zehpelcey. ponan meyc cymes. ypla opepmeca, unnetza yaca.
Donne hi zebolzene’ peoppad.
him pyp3 on bneorcum mne. berpunzen yefa on hneppe. mud psem ypipan pelme. hac-heopcneyye.
and hpese yidpan. unpozneyye.
eac zepexped.
heapde xehapred.
Pim yprSpan onzins.
yum cohopa.
ypidse leozan.
peey sepmney ppece. pulnad ‘p ippe.
If then to him it should chance in an hour,
All his bright robes from his.
back be offstripped, All that we speak of, his pomp — and his power,
ae |
Glories unravell’d and gar- ; |
ments unripp’d,—
If these were shredded away, I am thinking, That it would seem to him surely as though
He to a prison had. crept, and.
was linking All that he had to the fetters of woe.
Rightly I reckon that measure- less pleasure, Eating and drinking, and sweetmeats and clothes, Breed the mad waxing of lust by bad leisure, Wrecking the mind where such wickedness grows:
Thence cometh evil, and proud overbearing ; Quarrels and troubles arise from such sin, When in the breast hot-heart- ness is tearing With its fierce lashes the soul that’s within.
1 Cott. peboxene.
ST. ALBERT’S COLLEGE LIBRARY
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 333
aney and oppey. him  eall zehaec. hy peceleyz. pihcey ne yepired. Ic pe yeede ep.
on piyye yelpan bec. pec yumey Zoodey. ylopa zepcearca, anlepna elc.
4 pilnode.
pop hiy azenum. ealo-zecynde unpihzpire. eoppan cyninzar.
ne mazon egne puphcion.
apuht zoober.
Fop peem yrle.
pe ic pe zp yeede. Niy ‘} nan pundop. foppeem hi pillad hi, peem unpeapum.
pe ic pe ep nembde. anpa zehpelcum.
& undeppeodan. Sceal ponne nede. neappe zebuzan.
co papa hlapopda. heefce 5ome.
pe he hine eallunza. zp undeppi0do5e. peer ip pypre gee. pec he pmnan nyle. pid peem anpaloe. eenize pcunde.
pep he polde 4. pinnan onzmnan.
and ponne on pem Zepinne.
puphpunian fops. ponne nzepoe he. nane ycyloe.
peah he ofeppunnen. peoppan yceolde.
Afterward, sorrow imprisons and chains him ; Then does he hope, but his hope is a lie: Then again, wrath against some- body pains him, Till he has recklessly doom’d him to die.
In this same book before I was
speaking, Everything living is wishing
some good,
But the bad kings of the earth, who are wreaking
Nothing but ill, as is fitting they should.
That is no wonder, for slaves very willing Are they to sins,—as I told thee before,— And to those lords whose chains they are filling, Straitly and strictly must bend evermore:
This is yet worse, they will not be winning ; Standing-room even against such ill might; Still, if they will, they struggle unsinning, Though they should seem overthrown in the fight.
334
METRUM XXXVI
Ic pe mez ease.
ealbum 4 leayum.
ypellum andpeccan.
yppeece zelicne.?
erne piyye ilcan.
pe pic ymbyppecad. . Pic zepzelde x10.
on yume cide.
pec Aulixer.
undep-hzpbe.
peem Larepe.
cyne-picu tpa.
De pey Dpacia.
proba aldop.
and Recie.
picey hipbde.
Vey hiy ppea-dbpihcner.
pole-cuS nama,
Azamemnon.
ye ealley peold.
[peca picer.
Lud pay pide.
pec on pa cide.
Tpioia zepin.
peapd undep polcnum.
fop pizey-heapd.
Cpeca dpihcen.
camp-yced yecan.
Aulixey mid.
an hund yeipa,
leedde ofep lazu-ycpeam.
yeec lonze peep. cyn pmeep? pull. Da’ pio uid zelomp. pec hi p pice. xepeehc hepdon, d1lopie Zecepte.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
METRE XXVI. OF CIRCE AND HER COMPANY.
From old and leasing spells right easily
Can I to thee tell out a tale like that
Whereof we lately spake.—It chanced of yore
That, on a time, Ulysses held two kingdoms
Under his Cesar: prince of Thrace,
And ruled Neritia as its shep- herd king.
His head-lord’s folk-known name was Agamemnon,
Who wielded all the greatness of the Greeks.
At that time did betide the Trojan war,
Under the clouds well known: the warrior chief,
Lord of the Greeks, went forth to seek the battle.
Ulysses with him led an hun- dred ships
Over the sea, and sat ten win- ters there.
When the time happen’d that this Grecian lord
With his brave peers had over- thrown that kingdom,
he was
® Boet. lib. iv. metrum 8.—Vela Neritii ducis, &e.
1 Cott. selice.
2 Cott. pint,
3 Cott. be.
J. bmdeet) ¢
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 335
opihcen Epeca. Tpoia buph.? cilum Zeyipum. pa pa? Aulixer. leare heerbde. _ Dpacia cynm;.* pec he ponan moyce. he lec him behinodan. hypnode ciolar. nizon J hund nizonzz. neenize* ponan. _mepe-henzeyza. ma ponne enne. Fepede on yizel pepeam. famiz-bopoon. ppiepeppe ceol. pec bid } meyce. [pecrepa rerpa. pa peans ceald pedep. yceapnc-ycopma zelac. ycunede yio bpune. yo pid oppe. uc feop adpar. on pendel-yz. pizendpa ycola. up on  izland. pep Apolliney. dohtop punode. oez-pumey popn. pey ye Apollinuy. zpeley cynney. Iobey earopa. ye pey gZ10 cyning. ye licecze. liclum 4 miclum. xumena zehpylcum. peec he Lod? pepe. * hehyc 3 halzoyc. Spa ye hlapopd pa. 1 Cott. bups. 5 Cott. 500d.
2 Cott. bu.
The dear-bought burgh of Troy,—Ulysses then,
The King of Thracia, when his lord gave leave
That he might hie him thence, he left behind
Of all his horn’d sea - keels ninety and nine.
Thence, none of those sea- horses, saving one,
Travell’d with foamy sides the fearful sea;
Save one, a keel with three- fold banks of oars,
Greatest of Grecian ships. Then was cold weather,
A gathering of stark storms; against each other
Stunn’d the brown billows, and out-drove afar
On the mid-winding sea the shvual of warriors,
Up to that island, where, un- numbered days,
The daughter of Apollo wont to dwell.
This same Apollo was of high- born kin,
Offspring of Jove, who was a king of yore, ,
He schemed so, as to seem to every one,
Little and great, that he must be a God,
3 Cott. ciming. * Cott. neenizne.
336
psec dypize role. on zedpolan leebdde, odpzet him zelypbe. leoda unpim.
foppeem he py mid pihce.
picey hipode.
hiopa cyne-cynney. [v6 ip pide.
pet on pa cide.
peoba ezhyile heepdon.
heopa hlaropd.
fon pone hehycan Lod.
and peoppodon.
ypa ypa puldper cyning. zip he co peem pice per.
on pihce bopen.
py pay Iobey paeden. Lod eac ypa he. Satupmuy pone. yund-buenbde.
hecon helepa beapn. hedon pa meexzpa. lene efcep oppum. fon ecne Lod. Sceolde eac peyan. Apolliner.
dohcop dSiop-bopen. oyyizey folcer. gum-pinca zyden. cude zaldpa rela. dpupan Spyepercar. hio zebdpolan fylzbe. manna ypipoyc. manezpa pioda. Lyninzey d5ohcop. yio Lipce pey. haven fop hepizum. Pio picyode.
on pem izlonbde.
pe Aulixer.
cynmz Dpacia.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS,.
Highest and Holiest ! silly folk
So the ;
Tt
This lord did lead throughlying | 4
ways, until An untold flock of men be- — lieved in him:
=
For that he was with right the ?
kingdom’s chief,
And of their kingly kin. Well is it known
That in those times each people held its lord
14
As for the God most high, and
worshipp’d him
For King of Glory,—if with right of rule
He to the kingdom of his rule was born.
The father of this Jove was also God,
Even ashe: ers call
Saturn: the sons of counted these kin
One after other, as the Ever Good!
him the sea-dwell-
men
Thus also would Apollo’s high- —
born daughter
Be held a Goddess by the senseless folk,
Known for her Druid- craft, and witcheries.
Most of all other men she fol- lowed lies.
And this king’s daughter, Circe was she hight,
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 337
com ane to.
ceole lipan.
Lud peey yona. eallpe pepe meenize. pe hipe mid punobde. zepelinzey yr.
Pio mid unzemece. liyyum lufobe. li6-monna fpea.
and he eac ypa yame. ealle mzzne.
eyne ypa ypide.
hi on yeran lurobe. pzec he co hiy eapde. senize nyyce.
moder mynian.
opep mezd zunze. ac he mid pem pire. punode yidpan. odpec him ne meahce. monna enix.
pezna* pmpa.
peep maid peyan.
ac hi rop pem ypmpum.
eandery lyyce.
myncon foplecan. leopne hlaropd.
Da onzunnon pepcan. pep-peoda rpell.
yedon f hio yceolte. mid hipe remlace. beopnay fopbpedan. and mid balo-cpefcum. ppapum peoppan.
on pilopa he.
cyninzey pexnay. cyypan yrspan.
and mia pacentan eac. pepan mzenizne.
Circe for Church, as having many with her,
She ruled this isle, whereto the Thracian king
Ulysses, with one ship, hap- pened to sail.
Soon was it known, to all the many there
That dwelt with her, the coming of the prince ;
She without measure loved this sailor-chief,
And he alike with all his soul loved her,
So that he knew not any love more deep
Even of home, than as he loved this maiden;
But lived with her for wife long afterward ;
Until not one of all his thanes would stay,
But, full of anguish for their country’s love,
They meant. to leave behind their well-loved lord.
Then on the men she ’gan to work her spells;
They said, she should by those her sorceries
Make the men prone like beasts: and savagely
Into the bodies of wild beasts she warp’d
Sume h: co pulpum pupdon. 1 Cott. besnpa. Zz
338 ; THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. ~*
ne meahton ponne popd rops- By baleful craft the followers~ :
bpmzan. ac hio ppaz-mzlum. piocon onzunnon. Sume pepon earopar. a zpymezebdon. ponne hi yapey hpzev. ylopian ycioldon. Da pe leon peepon. onzunnon ladlice. yppenga pyna. ponne hi sceoldon. clipian op copppe. Cnihvay pupdon. ealde ze zlunze. ealle pophpeproe. co yumum dione. ypelcum he zpop. on hip lip-bazum. xelicoyc peer. bucan pam cyninze. pe yio cpen lupobde. Nolde pana oppa. zeniz onbican. menniycey mecey. ac hi ma luredon, diopa Spohcas. ypa hic zedere ne peey. Neepdon hi mape. monnum Zelicey. eopd-buendum. ponne inzepone. Pepoe anna zehpyle. hip azen mod. pec peer peah ypide. yopzum zebunden, Fop pem eapfopum. pe him onyeton. Ppet pa dyrezan men.
pe pyrum opycpeeroum.,
lonz zelyfdon.
of the king.
Then did she tie them up, and
bind with chains. Some were as wolves; and might not then bring forth — A word of speech; but now and then would howl.
Some were as boars; and
grunted ever and aye,
When they should sigh a whit © :
for sorest grief.
They that were lions, loathly would begin
To roar with rage when they should call their comrades,
The knights, both old and young, into some beast
Were changed as each afore- time was most like
In his life’s day: but only not the king, -
Whom the queen loved: the others, none would bite
The meat of men, but loved the haunt of beasts,
As was ill fitting ; they to men, earth-dwellers
Had no more likeness left than their own thought.
Each still had his own mind, though straitly bound
With sorrow for the toils that him beset.
For e’en the foolish men who long believed
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
leayum ypellum. pyyon hpeppe.
pec } zepic ne mex. mod onpenbdan. monna eniz.
mid opycpercum.
 peah hio zebon meahte.
pec pa lichoman. lanze ppaze.
onpend pupdon.
Ty } pundoplic. mezen cpere micel. mobda zehpilcey.
ofep lchoman. leenne J yzenne. Spyleum 3 ypylcum.
pu meahc ypeocole onzican.
peec peey lichoman. hycay J cpeercar.
oF pem mode cumad. monna zehpylcum. zenlepna zelc.
Du meahz eade onzican. pet ce ma deped. monna zehpylcum.* mobdey unpeap. ponne meccpymney. leney lchoman.
Ne peanr leoba nan. penan pepe pypbe. pec ‘p pepize flee. pet moo.
monna enizey. eallunza co him. zeppe mez onpendan. ac pa unpeapar. zlcey moder.
and  inzeponc. zlcey monney.
pone lichoman lic. pidep hic pile.
339
Through leasing spells in all this Druid craft,
Knew natheless that no man might change the wit, Or mind, by such bad craft: though they might make That for long while the bodies should be changed.
Wonderful is that great and mighty art
Of every mind above the mean dull body.
By such and such things thou mayst clearly know
That from the mind come one by one to each
And every man his body’s lusts and powers.
Easily mayst thou see that every man
Is by his wickedness of mind more harm’d
Than by the weakness of his failing body.
Nor need a man ween ever such weird-chance,
As that the wearisome and wicked flesh
Could change to it the mind of any man,
But the bad lusts of each mind, and the thought
Of each man, lead his body where they will.
1 Cott. sehpelcum. % 2
340 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
METRUM XXVII>
Ppy xe ene reylen. unpiht-plounzum. edpep mood operan, ypa ypa mene floder. ypa hpepasd,
iy-calde yee.
peczzad fop pinde, Ppy odpice ze. pypoe eopne.
pec hio zepeald narad. Ppy xe peey Seapey.
pe eop Dyhcen zerceop.
zebiban ne mazon., bicpeyr zecyndey.
nu he eop elce deez. onet Topeapid.
Ne mazon ze zeyion. pec he yymle yrpypes. epcen ezhpelcum. eoppan cudpe. diopum 4 fuzlum. dead eac ypa same. eeypcep mon-cynne.
zeond piyne middan zeapd,
ezeylic hunca.
abic on pase.
nyle he eniz yp2ed. eeppe poplecan. zep he zehebde. pec he hpuile ep. sepcep. ppypede.
I; } eapmhe ping.
pec hi zebiban ne maxon,
bupz-piccende. unzeyeelize men. hine ep pillad. fOpan coyciocan,
METRE XXVIII. OF TOLERANCE.
Why ever your mind will ye trouble with hate, As the icy-cold sea when it rears ; Its billows waked-up by the wind ? Why make such an outery against your weird fate, That she cannot keep you from fears, Nor save you from sor- rows assign’d P
Why cannot ye now the due bitterness bide Of death, as the Lord hath decreed, That hurries to-you-ward each day P Now can ye not see him still tracking beside Each thing that is born of earth’s breed, The birds and the beasts, as ye may ?
Death also for man in like
manner tracks out Dread hunter! this middle- earth through, [more; And bites as he runs ever- He will not forsake, when he searches about, [ too, His prey, till he catches it And finds what he sought
for before.
b Boet. lib. iv. metrum 4,—Quid tantos juvat excitare motus, &e.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 341
ypa ypa fuzla cyn. ode pilou diop.
pa pmnasd becpuh. zzhpyle polde.
opep acpellan.
Ac pet ip unpihe. eezhpelcum men,
pec he openne. mpic-poncum.
Floze on peepse,
ypa ypa ¢uzl odSe diop. Ac pet pepe pihcoye. pec ce pinca zehpyle. oppum zulbe.
edlean on pihc.
peone be zepeophcum. peonuld-buendum. pmza zehpilcey.
pec ip p he lupize. zodpa zehpilcne.
ypa he zeopnoyc mee ze.
miloyize yelum. rpa pe [ep] yppeecon.
De yceal pone monnan.
mode lupian.
and hiy unpeapay. ealle hazian.
and ofynipan.
ypa he ypipoyc meeze.
METRUM XXVIIle¢
Ppa ip on eoppan nu. unlepopa.
pe ne punopize. polcna fepeldey.
A sad thing it is, if we cannot await His bidding, poor burghers of earth, But wilfully strive with him still ; Like birds or wild beasts, when they haste in their hate To rage with each other in wrath, And wrestle to quell and to kill.
But he that would hate in the deep of bis heart Another, unrighteous is he, And worse than a bird or a beast; But best is the man who would freely impart To a brother, whoever he be, Full worth for his work at the least :
That is, he should love all the good at his best,
And tenderly think of the
bad, [fore ;
As we have spoken be-
The man he should love with his soul—for the rest
His sins he should hate, and
be glad [more.
To see them cut off ever-
METRE XXVIII. OF HEAVENLY WONDERS.
Who now is so unlearned among people of the world,
© Boet. lib. iy. metrum 5,—Si quis arcturi sidera nescit, &e
342 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
podpey ypizco.
pyne cunzlo.
hu hy zlce deze. ucan ymbhpepred.
' eallne middan zeand. * Ppa 1p mon-cynney. pet ne pundpie ymb. pay phcezan cunzl. hu hy yume habba®. ypide micle.
yeyptpan ymbehpeapre.
yume yepipad lenz. ucan ymb eall pip. an papa cunzla. populd-men hazad. peney pila.
pa habbad yeypcpan. repise and feepeld.? ymbhpepre leeyyan. ponne oppu cungl. foppeem hi pepe eaxe. ucan ymbhpepred. pone nop-ende. nean ymbcepped. on peepe ilcan.
eaxe hpepred.
eall puma pobdop. pecene yepiped. yud-heald ypiped, }pipe unciopig.
Ppa ip on populte.* pec ne parize. buvon pa ane.
pe hic sep piyyon. pec meeniz® cunzul. mapan ymbhpyprc. harad on heoponum yume hpile erz. leyye zelipas.
pa pe lacad ymb eaxe ente. 2 Cott. peopulde.
1 Cott. yeepelz.
As not to wonder at the clouds — upon the skies unfurl’d, The swiftly rolling heavens and the racing of the stars, : How day by day they run — around this mid-earth in — their cars P
Who then of men doth wonder not these glittering stars to see,
How some of them round wafted in shorter circles be,
And some are wanderers away and far beyond them all,
And one there is which worldly men the Wain with shafts do call.
These travel shorter than the rest, with less of sweep and swerve
They turn about the axle, and near the north end curve,
On that same axle quickly round turns all the roomy
sky, And swiftly bending to the . south untiring doth it fly.
Then who is there in all the world that is not well amazed,
Save those alone who knew before the stars on which they gazed,
3 Cott. bec ce menis,
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 3843
odSe micle mape. serepad pa hipe mid one. ymbe peaple ppeezed. papa ip zehacen. Sacupnuy yum.
ye heyd ymb ppiciz. pintep-zepimey. peopuld ymbcypped." Boozer eac.
beophce pemes.
opep sreoppa cymes. epne ypa same.
on pone ilcan ycede. epc ymb ppicziz. zeap-zepimer.
pzp hi zo pa per.
Ppa iy peopuld-monna. pec ne parize.
hu yume yceoppan.
06 pa yee fapad.
undep mepe-rcpeamay. pey pe monnum pincé. Spa eac sume penad. pec ylo yunne do,
ac ye pena niy.
puhte pe yoppa.
Ne bi6 hio on efen. ne on wzp-mopzen. mepe-rcpeame pa neap. pe on midne dz.
and peah monnum pynco.
pzec hio on mene zanze. undep ye ypire.
ponne hio on yevl zlides. Ppa 1p on peopulde.
pet ne punopize.
pulley monan.
ponne he feepinza.
pypd undep polenum. plicey bepearad.
That many somewhiles on the heavens make a longer bend,
And somewhiles less, and sport about the axle of the end:
Or else much more they wander quickly round the midway spheres,
Whereof is one, hight Saturn, who revolves in thirty years,
Bootes also, shining bright, another star that takes
His place again in thirty years, of circle that he makes.
Who is there then of worldly men to whom it doth not seem
A thing most strange that many stars go under the sea- stream,
As likewise some may falsely ween that also doth the sun,
But neither is this likeness true, nor yet that other one.
The sun is not at even-tide, nor morning’s early light Nearer to the sea-stream than
in the mid-day bright,
And yet it seems to men she goes her wandering sphere to lave,
When to her setting down she glides beneath the watery wave,
1 Cott. ymbeipped. Boezey.
344 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. ; '
bepeaht mid piorcpum. Ppa pezna ne maze. eac parian,
elcey pcioppan.
hpy hi ne yeimen. ycipum pedenum. beropan pepe yunnan. ypa hi rymle 508. middel mhcum.
yiS pone monan fopan. hadpum heorone. Ppeec nu heelepa rela. ypelcey and ypelcey. yplde pundpad.
and ne pundpiad.
pec ce puhca zehpile. men and netenu. micelne habbad.
and unnectne.
andan betpeoh him. ypide ymzalne.
iy } yellic pmex.
peer hi ne pundpiad.
hu hie on polenum oft.
peaple punpas. ppaz-meelum eye. anpopleced.
ano eac ypa same, yo pid lanbde. ealnez pinned.
pind prd peexe.
Ppa pundpad peer. odde opper ere. hpy" pec ip meeze. peoppan oF psectene, plice cophe? yemed, yunna ypezle hac. yona zecepped.
if mepe enh,
on hiy azen zecynd.
1 Cott. hyn.
¢
Who is there in the world will wonder not to gaze ;
Upon the full-moon on his way, - bereft of all his rays,
When suddenly beneath the : clouds he is beclad with black P
And who of men can marvel not at every planet’s track ?
Why shine they not before the sun in weather clear and bright,
As ever on the stilly sky before the moon at night ?
And how is it that many men much wondering at such, Yet wonder not that men and beasts each other hate so
much P
Right strange it is they marvel not how in the welkin oft Tt thunders terribly, and then eftsoonsis calm aloft,
So also stoutly dashes the wave against the shore,
And fierce against the wave the wind uprises with a roar!
Who thinks of this? or yet again, how ice of water grows,
And how in beauty on the sky the bright sun hotly glows,
Then soon to water, its own kin, the pure ice runs away; |
But men think that no wonder, when they see it every day.
2 Cott. coph.
i)
. THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 345
— peopped co peecpe.
Ne pincd } pundon micel.
monna enezum.
pec he meze zereon. _ dozopa zehpilce.
ac pec dyyie role.
peey hic yelbnop zeyihd.
Fpipop. pundpias.}
peah hic piypa zehpeem.
pundon pince.
on hip mod-refan. micle lyre. Unbdep-ycapolpeeyce. ealnez penad.
pec  eald zerceare. wppe ne pepe.
peec hi yeldon zey108. ac ypipop giec. peonuld-men penad. peec hic pear come. nipan zeyeloe.
xp hiopa nenzum. hpyle zp ne opeopde. iy ‘} eapmlic pine. Ac zig hiona eeniz. zppe peopped.
co pon fFippet-Zeopn. peec he rela onzm6. leopmian liyza.
and him liger peapd. of mode abpic.
pet micle dyyiz.
peec hic opeppprzen mid.
punobde lanze. ponne ic pet Zeape. p hi ne pundpias. meenigey pinzey.
pe monnum nu. peppo Jj punodep. pel hpep pynces.
This senseless folk is far more | struck at things it seldom sees,
Though every wise man in his mind will wonder less at these ;
Unstalworth minds will always think that what they seldom see
Never of old was made before, and hardly now can be.
But further yet, the worldly men by chance will think it came,
A new thing, if to none of them had ever happ’d the same;
Silly enough !—yet if of them a man begins to thirst
For learning many lists and lores that he had scorn’d at first,
And if for him the Word of life uncovers from his wit The cloak of that much foolish-
ness which overshadow’d it, Then well of old I wot he would not wonder at things Se) Which now to men most wor- thily and wonderfully show.
1 Cott. pundpas.
ST, ALBERT’S COLLEGE LIBRARY 346 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
METRUM XXIX.4
Ing pu nu pilnize. peopuld-Dpihcney. heane anpald.
hlucpe mobe. onzican ziopne.! xemal-meezene. heoponey cunzlu.
hu hi him healdad becpuh. pibbe ysinzale.
oyoon ypa lanze.
ypa hi zepenede puldpey ealdon.
xc Fpum-ycearte. pec ylo Fypene moc. yun ne zeyecan.
ynap cealdey pez. monna Zemexpo. Pperc pa mepan cungl. aupep oppey pene.
A ne zehpined.
zp pam ‘p opep. opzepiced.
Ne hupu ye yceoppa. zeycizan pile. peyc-deel polena, pone pire men,
Upya nemnad.
Ealle pcioppan.
yizad epcep yunnan, yamobd mid podepe. unbdep eoppan zpund, he ana ytenc.
niy ‘P nan pundop.
he ip pundpum fey.” upende neah.,
eaxe pay podepey. Donne iy an seeoppa. ofep oppe beophe.
METRE XXIX.
OF THE STARS AND SEASONS.
If now thou art willing the ;
Lord of the world His highness and greatness ' clear-sighted to see,
Behold the huge host of the
heavens unfurl’d How calmly at peace with each other they be!
At the first forming the glori- fied Prince Ordered it so that the sux should not turn Nigh to the bounds of the moon ever since, Nor the cold path of the snow-cirele burn.
Nay, the high stars never cross on the skies Ere that another has hurried
away ; Nor to the westward will ever — uprise Ursa the star,—so witting men say.
All of the stars set after the sun Under the ground of the earth with the sky:
4 Boet. lib. iv. metrum 6.—Si vis celsi jura tonantis, &e.
1 Cott. s1onne.
2 Cott. eayz.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
cymes eaycan up.
zep. ponne yunne,
pone monna beapn. mopzen-ycioppa hazas. undep heoronum.
= poppeem he helepum dz.
bodad eycep bupzum. bpenzed ercep. ypezelcophc yunne. yamad eallum Sez.
iy ye Foppynel.
pezep and yciene. cymes eaycan up. zeppop? yunnan.
ano efc epcep sunnan. on yecl zlided.
peyt undep peopulde. pep-p1oda hip.
noman onpendas. ponne mhz cymes. hazad hime ealle. zefen-ycioppa.
ye bid peepe yunnan ypircpa. yidpan hi on yecl zepicad. oyipned.
pec ip pele cunzol.
05 } he be eayczan peopped. elbum opeped. zp. Houne ati
* * * * * * habbad.
zpele cunzol.
emne zedeled,
bez J mhce.
Dpihcney meahcum. yunne J mona.
ypide zeppaepe.
ypa him ez ppymbe. peedep zeciohhode.
Ne peappe pu no penan.
1 Cott. bonne.
347
That is no wonder; for only this one, The axle, stands fastly and firmly on high.
Again, there’s a star more bright than them all, He comes from the east, before the sun’s birth, The star of the morning,—thus him ever call, Under the heavens, the chil- dren of earth.
For that he bodes day’s-dawn to men’s homes After him bringing the sun in his train, Fair from the east this fore- runner comes, And glides to the west all shining again.
People rename him at night in the west, Star of the evening then is he hight, And when the setting sun goes to her rest He races her down more swift than the light.
Still he outruns her, until he appears Again in the east, forerun- ning the sun, A glorious star, that equally clears The day and the night, ere his racing be run.
2 Cott. ep yop.
348 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
pet pa plicezan cunzl. pey peopoomey. appoten peopse.
yi omer Ozeze.
Sed piSpan ymbe. moncynney fppuma. ypa him zemez pinced. Foppon hi he healre. heoroner purer.
on ane ne lec. zlmihziz Lob.
py ley hi oppa fopdyden.
zpela zepcearra,
ac ye eca Lob. ealle’ zemeczas. ylda zeycearta. yorpca zedpepad. hpilum pec opize. opipc” pone peevan. hpylum hi zemenzed. mecodey cperfce. cile prs heeco. hpdlum cepped ere. on up pooop.
x1 beophca lez. leoht lyrce.
lized him behmbdan. hepiz hpuyan deel. peah hic hpilan ep. eopde yio cealde. on mnan hipe. heold 3 hydde. halizer meahctum,
Be peer cynmzer zebobde.
cymes xeapia zehpaem. eopde bpmzes. ezhpyle cudop. and ye hava sumop. heelepa beapnum. zeapa xehpilce. zieped J opizes.
1 Cott. ealla.
Through the Lord’s power, the
sun and the moon Rule as at first by the Fae ther’s decree ;
And think not "thea tional
3
bright shiners will soon Weary of serfdom till domes- day shall be:
Then shall the Maker of. man at his will Do with them all that is right by-and-by ; Meanwhile the Good and Al- mighty One still Setteth not both on one half of the sky,
Lest they should other brave
beings unmake; But Ever Good, He still suffers it not; Somewhiles the dry with the water will slake, Somewhiles will mingle the cold with the hot.
Yea, by His skill, otherwhiles will upsoar Into the sky fire airily- form’ d, Leaving behind it the cold heavy ore
Which by the Holy One’s |
might it had warm’d,
2 Cott. Syd.
¢
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS. 349
Zeond yione zpuno. yeeo and blebda. hzepreyc co honda. hep buendum. pipa peced.
pen efcep pem. ypylce hazal 4 pnap. hpuyan lecca®d,
on pimcpey cd. pedep unhiope.
fop pem eopse onrehd.
eallum yeedum, zeded ‘f hi zpopad. zeana zehpilce.
on lenccen tid. .
lear up yppyccasd.
ac ye milda mecod, monna beapnum. on eoppan fez.
eall ce zpoped. peycmay on peopolde, pel popdbpenzed hic. ponne he pile. heorona paldend. and eopad ere. eopd-buendum. nim ponne he pile. nepzende Lod.
and ?) hehyte z005. on heah yecle.
yiced yelp cyning. ano pioy yide Zepceare. penad anb piopad. he pone anpalded. pem zepelcleppum. peopuld zercearra, Niy } nan pundop. he ip pepoda Lod. eyninz and Dpihcen, epucepa zehpelcer. zepelm J ¢puma. eallpa zeypcearca.
By the King’s bidding it cometh each year,
Earth in the summer-time bringeth forth fruit, Ripens and dries for the soil-
dwellers here The seed, and the sheaf, and the blade, and the root.
Afterward rain cometh, hailing and snow, Winter - tide weather that wetteth the world, Hence the earth quickens the seeds that they grow And in the lenten- tide leaves are uncurl’d.
So the Mild Maker for children of men Feeds in the earth each fruit to increase, Wielder of heaven! He brings it forth then; Nourishing God !—or makes it to cease.
He, Highest Good, sits on His high seat, Self-King of all, and reins evermore This His wide handiwork, made, as is meet, His thane and His theow'to serve and adore.
That is no wonder, for He is the King, Lord God of Hosts, each living soul’s awe,
1 Theow, a slave,
350 THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
pyphca 7 yceppenb. peopulde piyye. piyoom and ee. populd-buendpa. Ealle! zercearta.
on hzpendo.
hio nane ne sendad. pec ero cumad.
Ing he fpa zerceedpiz.
ne ycapolade. ealle zercearca.” ezhpyle hiona. phase coytencce. peoppan yceolden. zzhpile hiona. ealle co nauhcze. peoppan yceoldon. ppade coylopena. peah pa ane lure. ealle zeycearca. heoroney J eoppan. hebben zemeene. peec hi piopien.
ypileum piod-ppuman.
and peexmiad p. hiopa faedep palded. niy ‘) nan pundop. yoppeem puhca nan. zeppe ne meahce. elley punian.
zip hi eall mzezene. hiopa opd-ppuman. ne piopoden. peodne mepum.
METRUM XXX.
Omepuy pey. eayt mid Cpecum. on pem leodycipe.
The source and the spring of —
each being and thing, :
All the world’s maker, and ~ wisdom, and law.
Everything made,—on His er- rands they go, None that He sendeth may ever turn back; Had He not stablished and settled it so, All had been ruin and fallen to rack;
Even to nought would have come at the last: All that is made would have melted away : But both in heaven and earth, true and fast, All have one love such a Lord to obey,
And are full fain that their Father should reign; That is no wonder, for else should each thing Never have life, if they did not remain True to their Maker, man’s glorious King.
METRE XXX. OF THE TRUE SUN.
Homer among the Eastern Greeks, was erst
e Boet. lib. v. metrum 2.—Puro clarum lumine Phoebum
Melliflui canit oris Homerus, &e. 1 Cott. ealla.
2 Cott. 5epcerza.
THE MNTRES OF BOETHIUS. Bol
leopa cpeerozayc. Fipziliey.
Fpeond J laneop. peem mean yceope. maziycpa bezyc. Ppeec ye Omepuy. oft and zelome. peepe yunnan plice. ypide hepede. zepelo cpercay. oft and zelome. leopum J ypellum, leodum peahcre.
ne mzz hio peah zeycman. peah hio yie yep 3 beophe.
ahpeepzen neah.
ealle’ zercearta.
ne Fuppum pa sercearca, pe hio zeyciman mez. endemey ne mez.
ealle! zeondhihzan. innan and uzan.
Ac ye zlmihzeza. paldend 3 pyphra. peopulde zeycearca.
hiy azen peone.
eall zeondplized. endemey puphyyhs. ealle’ zeycearta.
Dec iy pio yose.
yunne mid pibce be pem. pe maxon yinzan.
pyle bucan leare.
METRUM XXxI! Ppzc pu meahc onzican. zip hip pe zeman lyyc. pec ce miplice. maneza puhta. zeond eoppan fapad.
The best of bards in all that country side ; And he was Virgil’s friend and teacher first, To that great minstrel master well allied. And Homer often greatly praised the sun,
Her high-born worth, her skilfulness most true; Often by song and story many
a one [praises due. He to the people sang her Yet can she not shine out, though clear and bright, Everywhere near to every- thing all-ways, Nor further, can she shed an equal light Inside and out on all that meet her rays. But the Almighty Lord of worldly things, Wielder and Worker, brightly shines above His own good workmanship, and round all flings An equal blaze of skilfulness and love! That is the true Sun, whom we rightly may Sing without leasing as the Lord of Day.
METRE XXXI. OF MAN’S UPRIGHTNESS.
Yet more, thou mayst know, Tf it lists thee to mind, That many things go
f Boet. lib. y. metrum 5.—Quam variis terras animalia permeant figuris, &e. 1 Cott. ealla.
852
unzelice.
habbad blioh 4 aoe unxelice.
and mexz-plicay. manezpa cynna,
cud and uncud. cpeopad J ynicas,
eall lichoma.
eoppan zetenze. nabbad hi et pippum fulcum. ne mazon hi mid fpocum eoppan bpucan., [zanzan. ypa him eaden peer. yume focum tpam, foldan pedpad.
yume flep-fece,
yume fleozende.
pinded undep polenum. Bid peah puhva zehpile. onhnizen co hpuyan. hnipad of Sune.
on peopuld pliced. pilnad co eoppan. yume ned-peapre. yume neod-fpeece. man ana z25,
mecodey Zepcearra, mud hip andplican,
up on zepihce.
Mid py ip Zecacnod. pec hip cpeopa reeal. and hiy mob-zepone. ma up ponne nipep. habban co heoponum. py ley he hip hize pende, nipep ypa peep nycen. Niy? ‘f zebdarenlic.
bec ye mod-yera, monna enizey. nipep-heald pere.
and pec neb uppeapd.
1 Cott. cynnu.
THE METRES OF BOETHIUS.
Over earth in their kind Unlike to the view 2 In shape as in hue. j
Known or unknown Some forms of them all On earth lying prone Must creep and must crawl ; By feathers help’d not Nor walking with feet, As it is their lot Earth they must eat. Two-footed these, Four-footed those, Each one with ease Its going well-knows, Some flying high Under the sky.
Yet to this earth Is everything bound, Bowed from its birth Down to the ground; Looking on clay, And leaning to dust, Some as they may, And some as they must. Man alone goes Of all things upright,— Whereby he shows That his mind and his might Ever should rise Up to the skies.
Unless like the beast His mind is intent Downwards to feast,— ‘It cannot be meant That any man So far should sink Upwards to scan Yet—downwards to think! 2 Cott. Ip.
NOTES.
Note 1, p. viiii—“ Alpped Kuning pey pealhycod Siyye bec.” “ King Alfred was translator of this book.”—Although this preface is written in the third person, yet there is no doubt that Alfred himself was the writer, for he explains his method of translating, alludes to “the various and manifold occupations which often busied him both in mind and body,” beseeches the reader to ‘‘ pray for him, and not to blame him if he should more rightly understand it than he could ;” and finally, offers the apology that “every man must, according to the measure of his understanding, and according to his leisure, speak that which he speaks, and do that which he does.” The style of this preface is very similar to the one which Alfred prefixed to his version of Pope Gregory’s Pastoral, and also to that which he prefixed to the Anglo-Saxon version of Pope Gregory’s Dialogues, which was written, under his direction, by Werefrith, Bishop of Worcester.
Note 2, p. 2, 1. 2.—“*Reodsocta and Eallepica.”—The invasions of Radagaisus and Alaric took place early in the fifth century, and, after many years of desolating wars, Theodoric, an Ostrogoth, said to be the fourteenth in lineal descent of the royal line of Amala, acquired possession of Rome. Theodoric was a Christian, but had been educated in the tenets of Arius. For many years he gave the fullest toleration to the profession of the Catholic Faith, and went so far as to behead one of his officers for becoming an Arian, saying, “‘ If thou couldst not continue true to thy God, how canst thou prove faithful to me who am but a man?” At length, however, apprehending danger to his throne, and suspecting the Catholics to be in league with his enemies, he withheld the toleration he had granted, and became a persecutor of the orthodox faith. The oppressions which he beheld, roused the patriotism of Boethius, a noble Roman, distin- guished for his many and varied accomplishments. He entered into a cor- respondence with the Emperor Justin, at Constantinople, and this being discovered, Theodoric caused him to be imprisoned in Ticinum, and whil¢ there, he composed this treatise.
Note 3, p. 2, 1. 8.—Literally, “that they might be worthy of their ancient rights;” ‘heopa ealdpihca pypbe beon.’’—It may here be ob- served that the compound words which occur so frequently in Anglo-Saxon are, for the most part, compounded from substantives and adjectives. The adjective is frequently found in composition with its substantive, and remains uninflected through all its cases. Thus the adjective ‘‘eald,’”’ in composition with the substantive “yuh,” makes “ ealdpihza,” and “ealopihcum” in the genitive and dative and ablative plural; and in
2A
354 NOTES.
composition with the substantive “hlaropd,” makes “ealdhlapopd,’ and ‘“‘ealdhlayopd5um” in the dative and ablative plural. Two substantives are often compounded, the first having an adjective power. Thus “ populd™ compounded with the substantives “peap” and “ yelS,” respectively makes “ populd beapum” and “ populd pelbum” in the dative and ablative plural. This kind of composition is not limited to two words. The com=- pound “ eald-hlaropd,” considered as one word, may again be com=
pounded, as in the present chapter, with the substantive “cyn.” ‘Ther latter word “ cyn” only is then subject to inflection, “eald” and “ hlaropd”
remaining invariable. Accordingly we find “eald- hlaropd- cynney” in the genitive singular; and a similar inflection will be found in many other words.
Note 4, p. 2, 1. 11.—John, the first Pope who bore that name, was sent on an embassy by Theodoric to the Emperor Justin, at Constantinople, and on his return, Theodoric confined him in a dungeon at Ravenna; where he died of want. ;
Note 5, p. 2, 1. 20.—‘* Sende pba Sigellice ependseppicu.” “ He there-— fore privately sent letters.’-—The verb Sende is here used without a nominative case being expressed, which, however, is to be understood, and- sought for in the preceding sentence.
Note 6, p. 4, 1. 22.—“ 8e piydom.”—In several parts of this work the reader will meet with inconsistencies resulting from the grammatical acci- dent of gender. In Anglo-Saxon many substantives are neuter, but the far greater number, though denoting objects undistinguished by sex, are
considered, grammatically, as either masculine or feminine. These distinc-_
tions are for the most part regulated by terminations, but are occasionally arbitrary. As a rule, words ending in @ are masculine, and those ending in ¢ are feminine; thus Mona, the moon, is masculine; and Sunne, the sun, is feminine; while pip, wife, or woman, is neuter. In the Latin
version of Boethius, Philosophy is described as a female, the word Philo-— sophia being grammatically of the feminine gender, but Alfred generally —
translates it by piydom, which is invariably masculine. Hence we find him applying masculine articles, pronouns and adjectives, to piyyd5om, who is perhaps in the same page described as the porctep modoyp of Boethius.
Jn a few places Philosophia is rendered by Lepceadpiyney, Reason, and is_
then feminine. In one instance, ¢c. iii, § 38, the words piydom and Leyceadpiyney are used conjointly to designate Philosophy, with a verb in the plural number ; and yet the author immediately reverts to the singular, and says, ba ongan he ert pppecan 7 cpe’S.—Although the dialogue should properly be carried on between Philosophy and Boethius, yet Alfred frequently makes ‘the mind”—i.e. the mind of Boethius—one of the interlocutors, instead of Boethius himself; and Mod, the mind, is a substantive of the neuter gender.
Note 7, p. 7, 1. 28.—This opinion of Plato was powerfully enforced by him in his dialogue De Republica; and it is a truth which will find an echo in every well-ordered mind.
Note 8, p. 10, 1. 15.—The Cottonian MS., which has been wonderfalie restored by the gentlemen mentioned in the preface, commences with the word “unclenan ;’’ the preceding portion being too much injured to be deciphered, The variations in the readings of the Cottonian MS., which
|
od
NOTES. 355
- oceur before this word, were observed by Junius before the MS. was in-
jured by fire, and are given on his authority ; all the subsequent ones are the result of the editor’s own collation.
Note 9, p. 23, 1. 10.—This was Creesus, King of Lydia, who, having been taken captive by Cyrus, King of Persia, and placed on a pile to be burned, is said to have been delivered from his danger by a shower of rain, which Apollo sent at his earnest entreaty.—Herod. i. 87.
Note 10, p. 26, 1. 13.—This chapter ends abrupuy and is evidently in- complete.
Note 11, p. 36, 1, 22.—“ Fopbam Se Lpiyz eanbad on pbepe dene eadmodnerye.” “ For Christ dwells in the vale of humility.”— Whatever allusions to the Christian religion occur in this work, are introduced by Alfred.
Note 12, p. 47, 1. 32.—Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.—Juy. Sat. x. 22.
Note 13, p. 52, 1. 19.—King Alfred evidently mistook the epithet ““Tiberum” for a proper name. ‘The individual alluded to was probably
- Anaxarchus, a philosopher of Abdera. Nicocreon, King of Salamis, in
Cyprus, having been offended by the philosopher’s freedom, caused him to be cruelly tormented; and when at length the tyrant, finding he could not subdue the spirit of his victim, threatened to cut off his tongue, Anaxarchus bit it off, and spit it into the tyrant’s face.-—Cic. in Tuse. ii. 21.
Note 14, p. 53, 1. 30.—Busiris, King of Egypt, said to have been the son of Neptune, and altogether a mythical personage, sacrificed to Jupiter all strangers whom he could seize; and when Hercules visited Egypt, Busiris caused him to be bound and laid upon the altar. Hercules, however, soon disentangled himself, and sacrificed the tyrant and his son on the altar, where he had slain his victims. The whole statement, however, is contra- dicted by Herodotus.
Note 15, p. 53, 1. 39.—Regulus was a Roman consul during the first Punic war, and, after gaining several victories over the Carthaginians, was at length overcome by Xanthippus, and taken prisoner. He was sent to Rome by the Carthaginians to sue for peace, but so far was he from de- siring peace, that he exhorted his countrymen to persevere in the war, as it would be greatly for their advantage; and on his return to Carthage he was cruelly put to death. ;
Note 16, p. 58, 1. 29.—Lpeyc. Literally, craft.—Perhaps no word in the Anglo-Saxon language is used in a greater variety of senses. It denotes art, trade, profession, practice, employment, workmanship, skill, talent, ability, power, strength, faculty, virtue, excellence, endowment, and many other good qualities; and it is also used, though rarely, in a bad sense, for cunning, contrivance, artifice.
Note 17, p. 62, 1. 32. —JSeopa pppec ip codeled on cpa 3 hund reoyontis. Their language is divided into seyenty-two.—This calculation of the number of languages occurs again inc. xxxy.§4. It is also men- tioned by Atlfric, De Test. Vet.; and the passage is thus translated by Lisle : ‘Now the history telleth us concerning Noe’s posterity, that his sons begot seuenty and two sons, who began to build that wonderfull citie and” high tower, which in their foolish imagination should reach up to heaven. But God himselfe came thereto, and beheld their worke, and gave
242
356 NOTES.
them every one a sundry language, that they understood not each other what they said: so they quickly surceased the building; and then went. they to sundry forrein lands, with as many languages as leaders.”
Note 18, p. 64, 1. 8.—Cicero shows in his “ Somnium Scipionis” that the Romans occupied a comparatively small part of the earth, and that, there- fore, the glory of the Roman name was very limited in its extent.
Note 19, p. 64, 1. 15.—“ be se beep ymbe rpinca’.” “ Which ye labour about.”—“ beep,” “there,” is frequently redundant in Anglo-Saxon as in modern English. ; {
Note 20, p. 66, 1. 7.—“ cen buyend pimzpa.” “ Ten thousand winters.” —Northern nations reckon their years by winters, and the shorter divisions of time by nights. The latter mode of computation is still very common in this country, as, instead of seven days, we say “‘se’nnight;” and, in- stead of fourteen days, we say “a fortnight.”
Note 21, p. 68, 1. 34.—Hor. Carm. lib. i. carm. 4.
Note 22, p. 70, 1. 1.—‘‘ J)pex pint nu bey fopemepan and bey pian soldymiSey ban pelondey.” “What are now the bones of the celebrated and the wise goldsmith, Weland?”—This passage is grounded on the following remark of Boethius,
“Ubi nunc fidelis ossa Fabricii jacent ?”
In ce, xvi. § 2, Alfred mistook an epithet for a proper name, and here, in= stead of mentioning the name of Fabricius, the opponent of Pyrrhus, he seems to have been led by a singular association of ideas to substitute that of Weland, the Vulcan of northern mythology. Although there is a re- markable change of persons, the argument to prove the worthlessness of earthly reputation is not affected by it.
Note 23, p. 70, 1. 7.—“8e apeeda Rompapa hepecoga, ye per hatan Bpucuy, otpe naman Laypiuy.” “The patriotic consul of the Romans, who was called Brutus, by another name Cassius.” —This is a very singu- — lar mistake of Alfred’s. Brutus and Cassius are here confounded, and con- sidered as one person !
Note 24, p. 72, 1. 5.—“ypa bey pmdey yyc.”” “As the wind’s storm.” —For this reading we are indebted to Mr. Cardale; the reading in the Cottonian MS. being rpa bep pimdey pyy, and in the Bodleian ppee bep pindey byy ; both of which are evidently erroneous, and there cannot be a doubt that Mr. Cardale has happily restored the original reading.
Note 25, p. 72, 1. 6.—‘ 8cypings,” which is here rendered “experience,” means a stirring, or agitation, or any kind of tumult.
Note 26, p. 76, 1. 32.—‘8pibe ypete cto bealcecenne,” which is here translated “very pleasant to the stomach,” could not be rendered more literal in English, the expression being “ dulcis eructando.”
Note 27, p. 80, 1. 10.—p 1p bonne Lod. That is, then, God.—The Latin of Boethius is, Id autem est bonum, That God is the supreme good is not formally stated by Boethius until after a long train of reasoning, which is followed by his address to the Deity. It first occurs in the part of lib. iii. prosa 10, which corresponds with c. xxxiv. § 2, of the present work, But in this, and some other passages, the construction shows that Alfred meant to put God, instead of good. In Anglo-Saxon the word 505 denotes both God and good, so that there can be no other guide to its meaning, independently of the context, than the introduction of a capital
NOTES. 857
letter. It may be remarked, however, that in the Cottonian MS. of this work, the adjective 505 is generally spelt 5008.
Note 28, p. 82, line 2.—ofdelpe; more prone.—The Bodleian MS. gives oySelpe, and the Cottonian gives ofcSelpe, as the reading of this word; but these being unintelligible, Junius proposed to substitute oydelpe, in which he was followed by Mr. Cardale, and the Hditor’s opinion coincides with their view.—See Rawlinson’s Boethius, p. 167.
Note 29, p. 86, 1. 4.—obep is substituted by Mr. Cardale for heopa, and makes the passage clearer.
Note 30, p. 90, 1. 4.—meete is here used impersonally, and reflectively : literally, as if it dream you.
Note 31, p. 90, 1. 24.—Da andyrpopode Boecuy. Then answered Boethius.—Alfred occasionally forgets that he is writing in the character of Boethius, and names him in the third person.
Note 32, p. 92, 1. 34.—hmspize..... pyprce.. 2-6 cale.—These verbs are all in the singular number, and are used impersonally—a circumstance ‘which frequently occurs in Anglo-Saxon.
Note 33, p. 96, 1. 6.—ye Laculuy per hepecosa on Rome. Catulus was aconsul in Rome.—Catulus was a Roman consul, but it was Catullus, the poet, who was indignant that Nonius should sit in a chair of state. The two are here confounded.
Note 34, p. 102, 1. 28.—This refers to Damocles and Dionysius, the tyrant of Sicily.
Note 35, p. 104, 1. 19.—Seneca, who is called the “ foster-father” of Nero, had the misfortune to be appointed tutor to that cruel tyrant; and having incurred the displeasure of his former pupil, he was put to death by bleeding, which was accelerated by a bath.
Note 36, p. 104, 1. 24.—Papinian, the celebrated jurist, was a prefect under the Emperor Severus, and it is said that the emperor, on his death, commended his two sons, Antoninus Caracalla and Geta, to the care of Papinian. But soon afterhis father’s death, Caracalla dismissed Papinian from his office, murdered his brother Geta, and then gave orders for the execution of his former guardian, which was shortly afterwards carried into effect. Boethius could scarcely have selected two more fitting examples for illustrating his argument.
Note 37, p. 106, 1. 23.—Thyle. Thule—An island in the German Ocean, which, from its great distance from the continent of Europe, received from the ancients the epithet of ultima.” Its situation was never ascer- tained; and there are still different opinions about it. Some suppose that it was the island now called Iceland, or else part of Greenland; while others consider it to be the Shetland Isles.
Note 38, p. 106, 1. 31.—‘‘yum yceop;” “a certain poet.”—This was Euripides ; and the passage alluded to is Andromacha, I. 320, Ed. Matth.
Note 39, p. 110, 1. 16.—unebelne ; unnoble.—It was necessary to coin a word to express the meaning of the original. Ignoble would convey a very false idea of what is meant by unebel, both in this and many other passages.
Note 40, p. 112, 1. 15.—C2dipus is here alluded to, who, in ignorance, is said to have slain his father Laius, King of Thebes.
Note 41, p. 130, 1. 18.—opcuman is evidently a contraction of oyepcuman, to overcome, like o’ercome in English.
358 NOTES.
Note 42, p. 132, 1. 36.—bpuyz is here used for bepeyz. Note 43, p. 142, 1. 17.—beapy is here used for beapyc.
ib te
Note 44, p. 146, 1. 3.—y1o beophtney bepe sunnan yeiman pie ber ep
ney co mezanne, &c.—This, which is the reading in the Bodleian MS., is evidently a mistake, and unfortunately there is no other MS. to correct it,
inasmuch as those portions of Boethius which are metrical are entirely dif- —
ferent in the Bodleian and Cottonian MSS. The Bodleian contains the metres in a prosaic form, and the Cottonian has them in verse. E.Thom- son, Esq., has kindly suggested to the Editor that bey ep ner should be
peyzcepney, or rather beoyzepney, darkness; and this alteration is in —
some measure confirmed by the parallel passage in the metrical version, Viz. ?
ponne pile he recsan,
bec bene punnan sie,
beophtney pioyrzpo,
beopna sephpylcum,
co metanne.
There can, therefore, be no impropriety in thus altering the reading of the Bod. MS., and substituting for it a word which, while it gives clearness to the passage, is in harmony with the Cott. MS.
Note 45, p. 160, 1. 22.—The word “he” is redundant here, and makes ciohhige have the force of a reflective verb; a mode of expression very common in this work. It may here be remarked, that there are many redundancies which did not seem to require any remark in the notes.
Note 46, p. 162, 1. 4—Iec paz, &c.—The fable of the giants and the his- tory of the Tower of Babel are introduced by Alfred in consequence of a passing allusion in Boethius; and it may be noticed how carefully Alfred guards against making a direct assertion with regard to these fabulous histories, by employing the expression, ‘t pceolde beon.”
Note 47, p. 162, 1. 20.—Deipa. Dura.—Daniel, c. iii. 1.
Note 48, p. 166, 1. 8.—Papmenidey. Parmeriides.—Parmenides was a Greek philosopher, and flourished about the same time as Socrates; and, like other philosophers of that period, expressed his opinions in verse, The poem from which the quotation is made is entitled, “ On Nature.”
Note 49, p. 166, 1. 18.—pey pryan Placoney lapa yuma.—The passage here alluded to was the remark made by Plato in his Timeus, viz. that discourses, in those matters of which they are the interpreters, should always have a certain relationship to the subject.
Note 50, p. 170, 1. 8. —Tyciey.—The reading of this word is evidently different in the Cott. MS., but from the illegible state of this part of the MS. it is impossible to say what the reading is.
Note 51, p. 184, 1. 18.—ye Platoner cpide.—The saying of Plato, to which reference is made, is in his ‘‘ Gorgias and Alcibiades,” b. i,
Note 52, p. 194, 1. 4.—Ulysses is called by Boethius, Neritius dux, this name being derived from Neritos, a mountain in Ithaca. Alfred evidently mistook his author's meaning, and considered Retia, or Neritia, as a distinet country, over which Ulysses ruled.
Note 53, p. 194, 1. 11.—pendel yee ; the Wendel Sea.—This was either the whole of the Mediterranean Sea, or that part of it which is called the Adriatic.—See Alfred’s Orosius, b. i. c. i.
NOES. 359
Note 54, p, 194, 1. 32.Sume hi yeedon } hio yceolde yoprceoppan to leon. 4 ae yeo yceolde yppecan. bonne pynde hio. Some, they said, she—7.e. Ciree—should transform to lions, and when they should speak, then they roared.—Literally, some they said she should trarsform into a lion, and when she should speak then she roared. She, of course, refers to leon, which is a feminine noun in Anglo-Saxon.
Note 55, p. 220, 1. 27.—Spa ypa on peneyr eaxe hpeaprab pba hpeol. As on the axle-tree of a waggon the wheel turns.—The whole of this section is King Alfred’s original production. The simile of the wheel is, perhaps, pursued rather too far, and occasionally is not very intelligible ; bypb, which occurs a few words after, is for beped.
Note 56, p. 228, 1. 10.—See Psalm xvii. 8; Keep me as the apple of an Peye.
Note 57, p. 236, 1. 17.—In the Cott. MS., after Da cpe’S he, the follow-~ ing words are inserted, “eall bid so0d ‘p te nyz bid. ba cye8 1c ‘ap pos. ba cpe’S he.” S10, &e. Having chiefly followed the Bodleian text, it did not appear necessary to disturb that arrangement by incorporating these words in the text of this edition.
Note 58, p. 242, 1. 2.—See Aristotelis Physica, lib. ii. c. v.
Note 59, p. 244, 1. 6.—The passage alluded to appears to be in Iliad ili. Pee:
"Hediw&s 0, ds wavr’ epopas, Kal mavr’ emaxovers.
Note 60, p. 246, I. 26.—Cicero was named Marcus Tullius Cicero. See also c. xviii. § 2.
Note 61, p. 248, 1. 3.—In the Cott. MS. the following words are inserted after pppecon, before pic: “ba cpe’d 1c hpet hebbe ic fopsicen bey be pic ep yppecon. pa cpd he.” pic, &c. For the reason before given, in note 57, they are not incorporated in the present text.
Note 62, p. 252, 1. 20.—sepiy andziz is rendered ‘“ intelligence,” in con- formity with the Latin. By intelligentia, Boethius meant the highest degree of knowledge.
Note 63, p. 255, 1. 15.—By the expression ‘prone cattle,” which is the translation of ‘‘ hpopa nyzenu,” those animals are meant which have their faces turned towards the ground.
Note 64, p. 256, 1. 1, c. xliii—Fop by pe reeoldon, &c. ‘ Therefore we ought,” &c.—This, which is the last chapter of King Alfred’s translation of Boethius, and which is very interesting, is almost entirely the royal author’s own.
Note 65, p. 260, 1. 1 —Dpihten elmihuga Lod, &. “O Lord God, Almighty,” &c.—This prayer, which is added at the end of the Bodleian MS. in a later hand, was not appended to the Cottonian MS.
Note 66, p. 263, 1. 1.—Duy /dlpped uy.—This introduction, which was prefixed to the Cottonian MS., was scarcely the production of King Alfred himself, although it is an additional proof, if any were wanting, that he was the translator of Boethius, and the author of the metrical version. What is usually called the prose version of Boethius, contains the metres, but the translation is not in verse, although from the nature of the subject it nearly approaches poetry. King Alfred, it is supposed, wrote the prose when harassed with those “various and manifold worldly occupations which often busied him both in mind and in body,” of which he so feel-
; :
860 NOTES.
:
ingly complains; and when he had overcome the difficulties which beset him, he reduced the translation of the metres;to that form in which they haye been handed down to us, being at once a monument of royal industry, _ and a pure specimen of the poetry of the Anglo-Saxons.
Note 67, p. 264.—Metre I.— What is here termed Metre I. is rather an original introduction of King Alfred to the subsequent poem. The work of Boethius commences with a metre relative to his misfortunes, without _ alluding to the cause of them:
“Carmina qui quondam studio florente peregi, => Flebilis, heu, mzstos cogor inire modos.”
As the whole of the Anglo-Saxon metres are too paraphrastic to be strictly - called translations, it appears to be the simplest arrangement to number them from this. :
Note 68, p. 264, 1. 25.—Lind-pigende.—Literally, fighting under shields made of the linden, or lime-tree. Lind in its primary signification is the linden, or lime-tree, Tilia arbor ; and in its secondary, or metaphorical sense, it is a standard, or banner, as well as a shield. A similar meta- phorical use is made of the word wyc, an ash-tree. It often signifies a spear or javelin; 7.e. a weapon made of ash.
Note 69, p. 270, 1. 1.—/Mala bu yerppend.—This metre, which contains an address to the Deity, is a happy production of King Alfred’s muse. With regard to Mr. Turner’s observation, that King Alfred’s prose transla- tion of the metres of Boethius has more intellectual energy than his verse, it may be remarked, that this is not singular. We usually find much greater energy in blank verse than in poetry, which is fettered with rhyme. This may be exemplified by taking one of the poems ascribed to Ossian, and reducing it to the regular laws of verse. Mr. Turner, however, does justice to our author, by saying, “ There is an infusion of moral mind and a graceful ease of diction in the writings of Alfred, which we shall look for in vain to the same degree and effect among the other remains of Anglo-Saxon poetry.”—History of the Anglo-Saxons, b. v. ch. iv.
Note 70, p. 807, 1. 1.—€ala mim Dpihten.—This metre contains an- other address to the Deity, which, like the former one, is extremely beau- tiful. The Latin metre, beginning, O qui perpetué mundum ratione gubernas, is so amplified, that the Anglo-Saxon version of it may be con- sidered an original composition.
Note 71, p. 848, 1. 4.—eep Somey Sexe; before dome’s day.—Dome’s day signifies the day of judgment: being derived from deman, to judge, From hence also is derived our English verb, to deem, ¢.e. to form a judg- mont or opinion,
GLOSSARY.
a. ‘AY, ever Abelgan, to offend Abepan, to bear ‘Abebecian, to find hidden Abiddan, to pray Abizan, to bite, to devour Ablend, blinded Ablendan, to blind Abpecan, to break, to spoil, to take
by storm Abpedian, to remove, to open olan: to prepossess, to occupy Acelan, to cool Acennan, to bring forth, to beget; Acennedney, birth
Acyuns, an asking, a question Acpelan, to die Aorte ¢ to kill, to perish Aoimmian, to make dim, to darken Aol, a disease Adou, to take away, to banish Adpencan, to drown Aodpeosan Abpechan{ to endure, to tolerate Adpiohan Adpiyan, to drive away, to drive Adpeycan, to quench, to dispel ZB, law fa, a river, water
Kicep, a field
Hope, a vein
Mdyceayz, a new creation
4iiyen, the evening, even
4tiyen-yzeoppa, the evening star
4Byen-cide, the evening
Byep, ever
/Kys, again
LEycep, after
/Kycep-senza, a successor
/Eyceppa, second
fiycep-ypypian, toexamine, to in- quire after
fEypeaponey, absence
Zig, an egg
ishpebep, both
Zishpidep, on every side
/Wshponon, every way, everywhere
sbep, either, both, each
Lhz, property, possessions
ZElc, each
ZElepeyas, all skilful
fElens, long; To elenge, too long
/Elinse, weariness
Kilmer, alms
Elmihaga, the Almighty
fElcep, good, sound, perfect
ZElbeode, a foreigner
/Elpeodrs, foreign
mecca
Ema
fine, once
i leisure, rest
362
Aindemeys, equally Anlep Anlep /Enhie Anhe /Epl l opel an apple Ep i Ap § Ep, ere, ever, before
ZEpend, an errand
/Epend-seppic, a letter, a message LEpeye, first
ZEpleyz, Apleayt, iniquity, impiety 4Ep-mopsen, early morning /Epnepes, a course
/Kpnins, a running
/Ep-aide, timely
/Eyppins, a fountain
Mpel, noble
Hipelcundney, nobleness
/Epeling, a prince, a nobleman ZEpelo, nobility, native country Aizzedepe cant ial
Zine, Etna
AKizpican, to twit, to reproach /Epelm, a fountain
Ayepan, to make afraid
Ayeped, afraid
Ayeycnian, to fix
Ayanoian, to discover, to experience ‘Ayedan, to feed, to instruct Ayeoppian
i each, single
i only, excellent, singular
honour, wealth
Ayeppan (to take away, to put Ayippan away, to depart Ayypan
Ayeprcean, to become fresh Ayylan, to defile
Ayyppan, to remove to a distance A’san, to own, to possess Azelan, to hinder
A’sen Axsnu Axsnian, to appropriate A’syyan, to give back Ahebban, to raise
Ahc-auhe, aught, anything Abpap
yoran, anywhere, anywise Apep
t one’s own
GLOSSARY.
Ahpepsen, everywhere
Ahpepyed, turned
Ahpopryen, see }}peopyan
Aladian, to make excuse for Aledan, to lead away, to mislead _
=
Alezan, to let go, tolose, torelinquish —
Aldop, a chief
Alecsan, to lay aside, to retract, to —
confine Aleyan Alyyan Aleozan, to tell lies Aleyend, a Redeemer Allunga, altogether Alpealoa, the Omnipotent Alyran, to set free
t to permit
‘| Alyycan, to desire
‘Ambehr, a service
Amepian, to prove
Ametan, to mete out, to measure
Ameyppan, to hinder, to mislead, te distract, to corrupt
‘An, one
Anepbelan, to dishonour, to degrade
Anbid, waiting
Anbindan, to unbind
‘Ancop, an anchor
Anda, envy, enmity, revenge
Andeyn, measure, proportion
Andeczan, to confess
Andzec ‘
See ) sense or meaning, under- Andein standing, intelligence ‘Angi i =)
Andsecyull, discerning Andsicyullice, clearly Andlans, along Andhrene, food Anopyyn, respectable ‘Andyacizan, to deny Andppap Andpypd Andypapian Andpypoan Andpeand, present ped a cause, matter ‘Anodphz, form ‘Anodplica, the countenance Anyeald, onefold, simple, existing Anyealoney, oneness, unity
{ an answer
t to answer
singly
/A
GLOSSARY.
Anyoplecan, to lose, to forsake, to be relinquish
nsel nel ‘ a hook Angelic, like ‘“ingin, a beginning Anzinnan, to begin Anhealdan, to observe, to keep Anhebban, to lift up Anhic, alone, only Anlic, like j Anheney, form,
blance A'umodhce, unanimously Anney, oneness, unity Anycunian, to shun Anyendan, to send Anyeccan, to impose Anyin, a view ‘Anunya, at once Anpald Hoan * Bnpeald t power, dominion _Anyaldan, to rule Anpaldes, powerful Anpealoa, a governor Nupilice, obstinately ‘Anpunian, to dwell alone Apeoda ) Apoda § Apeodan / to search out, to discover, Apedian ; to conjecture Ayjpeeynan, to bear, to sustain ‘Apeccan, to declare, to explain Apecan, to delight Apyapan, to depart Aypian, to honour Apleayney, impiety Aplce, honourably Appyps, venerable, deserving of
honour Appypba, a venerable person AppypSney, honour, dignity Ayapan, to sow Aycian, to ask Aycipan, to separate, to be safe Aycopzian, to shorten, to become
shorter Aycuyan, to repel Ayeuns, an asking, an inquiry Ayeiyppan Aycyppan
likeness, resem-
a patriot
i to sharpen, to adorn
‘Aycpeccan
863
‘Ayingan, to sing
Aylupan, to slip away
Aymeagan, to inquire
Ayppinsan, to break, or spring out Aypyhgan, to wash
Aypypian, to seek, to explore Ayuyician, to exterminate Ayusan, to ascend
Arcpecan i to stretch out
Aycypian, to stir, to move, to agitate
Ayya, an ass
Aypeocole, clearly
Aypindan, to enervate, to perish
Ayynopian, to separate
Acelan, to reckon, to count
Acvemian, to make tame
Aceon, to attract, to draw, to allure
AS, an oath
Abeman, to extend
Abeoytpian 2 to become dark, to
Abyycpian § obscure
Abpeocan, to warn, to weary
Aby, therefore
Acihte, intent upon, attracted to
Azion-of, to draw out
Atcpendlod, rolled
Auhc, aught
Aubep, either
Ajpeccan, to awaken, to excite
Apesan, to move away, to turn aside, to agitate
Aipendan, to turn aside
Aipeoppan, to cast away, to degrade
‘Apep, anywhere
Ajpindan, to strip off
Apmnan, to contend
Apypsed, execrable
Atppizan, to write out
Aipypean, to do
Apypctpalian, to root out
Axe, ashes
B. Ba, both ae i a back Bevan, to bridle Balc, a heap Balo, wicked Bam, dative of Ba, to both
364
Ban, a bone
Bap, bare
Be, by
Beadu-pinc, a soldier Beas, a crown Bealcezan, to eruct Beam, a beam, a tree Beapn, a child Beapnleyz, childless Beazan, to beat
Bebeodan } to command, to bid, to
Beodan an
Biodon
Bebod, a commandment
Bec /
Boc\
Bec-Ledene, Latin
Becnan, to denote
Becpeopan, to creep
Becuman, to happen, to befal, to come to, to enter
Becyppan, to turn
Bedelan, to divide, to deprive, to be destitute
Beyeycan, to commit
Beyon, to catch hold of, to include
Beyopan, before
Besan, to follow
Bezican, to beget, to get, to obtain
Besons, a course
Behealdan, to behold, to observe, to keep
Beheapan, to cut off
Beheyu, necessary
Behelian, to cover, to conceal
Behindan, behind
Behorian, to behove, to render fit or necessary
Behpepyan, to turn, to prepare
Belcsan, to surround
Belimpan, to belong to, to appertain
Belucan, to lock up
Benxman, to deprive
Benuszan, to enjoy
Benypan, beneath
Beo, a bee
Beon, to be
Bea i a hill, a barrow
Beopn, a man
a book; also Bee, pl. books
GLOSSARY.
Beophr, bright
Beophtney, brightness
Beppenan, to wink
Bepan, to bear; p. p. sebopen Bepedan, to rid from
Bepeayian } to bereave, to deprive, — Bepyyan ' to strip
Beycylan, to look upon
Bereon, to look about, to look upon |
Beylipan, to impose, to put upon Beymiczan, to pollute, to defile Beyops, dear, beloved Beyzypmuian, to agitate Berpican, to deceive, to betray Beypimman, to swim about
Bez, better
Betan, to improve
Bezeyza, best
Bezins, a cable
Bezpuns, amendment
Bezyz, best
Becpeox Becpuh Becpux Bebeapryan, to need, to want Bepapian, to guard, to defend Bepeyan, to cover Bepees-uzan, surrounded Bepealpian, to wallow Bepican, to keep, to observe Keppusan, to cover, to conceal Bepyppan, to cast
Biddan, to pray, to compel Bipian, to shake, to tremble Bigan cea to bend
Bil, a bill, a sword
Bil-pude, blood-red sword Bileyiz, gentle, merciful Bilepicney, simplicity
Bindan, to bind
Binnan, within
Bio-bpead, bee-bread, honeycomb Biophto Biphtney Biphcu Bires Bays Biyen Biyn
betwixt, between, among
brightness
i an occupation
i an example
<
GLOSSARY.
Biysan, to employ, to be employed, to be busy
Biysuns, an occupation
Biymejan, to scoff at, to reproach, to revile
Biynian, to set an example
BiypelJ, a fable
Biypic, a deceit, a snare
Bicep, bitter
Bicepney, bitterness
Bipiyt, provisions, food
Blac, black, pale
Bled i fruit
Blaze, widely, everywhere Blapan, to blow, to blossom Blendian, to blind
Bleop, colour
Bhcan, to glitter
Blind, blind
Bhoh, hue, beauty
Bhy,. bliss, pleasure
Bhibe, blithe, merry, joyful BhSney, joy, enjoyment
Blod, blood
Bloyma, a blossom, a flower Boc-cpert, book-learning Boda, a messenger
Bodian, to announce, to proclaim Bot a bough, a branch Bopd, a bank
Bopen, born; p.p. of bepan Boz, repentance
3. ae { broad, extended
Bpebdan, to spread; p. p. bpexsoan Bpeoins, spreading
Bpeccan, to break
Bped, a board
Bpesxo, a ruler
Bpeoyt
. the breast
Bpidel "
Bd] t a bridle
Bpingan, to bring
Bpoc ( ae Bpoca | a brook, affliction, misery
Bpocian, to afflict Bpoga, a prodigy
365
Bpoyniende, perishable Bobet a brother Bpucan, to use, to enjoy Bpun, brown
Bpyd, a bride
Bpyp%, he governs Buend, an inhabitant Buran, above
Buzian, to inhabit Bups-yiccend Bups-papu * ‘ a citizen Buph-papu
Buph
Bans a city
Byps
Bupna, a stream
Buzan, without, external Butea p but unless, except Butzon } u P Bucu, both
Bucpuhz, between Bycsan, to buy
Bypnan, to burn
[. Lar, active Layepcun, an enclosure Leytep
foot vouy
Lahan, to be cold
Lamp-rzved, a camp, a field of battle
Lapicula, a chapter
Lap, care
Lapcepn, a prison
Leald, cold
Lebheccuns, scorn, laughter
Lempa, a soldier
Lene, brave
Leopyan, to cut
Leopl, a husbandman, a man
Leol :
ial t a ship
Leoyan, to choose; perf. sSecupe, chose
Lepa
Lepe-man
Lepan, to catch, to subdue
a merchant, a chapman
366
Lep a space of time, a turn; Lieppe et ypuman ceppe, in Lyp the first instance
Leppan, to return, to depart
Tilo shild
rib ¢ a chi
115, a germ, a shoot
Tipa-leay, without a shoot
Clam, a fetter
Las, cloth; pl. Llabay, clothes
Llen, pure, clean
Llenlic, pure, virtuous
Llenney, virtue, chastity
Finca t to call, to ery, to speak
Lhy, a cliff
Lhyian, to cleave, to adhere
Llud, a rock
Lluyzep, a cell
Lmhz, a youth, a child, an at- tendant
Lniht-had, childhood
Lnobdan, to dedicate
Tnol, a hill, a knoll
Lol, cool
Lonodel, a candle
Lonyul, a consul
Gopn, a grain
Lopbep, a multitude, a company
Loyp, a fetter
Loyznuns, a temptation
LoShee, truly, surely
Lpeerys, craft, art, virtue
Lpesyreza) the Creator, a workman,
Lpeyosa » zat Lpeycrsa ) an artificer
Lpeyeis, crafty, skilful, virtuous
Lpeaca, a Greek
Lpeopan
Lpypan
Lpiyzt, Christ
Lpiycendom, Christendom, Chris- tianity
Lulpian, to cringe
Luma, a comer, a guest, a stranger
Luman, to come
Lunnan, to know
Lunnian, to inquire, to search
Lu, known
Lupian, to know
t to creep
GLOSSARY.
Lpanian, to languish, to waste Lpeban Lpeban Lpiban Lpelmian, to kill Lpeman, to please Lpen, a queen Lpic }
Lpuc » Lpuca Lp1ddunz, a report, a speech
( to say, to speak
living, alive
406 hb awe 44-4 bers
Aisles
Lpide, a saying, a speech, a doctrine ©
Lyle, cold
Lyme, coming
Lyn, kin, kindred, kind
Lyn, proper
Lyna, a cleft, a chink
Lyne
Lynelic
Lyneycol, the king’s dwelling-place, the metropolis
Lynins, a king
Lynpen, a kind, a generation, a family course
Lypepa,’a kind of fish
Lyrpan, to fetter, to bind
Lyyz, excellence, splendour
Ly’ 2 knowledge, a region, a coun-
ribet try
Lypan, to show, to make known, to relate
' royal, kingly
D. Deed, a deed, an action Des ds Dax a day Desla k Digle secret, unknown, abstruse eet a number of days Deel, a part Dapu, an injury, a hurt Dead, dead Deathes deadly, mortal Dead, death
Deap, dare Delyan, to dig Delyepe, a digger Dem, an injury
ot. ALDERT S COLLEGE LIBRARY
GLOSSARY.
Dema, a judge
Deman, to judge
Dene, a valley
Deorel, the devil
Deo
gee i Sse5
Deoplicop, deeper, more deeply
Dioplhice, deeply
Don t a wild beast
Deop
Dype
Deophngs)2 a darling, a favourite,
Diophns i one beloved
Deop-cyn, wild beast kind
Deoppeop'ds
Deoppups
Deoppypd
DeoppupSney, a treasure
Dejnan, to injure
Dieselney, a recess, a secret place
Disellice, secretly
Dim, dim, dark
Diosol, secret, profound
Diop-bopen, nobly born
Diope, dearly
Dohzey:, a daughter
Dom, a judgment, a decree
Domepe, a judge
Domey-de5, doomsday
Don, to do, to make
Dopszen, durst
Dpeam-cpeyz, the art of music
Dpeamepe, a musician
Dpecan
Dpeccean
Dperan, to vex, to trouble
Dpenc 5
Dayne ' drink
Dpeoxan, to suffer
Dpeopis, dreary
Dpeorend, perishable
Dm
Dpig > dry
Dpys
Dpiran, to drive, to pursue, to exer- tise
ent to dry, to become dry
Dpibzen, the Lord
dear, precious
precious, dear
i to afflict, to torment
367
Dpihz-suma, a chieftain Dpincan, to drink
Dyohza%, conversation, society Dpycpeyz, magical art Dpycperas, skilful in sorcery Dpyssum, the dregs
Dugan, to be honest, to profit Dugus, honour, an ornament Dusu’s, virtuous, honourable Dun, a hill, a mountain Dunnian, to obscure, to make dun Duppe, darest thou? See Deap Dupu, a door
Dpehan k to wander, to deceive, to Dpohan mislead
Dpolema, a chaos
Dydepian, to delude
Dynz, a blow, a crash
Dyyi
Dyyis > foolish
Dyrs
Dyyian, to be foolish
Dyyis, folly, error
Dyyisa, a foolish person
€.
Ea, a river €ac, also Eaca, an addition €acan, to increase Eaden, granted, ordained Eadis, happy, blessed, perfect Eadislic, perfect E€adisney, happiness Eadmodhce, humbly, conformably Eayop ? €rop § €ayopa, a son Eaze, an eye €ala, alas! Ealand Ealond €ald 2 ola 4-04 €ald-pedep, a grandfather €aldop-man, an alderman, a noble-
man €ald-pihz, an old right €all, all
a wild boar
an island
368
GLOSSARY. Ealley, totally, altogether €bdpiz, a reproach = €allunga, altogether, entirely, at all | €yen-beopht, equally bright rae iad ies €pne, even 5 €alnes ys €rnhe, equal | €alo, ale €yz, again :
€ap, an ear
€apd, native soil
€apd-yeyz, settled, permanent
€apodian, to dwell, to inhabit
Eapepzod
Eapyod difficult
€apyoslic
E€apyodney, a difficulty
€apyobu, difficulties
€aps, weak, timid
€ap-seblond, the sea
€apm, an arm
€apm, wretched, poor
€apming? the miserable, the
€pming i wretched
€apmlic, miserable
€apmlice, wretchedly, meanly
€apmd
coms poverty, calamity
€pmsd
€apnjan, to labour, to earn
€apnuns, a means, a deserving, an earning
€ayt, the east
€aycep, Easter
€ayc-peapd, eastward
Cape '
Ae easily
€admedan, to adore, to be moved with adoration
€adSmed, humble
CaSmec ne
cat aes
€ap, oh!
€ax, an axis
€bban, to ebb, to recede
€bbe, the ebb, the receding of water
€ce, eternal
€cxg, an edge
Aer i eternity
€dlean, a reward
€onipian, to renew
€odyceayt, a new creation
€yc-cuman, to come again, to re- — turn
Exe, fear
€se-yull, terrible
€xeya, terror
€xey‘uc, horrible, terrific
€xshan, to ail, to grieve
€xzop-ropeam, the sea
€hzan, to pursue
Elo, an age, time
Eloay, men. See yld
€ldpan, parents, ancestors
€ldung, delay
Ellen, courage, fortitude
Ellende, a foreign land
Eller, else
€lpend, an elephant
Elpeodis, foreign
€mbe-sypdan, to encompass
€mlice, equally, evenly
€mn
€mne
€mnian, to make equal
€mza, leisure
€nde, an end
Endebypd
Endebypdner
E€ndebypdan, to set in order-
E€ndebypdlice, orderly
€nbdeleay, endless, infinite
Endeme
pret equally
€ndian, to end
Engel, an angel
€nsliye, English
Corel, evil
€opl, an earl, a chief
i the earth
E€op dhe, earthly
Copban-reeaz, the earth
Cop%S-pape, an inhabitant of the earth
Eopian, to show
€opp, your. See bu
even, smooth, equally
; order, regularity
GLOSSARY.
_ €plan, to plough, to till €yne, a man
_ €yz, a decree —
€zan, to eat
eSpet more easily
-€be, easy
€hel, a country, soil, a native place €pelice, easily
€pel-ycol, the metropolis
€Sney, favour, easiness
F. Facn, deceit, a stratagem Fedep, a father ot glad, happy Fesenian Feesnian Fesep, fair Fesepney, fairness, beauty Fepbu, colour Feyeld, a way, a course, a going Fepinsa, suddenly Feplice, suddenly Feyz, fast, firm, constant, sure Freeycan, to fast Feyze, firmly Feeycen, a fastness, a citadel Feyzlic, firm, constant Feyzhie, firmly Feycney, firmness Feyznian, to fasten Feyc-pexd, inflexible Feyt-pedlic, constant Feyct-pedney, a fixed state of mind, resolution Faszian, to vary Famis, foamy Fana, a temple Fandizan, to try, to explore, to find out Povan to go, to depart Faz, 2 vessel Bes i few Feapa Fealdan, to furl, to fold up
R to rejoice, to wish for
369
Feallan, to fall
Fealpian, to ripen
Feapn, fern
Feapp, a bull
Fedan, to feed
Ferep, a fever
Fela t
Feola ¢ ™@7Y
Feld, a field
Fels, a felly
Felczun, a dunghill
Fenn, a fen
Feoh, money Feoh-sizyepe, a covetous man Feond fekdo:
feens i a fiend, an enemy
Feop
Feoppan } far
Fiep
Feope }
Feoph } life
Fiop
Feopyian, to prolong, to go far
Feop'd, the fourth
Feopep, four
Feopep-healy, the four sides
ECE ey a soldier
Fypd-mon
Fephé
Fepd
Fep%-loca, the breast
Fez, fat, fed
Fecel, a belt
Febe, walking, the act of going on foot
the mind
F : Pipes t a feather, a wing Fian
re to hate
Fiepen-yul, wicked, full of crimes Fiep-yeze, four feet Firel-ycpeam, the Fifel stream Fiyta, the fifth
Findan, to find
Fingep, the finger
Fiouns, hatred
Fiopep-yec, four-footed
Fipay, men Fipen-luyz
Retest luxury, debauchery
2B
370
Fipyz, a space of time
Fippet-seopn, being inquisitive
Fire, a fish
Fiyeian, to fish
Fiyica, physica, physics
Fizz, a song
Fleyc, flesh
Flerche, fleshly
Fleosan
Fleon
Fhon
Fleopan, to flow
Fhonode, fleeting
Flan, to contend
F loo, a flood
Flop, a floor
Foddep, fodder
Fole, a people
Fole-cus, brated
Fole-sey718, a nobleman
Fole-gepin, battle-fray
Folciye, the vulgar, a man
Foldan-ycear, the earth
Fold-buend, an inhabitant of the earth
Folde, the ground, the earth
Folxas, service
Folsepe, a follower, an attendant
Folsian
Tyivean to follow
Yon, to take, to undertake, to begin
Fop, for
Fopbepan, to forbear, to allow, to pass over
Fopbepnan, to burn, to burn up
Fopbeodan
Fopbiodan
Fopbeprzan, to burst
Fopbpedan, to prostrate, to over- throw
Yopbugan, to avoid
Fopceapan, to bite off
Fopcud, wicked
FopeuSpa, inferior
Fopepepan, to censure
Fopceyppan, to avoid
Fopdon, to destroy
Fopodpiyan, to drive out
Fopdpigan, to dry up
he fly, to flee, to fly from
' to forbid, to restrain
GLOSSARY.
known to nations, cele- |
Fopdypilman, to confound
Fopealdian, to wax old
Fope-mepe, eminent, illustrious
Fope-meplic, eminent
Fope-mepney, renown
Fopeyceapian, to foreshow, to fore= see
se oo Ad tal
ifdeawt
yrata
Foperceapung, foreshowing, provi- —
dence, foreknowledge Fopereupeney, dishonour Fopeyppec, a defence Fopeyrppeca, an advocate Fopeyrppecen, forespoken Fope-zacn, a foretoken ‘ Fope-pencean ? to despair, to dis- Fope-pencan ; trust Fope-bingian, to plead for, to de- fend Fope-bone, forethought, providence Fopemohhuns, predestination Fope-pizan, to foreknow Fopsiran, to forgive, to give Fopsitan, to forget Fopsyloan, to recompense Fophealdan, not to keep, to lose, to withhold Fophelan, to conceal Fophepesian, to lay waste, to de- stroy Fophosian, to neglect Fophuan 2 to frighten, to be Fuckores! alraid Fophpypyan, to pervert, to change for tle worse Fopleedan, to conduct, to mislead Fopleczan / to permit, to relinquish, Foplezan { to lose, to leave Fopleoyan, to lose Fophgan, to commit fornication Foplopen, lost Fopluyczhece, gladly, willingly oe \ first Fopma Fopneah, almost Fopon, before Fopy-ynel, forerunner Fopyceoppan, to transform Fopyceotan, to anticipate Fopyeapian, to wither Fopyeon, to overlook, to despise
GLOSSARY.
Fonylapian, to be slow, to be un- willing
Fopylean, to slay
Fopyzandan, to withstand, to under- stand, to ayail
Fopyzelian, to steal
Fopypelgan, to swallow up
Fonypisian, to pass over in silence
Fop%, forth
Fopbam for that reason, be-
Tontober cause FopSbpingan, to bring forth, to pro-
~ duce, to accumplish
Fop%-yopleceney, free permission, license
Fop'd-sepican, to depart, to die
Foppa, further, worse
Fopppiccan, to oppress, to tread under ;
Foppy, therefore
Fopzpupian, to be presumptuous, to be over-confident
Fopcpupuns, presumption
Foppeopnian, to refuse
Foppeoppan? to be undone, to
Foppupban i perish
FoppeopSrulhic, excellent
Foppyp, destruction, damage
Foppypnan, to forewarn
Foycep-yedep, a foster-father
Foyzep-modop, a foster-mother
Foz, a foot
Fox, a fox
Fpam, from
_ Fpam-sepizan, to depart
. Fpea, a lord
Fpea-dpihzen, a supreme lord
Fpecen
Fpecendlic
}pecenlic
Fpecn
Fpecenney, danger, peril
Fperpian, to comfort
Fpesnan : to ask, to inquire, to
Fpisnian know by asking
Fpem®, foreign, outer
}Fpeme, profit, advantage
Fpemed, a stranger
Fpemman, to effect, to do, to per- petrate
~ dangerous
371
Fpeo )
Fpeoh
Fpis
Fyo0
Fpy ‘
Fpeodom
Fypiod0m freedom
Fpydom
Fpeolice, freely
Fpeolyian, to set free; p. p.seppylyod
Fpeond
Fyend
Fpynd
Fpeond-pebdenn
Fpeondycipe
Fy18, peace
Fpipian, to protect
Fp1$-ycop, an asylum, a refuge
Fporep, consolation, comfort
Fpom-peapd, away from, a depart- ing
Fpuma, the beginning, the origin
Fpum-yceayc, the origin, the first cause
Fpum-yzol, an original station, a proper residence
Fpym’, the beginning
Fugel, a fowl, a bird
Ful, foul, impure
Fulgpemed, perfect
Fulypemeodney, perfection
Fulypemian 2? to perform, to ac-
Fulppemman i complish
Fulgan, to follow up, to fulfil, to ac- complish ; perf. pul-eode
Full, full
Fullice, fully
Fulluhc, baptism
Full-pypcan, to complete
Fulneah, nearly, full nigh
Ful-pibz, full right
Fulzpuyan, to confide
Fulcum, help
Fulcumian, to help, te support
Fundian, to strive, to try, to tend to
Fup, a furrow
Fupbon
Fupbum
Fyllan, to fill
Fylyz, help
free
| a friend
{ friendship
moreover, also, besides
Meaty 7
872
Fyp, fire
Fypen, fiery
Fypmeyz, at all, at most
Fypp, far
Fypry, furze
Fypppian, to support, to promote
i. TLadepian? to gather, to join, to Tredpian resort
Ladepzans, continuous, united
Treelan, to astonish, to hinder
Leepy, grass
Tayol, tribute
Lalan, to sing
Laldop, an incantation
Tralney, lust :
Tramen, sport, pleasure
Tran
nt ge ie
Lapyecs. the ocean
Trayt, the soul, the spirit
Tayclic, ghostly, spiritual
Layclice, spiritually
Leacyian, to ask, to find out by asking
Treadop, together
ene ena to abide, to wait for
Trebidan H
Teandpypdan, to answer
Leap, the year
Treap-mwlum, yearly
Leapa
Treape
TLeapyos, difficult
Treapo, prepared, ready
Treapo-piza. intellect, understanding
Treappian, to prepare
Geaycuns, asking, inquiry
Treav-peapd, a gatekeeper
Trebepan, to behave
Lebeacnian, to point out, to nod
Trebed, a prayer
Trebed-man, a beadsman, a man em- ployed in prayer
Lebelgan, to be angry
Irebephzan, to enlighten
Irebecan, to improve, amends
t formerly, certainly
to make
GLOSSARY.
Lebiexan
ecuat tobay Lebiddan, to pray Lebindan, to bind
Leblendan, to blend, to mingle, te —
pollute Lebhypian, to rejoice Lrebod, a command Lebpzdan, to spread Lebpensan 2 F ecican t bo. aa Lebugan, to bend Lebyp, birth, family, origin Lebypian, to happen, to come to
pass Leceoyan, to choose; p. p. secopen Leceppan 2 to turn, to have re- Lecyppan i course to Leclenpian, to cleanse Lecnapan, to know, to discover Lecophe, fit, proper Gecundelic ea cecpabeban pea Lecynd, nature, kind, manner Lecynde, natural Lecyndelice, naturally Trecypan, to make known LecySpe, a country
Lid J Tredayenhec, seemly
Lredal, a separation
Lebdere, fit, suitable
Ledon, to finish, to complete Ledpepner
redpersbner trouble
Tredpepney
Tredpeyan, to disturb
Tredpelan to mislead, to deceive, Tredpehsan i to seduce
Iredpola, error, heresy Ledpol-miyz, the mist of error Leeapnian Leeapnigan Treeapnuns, merit, desert Treecan, to make addition Teednipian, to renew Leendebypdan, to set in order Leendian, to end, to tinish
i to earn, to deserve
ee
-
.
GLOSSARY.
Geendodhie, that which will end Geeopian, to discover, to show Lreyazen, glad Treyapan, to go, to travel, to die  Lepea, joy, gladness
Geyesan 2? to join, to unite, to com- Eereeean'y pose Leyelan, to feel Leyeohz, a fight, war Leyepa, a companion Leyeppeden, companionship Leyepreipe, a society Leredpan | Caen Lepibepan i 0 give wings Geylic, a contention Leon, to receive, to take, to catch Leypedan, to feel Treypeoney, the feeling Leypeese, mind, opinion Treypese, celebrated Treppedan, to perceive Leypemian, to finish, to fulfil, to
perpetrate GLeypeosan, to set free Leyulcumian, to help Leyyllan, to fill, to fulfil, to satisfy Lerypn, long ago LeyypSpian, to promote, to improve
Lesadepian to gather, to unite,
ae pet to bring together
Lesedemizan
Lesadepuns, a gathering, a collec- tion
Teslenzan
Llengan
Lesonzan, to pass through
Lespapian, to touch
Lexpipan, to seize
Lesypian, to clothe; p. p. seseped
Gehazan, to promise
Geheycan, to bind, to enslave
Isehealdan, to hold, to keep, to pre- serve
Lehebde, seized
Lehelpan, to help, to assist
Gehenzan, to pursue, to seize
Leheopan
Lehepan )
Lehipan j
Lehypan
to decorate
to hear, to obey
Leheped, heard, applauded Trehepend, a hearer Gehepney, the hearing Irehicgan 2 to seek after, to regard, fehverant to discover Gehipan, to form Lehpeoyan, to fall Gehpinan, to touch Lehpez Lehpile i every one Irehpeebepey, every where Lehpidep, everywhere ehydan, to hide Lehypyum, obedient Lehypyumney, obedience Gehypyc, adorned Gelac, an assembly, a collection Lelandian, to approach Teledan, to lead Treleepan, to teach, to instruct Treleeycan, to continue, to perform Treleaya, belief Leleayyul, faithful Teleanian, to recompense uae rs i to believe
elyyan Geleopnian, to learn Leleczan, to hinder, to cause delay Lelie, a likeness Lelic, like, suitable Grelice, likewise Lelicyan, to lie Leliman, to cement, to unite Gelimpan, to happen Lelipan, to sail, to move Telome, often Gelons, on account of Gelp-ycaba, a proud wretch Lelyyzed, pleased with, desirous of Lemeec, a yoke-fellow, a mate Lemes5, greatness : Lemene, common, general Lemenelice, in common Lemepe, a boundary Lemepyian, to praise Lemas, a relation Gemal-megene, a multitude Leman Lyman Lemana, a company
i to attend, or care for
374
emeancian, to appoint, to deter- mine bounds
Lemeleyz, negligence
Lemen, care
Lemengan, to mix, to mingle, to form
Lemec, measure
Lemez, docile, meet, suitable
Tremezan, to meet, to find
Temecyeyt, modest, moderate
GLemecsian, to moderate, to rerulate
Tremecvsuns, moderation, measure
Lemechic, suitable, tit, moderate
Lemons, among
Tremoz, an assembly
Gemunan, to remember
Lemundbypdan, to protect
Lemynd, memory
Temynodsian, to remember
Lremyndpypbe, memorable, worthy of remembrance
Treneahyne, near
Lenealecan, to approach
Teneban, to subdue
GLeniman, to take, to conceive
Trenos
Trenoh
Lenydan, to compel
Genyhz, abundance
Treo
Tnu
Treoc, a yoke
Treocya, a sighing
Leos
Tnungs i eee,
Leolca
Tnoleca
Treolecan, to allure
Leomepunsg, lamentation
Teompe, sorrowful
Treompian, to grieve, to mourn
Treond, through, over
Treond-hhztan, to enlighten
TLeond-yeman, to shine through
Treond-plizan, to look over, or be- yond
Treopenian, to open
TLeopn, desirous
Teopne
Tnopne
Leopnyull, desirous, anxious, diligent
i sufficiently, enough
i formerly, anciently
i the yollx of an egg
t earnestly, willingly
GLOSSARY.
Geopnyullice, very earnestly Leopnyulney, earnestness, anxiety
ass eras | to desire anxiously, te Tapnan —_—
Leopnlic, earnest
Leopnhice, studiously, earnestly
Leopztpupian, to despair
Leoz
Let
Int
Lyz
Leozan, to melt, to pour
Lepad, consideration, a condition
Lepad, considered, constituted
Lepadyeipe, prudence
Lepecan, to seize
Lepeyz, distracted
Leneayian, to take by force
Gepeapan, to bind
Lepec, government, correction, skill
Gepecan } to say, to instruct, to
Lepeccan : prove, to subdue
Tepeclice, widely, diffusely
Tepela
ae appardl
Lepenian, to adorn
Lepenu, ornaments
Lepiht
Lepyhe
Trepihe 2
Lepyht §
Trepim, a number
Lepyenhi, suitable
Tepiyenlice, suitably, fitly
TLepipmian, to agree, to suit
Trepum, space
Trepyman, to lay waste
beans to unite, to collect to-
Trerommian gether
Leyapxod, aftlicted,. grieved; p. p. yapsian
Leypelan, to happen
ie ; happy, prosperous
Leyehhice, happily, prudently
tone happiness
Leycead, reason
Lerceadlice }
Lerceadpiyhice § zouipneny
yet
i desert, a reward
suitable, right, fit
ah
ree
tO fm ecrcriee
GLOSSARY. BY)
Lepceadpiy
Leyceadpiphic
Leyceadpipney, reason
Teyceayz, a creature
Lreyceapen, formed; p. p. peyppan
Leyceapian, to view, to regard
Gercendan, to corrupt
Teycinan, to shine, to shine upon
Geyepiyan, to appoint, to ordain
Lerceyloan, to shield, to defend
Lercypped, clothed; p. p. aycyppan
Lerecan, to seek
Gereon, to see
Leyeban, to say, to prove
Ieyetney, an appointment, an insti- tution
Geyeczan, to set, to compose, to compare
Lerepenhiec, visible
Lreyibhice, peaceably
Geyibyuma, peace-loving
Leyrehbe the sight
GLeyihc
Treyih
Ley13, a companion
Leromnung, an assembly
Geycandan, to stand, to attack, to press upon
Lerzabehan ) to establish, to make
Ee atohan | steadfast
Leycteppan, to go, to step, to ap- proach
Leyce Spi, stable, steadfast
Lepzigan, to ascend
Leyullan, to stop, to restrain, to be still
Trepzincan, to smell
; rational, intelligent
oo to guide, to rule, to Ley ean, correct
Leyzondan, to confine Lepcpangian, to strengthen
r neoL .
os eae \ wealth, gain
Lercpynan, to gain, to obtain, to beget
Trepund, sound, safe, secure
Leyunoyullice, securely, prospe- rously
Leyundyulney, health, prosperity
Leyrundpran, to separate
Treypencan, to afllict
Treypican, to cease, to desist
Lerpizean :
eeean t to be silent
Leypinc, affliction, trouble, labour
LeyprSpian, to subdue
Treypuytep, a sister
GLeyyngian, to sin
Leva, as yet, again
Lrevacnian, to betoken
Geveecan, to teach, to explain, to show
Lecelan, to accuse, to reprove
Treteeye, meet; sup. Zeteyoyt
Levene, heavy
Trecense, happened
seo to draw, to attract
Leteopian, to grow weary
Lebarya, one who assents
Trebayian, to assent, to allow
rehahe f thought
Lrebapened, wetted
Trebeahz, counsel, purpose
Lebeahzepe, a counsellor
Trebencan ? to think, to consider, to
Lebincan ; remember
Lebeodan, to associate
Lebeode, a language
Lebinnan, to disperse
Trebohan, to bear, to suffer
Lebpopian, to suffer
LeSpuen, joined
LeSpeenan, to moisten
LeSpep, conformable, agreeing, at peace
LeSpeepelice, harmoniously
LeSpepian, to adopt, to make con- formable
Trepyld, patience
Lrebyldelice, patiently
Lebyloig, patient
Lezidan, to happen
Teciohban, to determine, to appoint
Letpeope, true, faithful
Letpeophce, faithfully
Lecpeopian, to conspire
Lecpymuian, to encourage
376
Geunnan, to grant
Teunpozpian, to be sorrowful, to be disquieted
Lepanian, to diminish
Lepapenian, to warn, to beware
Lepecan, to excite
Lepesan, to weigh down
Lepealdlebep, a rein
Leped, madness
Lepelizian, to enrich
Lepelz-lebep, a rein
Gepenian, to allure
Lepeoppan, to be, to come to pass
Lepeoyspian, to make honourable, to distinguish
Lepexan, to grow, to accrue
Lepidep, the weather
roan t a wish, the will
Tepin, labour, a battle, war
Gepinna, an enemy
Lepinnan, to conquer
Gepiy, certain
Lepiylice, certainly
Lepiz, understanding
Lepic-leay, witless, foolish
Trepic-loca, the breast
Trepica, a witness
Lepizan, to depart
Lepicney, knowledge
Treplec, debased
Lepmic, a writing
Treppixl, a change, a course of events
LTepuna, a custom, wont
Lepunelic, wonted, usual
Trepuman, to be wont
Lepunrum, pleasant
Lrepypcean, to make
Lrepyphc ?
Lepyphco §
Trepyyean, to wish
Indd1an, to sing
Tnepan, to prepare
Inyan, to give
Inyende, giving
Inyepney, greediness
Tnyol, bountiful
Ingpe, greedy, anxious
Inygu, a gift
Inganz, a giant
merit, deserving
GLOSSARY,
Talp, arrogance
Inlpan, to boast
Inm
Tnm-cyn
Tnm-cynn
Iimeleyz, negligence
Inm-peced, a palace
Innyeyz, ample
Inngpa, a youngster, a scholar
InosoShas, the season of youth
Tnomon, sad
Inycian, to sigh, to sob
Inye-la-seye, yes, O yes!
Tnzpian, to desire, to covet
Tncypune
Tnzyuns
Tlad, pleasant
Lley
Glar
Gley-hlucpu ? glass-clear, trans-
Glay-hlubpe i parent
Tleap, skilful, prudent
Glensan, to adorn
Lhodan, to glide, to slip
Lhopian, to sing
Lhopopd, a song, metre
Ime, a gnat
Imopnian, to lament, to grieve, to groan
Tmopnuns, lamentation
Lod, God
Tod, good
Toda, a Goth
Lodcund, divine
Todcundelice, divinely
Lodcundnyy, deity, divine nature
Lodney, goodness
Lold, gold
Lold-hopd, a hoard of gold
TLold-pmrs, a goldsmith
Lparan, to dig, to delve
Imam, fierce, enraged
Lpapian, to grope
pes, grey, green
Inpeaz, great
Ipene, green
Lpenian, to become green
Lpezan
Te-spevan
Gp, grim
a jewel, a gem
t covetousness, desire
glass
t to greet, to address
n/ nectar
pba bad
patel
GLOSSARY.
Inpot, a particle, an atom Tpopan, to grow Lpund, ground, earth, bottom Ippund-leay, groundless, unfathom- able Inpund-peal, a foundation Gpymezan Lpymecizan Luma, a man Lum-pine, a leader Tus, a conflict Tydene, a goddess Tyldan, to pay Lylden. golden Lylz, guilt Lyzyepe, a miser
i to grunt, to roar
p>. J)abban, to have Jdadop adpe eeys, detained )Jeyzedom, captivity ert hail
t bright, serene
NDeelo ‘ health Peelu
eae a man, a hero eelga, light })emed-ping, cohabitation Peepend, an errand Pepyeyrc, harvest
})eeplic, laudable
ey, a command
})eS, keath, heather Teco, heat
})al, sound, hale
Jahis, holy, a saint Palpian Dealyian }Jam, a home, a house
}am-yeyz, an inhabitant
}Janz1an, to hang
J)ap, hoary
Japa, a hare
Paz, hot
Navan, to call, to name, to command
{ to pray, to beseech
377
JSacheopeney, hot-heartedness, anger, fury
JJazian, to hate
Jape, sight, aspect
JNe
Ie he, any one, it
Juz
Jdeard, a head
JSeayod-beah, a crown
Iveas high; comp. ))yhpe; sup.
}eah Wehiyca
Jdean
JJeahney
JJeaney
J)eah-pedep, a great tempest
deal, a hall
JNealan, to heal; imp. Jdal
JSealdan, to hold, to incline
Nealy, half
Dealic, high, exalted
Jyealice, highly
Jealhcop, more highly
Jdean, needy, poor
JSeanlic, vile, worthless
ead, hard
JSeapde, severely ; sup. Jeapdore
JJeapd-heopt, hard-hearted
Jeapd-yehs, unhappy
Weapd-yeeld, a hard lot, unhappi- ness
JJeapm, harm
JJeapm-cpidoisan, to speak ill of one
Jbeapepa, a harp
JSeappepe, a harper
JSeappian, to play on the harp
Peappuns, harping
JJeabepian, to restrain, to control
JSeabo-pinc, a chieftain, a noble
}ebban, to raise, to lift up
Tpeyis, heavy
}Neyrsan, to be heavy or sad, to
height, highness
weigh down Deyrshice, heavily, grievously ecko heaviness, sorrow }Jerpiner }Yelan ? Tulan § to cover, to conceal Weldan, to bend, to incline Jyell, Hell
378
Jdell-papa, an inhabitant of hell
JSelm, the head, the tup of anything
Jdelma, a helm, or rudder
Pelpan, to help
JJenan, to oppose, to repress
Jen, poverty, trouble, punishment
Jdeoyencund, heavenly
Peoman, to mourn
Jdeoyon, heaven
Jeoyon-copt, heavenly bright
Weopoz, a hart
Peoprumian, to obey
Jeopt, a hart, a stag
JPeopze, the heart
Yep, here
}epan, to obey
Pepe, a crowd, an army
Pepe, fame
Tepes, a court, a family
Pepe-seac, a weapon
)epe-pine, an enemy
epe-cema, a chieftain, a leader of an army
))epe-coha, a consul, a leader of an army
)epepian, to despise
hotcot an army
Pepian, to praise
)epins praise, favour
Peplic, glorious
JNdep, hither
JMopey hidpey, hither and thither
Jgan, to hasten
Jise, the mind, energy, care
ige-ley'c, heedless
JNse-pnocp, a wise mind
}Msian ) to strive, to think, to en-
)ys1an t deayvour
Jn5-perp, familyship
Puloe, a battle
Jumyely, himself
}yman t hence
}ionan
}yndan, behind
inde, a hind
Jingpian, to hunger
Jnop, a hinge
Jupde
Winbet a protector, a ruler
GLOSSARY.
Jy, his
Jup, form, hue
JMp-cus, familiar
J’puns, pretence, appearance
TSleep, a mound, a barrow
Jlayopo, a lord
Plaropd-ycipe, lordship, government
Dleahcep, laughter
Tleobop, a sound
}yhra, fame, report
Jphyeadigz, celebrated
}hyeadigney, celebrity
}ylud, loud
Jylncep, clear
}lyyzan, to listen
Jyneeppian, to rest, to lie
}dnere, soft, tender
}n1pan, to bend
JJosian, to be desirous, to be anxious
Jdol, a hole
}dold, faithful
J)olm, the ocean
JSolz, a wood, a grove
Sond, the hand
Jdopa, hope
Jopian, to hope
}Sopayeabe, a sink
JMopd, a hoard, a treasure
}dopd-sercpeon, a treasure
}oyp, reproach, derision
Typed, ready, swift
}Ypedlic, speedy
J)peedhice, speedily, quickly
})peed-pepney, a swift course
})peed-peene, a chariot
})peesel, a garment, apparel
Wpebed a
abe , quickly
})peoran, to fall
}Ypeore, violently approaching, e.g- a storm
})peorend F
fares cubes perishable
})peop, cruel, troubled
J)peop
})peopruns ?
JSpeopan, to rue, to repent
})peoprian, to rue, to be sorrowful
Ppepan, to agitate, to lift up
)peycan, to lie down
' repentance
GLOSSARY.
JYpebep, the mind
})pioh, rough
})poy, a roof, the top of anything
J)por-peeyc, roof-fast, firm
J)pon-mepe, a whale-pond, the sea
Jpop, prone, bent down
})pure, the earth
})pype, ruin
}Jumeca, how, in what manner
J)und, a hound, a dog
J)und-migonz1g, ninety
JYundped, a hundred
J)und-yeoyontis, seventy
}yunig, honey
Tdunza, a hunter
}Junzian, to hunt
Jyupu, at least
}uy, a house
Jduyey-hipde, a keeper
})pa, who, any
JSpaz, brave ,
))peet, which, what
)peece, wheat
))pebep, whether, either
})peebpe, nevertheless
))peec-hpesa, a little, in some mea- sure
J)peec-hpesanunsey, in some mea- sure, in some degree
})pealya, expanse, convexity
desk MY ) to turn, to turn round,
TORE saat to depart, to wane
Pepyan
))peapyuns, inconstancy, change- ableness
JYpele, any
}dpene, a little
J)peol, a wheel
Wpepylic, changeable
JSpidpe, whither
pile. a while, time
}ppilendhic, for a time, temporary
}}plum, sometimes
})piz, white
pou i a little, somewhat
})ponne
})ponan
})ponon
})pone, any one
})ponne, when
t whence, how
379
)pupyulney, changeableness )pypre, a circuit
the at to hide, to conceal J)y5e, a hide, a skin
}yhche, joyful, desirable
ylz, a hilt of a sword
}dypan, to hear, to obey })ypian, to imitate
}/ypnde, horned, haying a beak }yprz, an ornament
Pypyzan, to adorn
})yrpan, to deride, to revile })yrpins, reviling, reproach }dyd, a haven
I. Let Tdel 5 5 Idel-seopn Late, vain Tegland ) Islond >» an island Tland | |
Teld, old. See eald, comp. Ieldpa, sup. Ieloerz
Ilc, the same
Immedeme, unworthy, imperfect
Inc, you f
Incoya, the mind, the breas
Inepre, provision
teat to enter
Innan
Insehys6, intention, thought
Insebanc A
one, thought, mind
Inhee, internally, in itself
Inna ?
Innan §
Innanpeapd
Innepeand
Innod, the stomach
Innuns, that which is included
Inpeapdlice, thoroughly, inwardly
es Re an inward thought, a
Inpiz-bone deceitful thought
lob, Jove
Ipnan, to run
Ippe
Ipyung ' anger
Ippian, to be angry
within
t inward
380
Ty, ice
Ty1g, icy Ipacize, Ithaca Tu, formerly
K. Kayepe, Cxsar, an emperor Kuning, a king
L. La, lo! oh! Lacan, to play, to sport Lacnian, to heal Ladzeop Ladpeop Lazzeop ( Lazbiop ; Lece, a physician, a leech Lexce-cpeyz, the art of medicine,
medicine
Lece-50m, medicine, a remedy Lebdan, to lead Laden, Latin Leyan, to leave, to relinquish Len Lean Lenan, to lend Lene, slender
Leong ) long; comp. lens; sup.
Lange » Long ) lengeyt
Lepan, to teach
Ley, less
Leyzan, to follow
Lezan, to permit, to let go, to leave, to suppose
Lay, the remainder, what is left
Lagu, water ;
Lasu-ylod, ocean-flood
Lagu-rcpeam, the sea, the ocean
Land k land
a leader, a guide
t a reward
Lond Lanz se i tall Lange Longe Lang-rep, long continuance Lansyrum, lasting, long
Lap, learning, lore, admonition Lapeop, a teacher, a master
i long, a long time
GLOSSARY.
Layz, at length
Laze, late ; comp. lazop
La’, hateful, hostile, destructive Laéhce, horribly
Leary, permission, leave
Leary, a leaf
Leahzep, a sin, a crime Leanian, to reward, to recompense Lear i false, loose
Leay-lic ae
Lear-ypell, a fable
Leay-ypelluns, false opinions, false __
speaking Leayung, lying Leax, a salmon Leccan, to moisten, to be wet Lecsan, to lay down, to lower Ley, left Les Lesa} a flame Lis Lexan, to lay, to place Lenczen, Lent, the spring Leng, length Leo li i a lion Leod Leod-yeipe Leod-¢puma, a leader, a chieftain Leod-hata, a hater of people, a tyrant Leohg, light Leohzan, to lighten, to make light Leor Lior Leopian ) Libban | Liman —} to live Lipigan | Lybban Leoyzeel, estimable Leorpend, beloved, acceptable Leoxan, to tell a lie, to deceive Leoma, a ray of light Leopmian eae le Leod Liod Leo’-pyphza, a poet Lezzan, to hinder
; a nation, a people
; precious, beloved, dear
; a verse, a poem, a lay
GLOSSARY.
Libbende, living lic | lik Tehet ee
Lic isin t BE OnY.
Licevan
Licezzan
weet to lie, to extend
Jachamlice :
Lichomlice ; ey
Lician, to please, to like
LicpypS, worthy of esteem
Liy, life
Lirep, the liver
Ligez, lightning; pl. lyrecu
Lihzan, to shine, to give light
Lim, a limb
Limplice, fitly
Lind-pigend, a warrior with a shield
Liyan, to collect, to gather
Tayye, favour
Liyz, science, skill, power
Laycum, skilfully
Li6, a cup
115, mild
Liban, to sail
I1$-mon, a sailor
Lixan, to shine
Locen, an enclosure, bounds
Locian, to look, to see
Loy, praise
Londey-ceopl, a husbandman
Loppe, a flea
Loyian, to lose, to perish, to go away
Loz, a lot, deceit, craftiness
Loz-ppenc, deceit
Lox, a lynx
Lure, love
Juyian, to love
Lupiend, a lover
Lungpe, forthwith, quickly
Luyz, desire, pleasure, lust
Luyz-beyp, cheerful
Luyz-bepe, desirous
Luyz-beplice, delightfully, with delight
Luyz-bepney, happiness, desire
Lurczhee, willingly, joyfully
t to pretend, to dissemble
381
Luycum, willingly
Lucan, to incline
Lyccan, to pluck up
Lyyan, to permit
Lyyz, the air
Lyyzan, to wish, to choose, to be pleased with
Lyz, little
Lyzes, crafty
Lyzel 2 little, small; comp. ley, sup.
Teele leyc
Lyzelice, deceitfully
Lychan, to diminish, to lessen
M. Macian, to make, to form, to do (Qeeden, a maiden Meesen, virtue, power Mesen-cperyt, chief strength Mesen-ycan, a huge stone Mesn, power Mes5, a maiden, a country, a tribe, a kinsman Me55-had, virginity es-plice, a species, a form (eel, a space of time
strength, might,
Qenan? to mean, to intend, to Menan lament
Meenisu |
Manes i
Coan a crowd, many
Menigu
Qeepa, famous, celebrated, great; sup. Mepoye
pelea excellent
Meeplic, noble
Mepyan, to be celebrated
eps, greatness, glory, praise; pl. miracles
Meeyt, a mast
Meyzc, most, greatest.
Meecan, to dream
eS, measure, degree, condition, lot
Mas, a relation
@asan, to be able
Maxzipcep, a master
Mazso-pinc, a citizen, a man
See Mycel
382
Man
Mon
an, sin, wickedness, evil, disease
Man, sinful, wicked
Man-yull, full of wickedness
Manian, to admonish
Mani5-yeald
mokicee ald manifold
Manig-yealdlic, complicated
@annian, to people, to fill with men
ManSpepe, gracious
Mapa, greater. See Mycel
Mape, more
Maptyp, a martyr
MaSm, a vessel
MaSm-hypode, a treasurer
Meahz
Mihc
Meape, a boundary, a territory
Meapcian, to mark, to mark out
Meappian, to err
Mece, a sword
Med, meed, reward
Medeme, worthy, desirable, perfect
Medemlice, worthily
Medemney, dignity
Medcpumney
Meccpumney > infirmity, weakness
Meccpymney }
Meldian, to make known, to display, to inform against
Melo, meal
Menzan, to mix
Mengz10, a multitude
Mennmiye Q
Menniyclhie §
@eodum, meritorious
Meox, dirt
Mepe, a mere, a lake, water
Mepe-plod, the ocean
Mepe-hengeyt, a sea-horse, a ship
Mepe-rcopeam, the sea-stream, the ocean
Mepse
Mupse
Depye, a marsh
Mecan, to meet, to find, to observe
Mecan, to measure, to mete, to com- pare
Meze, meat
a man
strength, might, power
human, humanity
t joyful, merry
GLOSSARY,
Meczian, to mete, to moderate, to rule
Meczuns, moderation
Mezod, the Creator
Micel
Mycel
Micellic, great
Micelney, greatness
Micley, much
Miclum, greatly
t much, great
Middan-eapd 2 the earth, an en- canes at closure Middepeapd, midward
Middel, middle
MidyephS, middle age Midsehealdan, to satisfy
@idleyc ¢ midmost, middle class, hires middle
Mid-ope, the middle region Mid-pintep, mid-winter, Christmas Mihte. See Mazan
Mihas, mighty
@ihushee, mightily, powerfully Mild, mild, merciful
Qnld-heopc, merciful M@ild-heoptney, mercy
Muildpian, to have mercy, to pit (@ildpuns, mercy, pity
Milcye, mercy
@in, mine
Mimdzian, to advise, to remind Miyean, to mix, to dispose @iy-cyppan, to wander
Muiypdeed, a misdeed
Miyhpepyian, to pervert
Miyplic Miyche Mays, a mist
(Pipan, to conceal
(od, the mind
Modep
Modopn ‘ a mother
Mooup
Modis, proud
Modilic, magnanimous
Mobd-yera, the mind, the mind’s sense Molde, the earth
Mona, the moon
various
a a an
GLOSSARY. 383 eet a month Nie ¢ night Moncyn, mankind Neapa Mop, a moor Neayrep( ©opsen, the morning Necrent ae Mopsen-yceoppa, the morning star | Neappa
Mopbop, murder
Moyt, must
Moz, must, can
unt, a mount, a mountain
@unc-siop, the Alps, the mount of Jupiter
®upnan, to mourn, to care for, to regard
Muy, a mouse
Muyz, must, new wine
(hus, a mouth
at to remind
@ynla, inclination
Myntan, to propose
2 t pleasure, delight
Mypan, to hinder yp, pleasure
N. Nabban, not to have Nacod, naked Neone, a serpent Nenes, none Nek “t was not Neyye, a promontory Naya Nayu Nagan, not to have or possess Nahz Nauhz Napuhz Nalzy, not at all Nallay, not only Nama, a name Nan, none Nat, 7 ¢. ne-pat. Naubep, neither Neadinga, necessarily Neah Nean > nigh, near Neap
i the nave of a wheel
naught, nothing
See pican
Neapaney, trouble, distress Neapey, straitly Neapepney, anxiety Neappian, to straiten Neaz Necn Nyzen Nee i presence, neighbourhood Neb, the face
Spee ( necessarily yoe §
Ned-peapy need,
cattle, a beast
necessity, ue-
Neod-beapr cessary
Nid-beapy Nemnan, to name, to mention Neod-yppece, voluntarily Neod-beapre, necessaries Neoten, cattle, a beast of burden Neoban, ‘beneath Neopbepa, lower, inferior Neopol Nipol Nepsean Nepian Nepsend, a saviour; participle of Nepsean Neye nere, no, no; by no means
i prostrate
i to preserve
Nez
Neer ¢ 2 net
Necelic, beastly —
Nebo t to compel, to force Nigan nine
Nigon
Niman, to take, to take away, to assume, to adopt
Niobop, lower
ees i not to know
Nyzan
Nibemeyz, lowest, nethermost
Nibep
Nipeplic
Nipep-heald, downwards
i downwards, low
Noanet aie
Nipe, new
Nop%, north
Nop%-ende, north-end
Nop%S-peyz, north-west
Nopbepeapd, northward
Noz, use, enjoyment
Noman, to enjoy, to possess, to occupy
Nu, now
Nu-pihte, just now, straightway
Nyd-beapy, necessary, needful
Nyllan, to be unwilling
Nyz, purpose, use
Nyz, perfect
Nycz-pyp%, useful
O. Oy, of Oyadon, to remove, to do away Oyazteon, to draw out, to remove Oybeazan, to kill, to strike Oybecuman, to come from Oydel, a fall, a setting Oydzelpe, more prone Oydune, downwards, down Orep, a bank Orep, beyond Oyepbpewbdan, to overspread Oyepcouman, to overcome Oyepdpencan, to be drunk Oyepyapan, to pass by, to pass over Oyepyyll, intemperance Oyepsan i to pass over, to pass Oryepsansan away Oyepsiocolney Oyepsioculner Oyepheopan, to disobey Oyephosian, to despise Oyephyd, a high mind Oyepins, superfluity
i forgetfulness
f high-mindedness, ar- Orepmevta rogance, too much Oyepmeczo ae
Oyepmod Oyepmodhe Oyepmodney, scorn, arrogance Oyeppecan, to instruct
‘ arrogant, proud
”
GLOSSARY.
OyepyzlS, superfluity, too great) | prosperity Orepyeon, to look down upon
js
Oyepyeczan, to cover <i Oyepyteppan, to overstep : Oyepypipan, to overcome
Oyepzeon, to cover over, to over- — whelm
Oyepbeapy, great need
Oyepbeon, to excel, to surpass
Oyeppmnan, to overcome
Oyepppeon, to cover over; part. ofepppizen :
Oysepican, to depart
Oyhenan, to take away
Oyipnan, to run off, to outrun
Oflezan, to let out
Oylyrz, desirous of
Oymunan, to remember
Oyyceamuan, to shame, to be ashamed
Oyyion, to see, to behold
Oyyitzan, to oppress
Oyylean, to slay, to kill, to cut off
Oyynipan, to cut off
Oyrpelsan, to devour
Oyz, often
Oyzeon, to draw off, to deprive
Oybincan, to bethink |
Orppiccan, to oppress
Oycped, frequent
Oypundpod, astonished
Oleccan, to flatter, to allure, to cringe, to gratify
Olecuns, flattery, allurement
Onelan :
rageacny bo Saini
Onbipisan
Onbypsan t ae SEN
Onbizan, to bite, to taste of
Onblepan, to blow upon
Onbypodan, to animate, to encourage
Onceppan ie turn from, to turn
Oneyppan back, to change | Oncnapan i ttn Oncneopan
Oncpeban, to reply, to echo Ondzic, mind, understanding Ondpzxdan, to dread, to fear Ondypope, an answer
GLOSSARY.
_ On-eapdian, to dwell in On-ecneyye, for ever Onezzan, to hasten Onyinbdan, to find, to discover Onyon, to receive, to accept Ongean, against | Ongimnan, to begin _ Ongizan, to perceive, to know, to understand Onhagian, to be at leisure, to be unoccupied Onhelodan, to incline Onhnigan, to bow down, to incline Onhpepan, to stir up Onhpinan, to touch Onhpeapyan ? to change, to go Peon away Onhypian, to imitate Onimnan, within Onipnan, to run, to move Onlacan, to sport Onlays, at last, at length Onlenan, to lend Onlezan, to relax Onleogan, to belie, to falsify Onlic, like Onlicney, a likeness Onheyan, to liberate Onhhzan ? to enlighten, to shine Onlyean ¢ upon, to shine Onlucan, to unlock Onluczan, to incline Qnyacan, to deny, to retort, to reply Onycunian, to shun Onyien, an aspect Onyigan, to descend, to sink Onyizzan, to press down, to beset Onycypian, to agitate, to excite Onyundpon, apart Onypiyan, backwards Onzizan, to untie, to unloose Onpbonce, delightful : Onpexenian, to awaken, to excite Onpendan, to change, to turn aside Onppecan, to revenge, to punish Onppipan, to reveal Onpunian, to dwell, to inhabit Open, open, exposed, clear, evident Openle, openly, plainly
bo
385
Opcuman, to overcome ; contracted from oyepcuman
Opd-ypuma, the origin, the author
Opeald, old
Opeldo, old age
Opsellice, arrogantly
Opmeze
Opmete
Opmo6, distracted in mind, dejected
Opmodney, mental disease, madness, despair
Opyops, secure, prosperous
Opyopsney
Opyophney
Ocepan, to appear
Opbeopan
Obepan
Obep, another
Obep, otherwise
O%Speyzan, to commit, to trust, to sow
O®Spinan, to touch
O%Syacan, to deny
OSyzanbdan, to stand still
Odpbe, or
OSpizan, to blame, to reproach
i overmuch
i security, prosperity
i to appear, to show
P. Papa, the Pope Pad, a path Peappoc, a park PeSpian, to make a path, to tread Planzian, to plant Plesa, play, sport, pastime Plesian, to play Pleo Pleoh } peril, danger Pio Pholic, dangerous Ppicu, a prick, a point
R, Racenta, a chain Racu, rhetoric, a discourse, an ex- planation Rad, a riding Recan, to reach Red, a discourse, counsel, advantage
C
386
Redan, to read, to govern, to decree
Redelye, a riddle, imagination, am- biguity
Resl, a garment, clothing
Reepan, to bind
Reyz, rest, repose
Reypian, to think, to meditate
Rap, a rope
Ra, quickly
Read, red
Rearepe, a spoiler
Reayian, to rob, to take away
Rearlac, spoil, rapine
Recan, to reckon, to count, to relate, to explain
Recan ? to regard, to care for, to
“wae direct, to govern
Recceleay
Receleay
Recceleyz ? recklessness, careless-
Receleyrz i ness
Reccepe, a rhetorician
Recely, incense
Recen
Recene
leaps i rightly, justly
Ren 2?
: a course Ryne § Ren, rain
a severe, fierce, violent
' reckless, careless
t immediately, straight
Repiz-mo6, fierce in mind
Ric, dominion, power
Ric, rich, powerful, in authority
Rice, a kingdom
Ricyian, to rule, to reign
Ridan, to ride
Bybee right, justice, truth
Rihvan, to correct, to instruct, to make right
Rihte, immediately, straightway
Rihzend, a ruler, a governor
Rihche, just, regular, upright
Ribclice
Rahcpiylice
Rihc-pellend, right willing, wishing what is right
Rihcpiy, rightwise, righteous
{ rightly, justly, wisely
GLOSSARY.
e
Rihzpipney, justice, wisdom, righte- ousness
Riman, to number
Rinc, a man, a warrior
Rind, the bark, the rind
Ripa, a handful of corn, a sheaf
Ripe, ripe
hese a rill, a rivulet, a river
.
Rod, the rood, the cross Pr Rodop, the sky ; Romance, Roman
Rond-beah, a boss
Rore, a rose
Rum, wide, large, august
Rume, widely
Rumedlic, spacious
Rumedhice, abundantly ; Rummo8s, bountiful Run-coya, the breast, the mind
Ryn, a roaring
Rynan, to roar
8.
Sacu, strife Sadian, to be weary See, the sea Swz-chy, the sea-cliff, the shore Sxed, seed Seesan sesan{ to say, to prove Sesan Sel, good Geel i better; comp. of yel Seel ' salt prosperity Sene, dull, sluggish Se-cilca, one who ploughs the sea, a |
sailor Sam, whether Samad 80mod Sampa, worse Sampade, unanimously Samvzengey, continually, imme-
diately Sampiy, half-wise, unwise Samppeedney, agreement, unity
i together, likewise
- Scanohc,
GLOSSARY. 387 Sanc Scip-hepe . Senet Rate carrot a fleet of ships ap Scipyzypa, a pilot Sait sorrow Scip, pure, clear, sheer
Sap-cpid, a sorrowful saying, a mournful song
Sapis, sorrowful, sorry
Saphie, sorrowful, grievous
Saplice, sharply, sorrowfully, sorely
Saul aha eGal
Sapl t e@ so
Sapan, to sow
Jae t to blush, to be ashamed
ae oh mean, vile Scead, the shade, a shadow Sceayz, creation Sceayc, a shaft Scealan, to owe, to be obliged to any one Scealc, a servant, a man Sceame, shame Sceameleay, shameless Sceapd, a shard Sceappner, sharpness Sceappyene, sharp-sighted Sceaz, a region Sceaba, a robber, an enemy Sceapian, to behold, to view Sceapuns, contemplation ae a shield; met. an arm erie oe y 8cell, a shell Sceol, a gang, a crowd, a shoal Sceop, a poet Sceoppend Sceppend } the Creator, a maker Scippend Sceopc 2 short; com. peypcpa; Scopz ' sup. peypteys S8ceozan, to shoot Sciene, beautiful, shining Scildi5 i ilt Scylors 6 BUY Scima, splendour, brightness, a ray et to shine cman Scinlac, magic 8cip, a ship
Scolu, a school, a band Scpidpeen, a chair of state Scpiran, to care for
Scep1'd, a revolution
Scucca, the devil
Scyytan, to verge, to incline Scyld, guilt, sin
Scyloan, to shield, to defend Scyl-yiye, a shellfish Scyppan, to create Scypmeelum, confusedly Scyppan, to adorn, to sharpen Sealz, salt
Seapolice, artfully
Seapu, a fraud
Sead, a well, a gulf
Secan, to seek
Secs, a warrior
Secs, a speech
Sepa, the mind
Sepz, soft, quiet
mol a a sail
Selan, to soil, to stain Selcud [emerge extraordinary,
Seldcud unknown Seloan Eee oe
Seloum-hponne, sometimes Seleyz, best; superlative of rel Sely, self Selylic, self-liking, self-love Sely-pill, self-will Sella, a giver Sellan : syllan i to give Sellic, wonderful Sendan, to send Seoc, sick oor ae to complain, to bewail Sioyian | Seorontis, seventy Seoyuns 2 - Siogun's t a complaint ans ag silver ylrop
388
Seolocen, silken
Seon, to see
Secl
Sicl ; a seat
Secxzan, to set, to place, to arrange
Siapo-cpeys, a skilful art
Sib, peace, agreement, relationship
Sibyumlice, peaceably
Siccecuns, a sigh, sobbing
Sicilia, Sicily
$15, wide, various
810
$1du
Siepan, to lie in wait, to plot
Siyzan, to sift
Sisan, to sink down, to rust
Sige, a victory
Size, a setting, declining
Srgend, thirsty
Sige-beod, a victorious nation
Sumle
Sinabel ¢ always
Sin, always
Sin, his
Sinc, a heap
Sinc-Zeoy, a money gift
Singal 2
Singala §
Singallice, perpetually
Singan, to sing
Sinyerpe, wedlocls
Sint. See peyan
Sioca, a sick person
Sioyon, seven
Sioyopa, bran
S810loc, silk
Siopian, to sew
818, time, occasion, a path, an arrival
8rSpan
S8yoban
Siccan, to sit, to dwell
SlepsS, sloth
Slapan
Slepan i to sleep
Slap, slow
Slean, to slay, to strike, to cast or throw
Slepan on, to slip on, to cast on
Shan,’ to slit, to tear
8h%, changeable, inconstant
i a custom
continual, lasting
i after, afterwards
GLOSSARY.
Smal, small
Smealic, subtle, deep, profound
Smealice, deeply, profoundly
Smean
Smeazan
Smeapcian, to smile
Smeauns, argument
Smec, smoke
Smolz
Smylz
Smusan, to flow gradually
Snap, snow
Snican, to creep, to crawl
Snipan, to cut off
Snyzczpo, wisdom
Sorte, softly, gladly
Sol, mire
Somne
wen together
Son, a sound
Sona, soon, immediately
Sond, sand
Sondbeoph, a sand-hill
Sondcopn, sand, grains of sand
Sopsian, to sorrow, to grieve, to be anxious
S08
Soba
Soban
S08-cpide, a true saying, a maxim
So8-peye, just
SoS-peycney, truth, sincerity
So8-ypell, a true history
Spaca, the spoke of a wheel
Spanan, to urge, to allure, to excite, to seduce
Speapcea, a spark
Sped, means, power, wealth, effect
Spell, speech, language, discourse, argument
Spellian, to speak, to teach
Spiseczan, to spit
i to inquire, to meditate
; mild, gentle, calm, smooth
true
5 anes to inquire, to seek after, pyran to argue Spypisan
Spop, a pursuit, a track
Sppec, speech, language, subject of discourse
Sppecan, to speak
Sppingan, to spring
b=
GLOSSARY.
Sppyccan, to sprout, to bud Stey Star Scan, a stone, a rock Gee, to stand, to be 8tan-yeapo-s1m, a precious stone 8za’S, a shore raat to establish, to support Scabol, a foundation Scabol-yeyc, stable, firm Sceap, a cup Sceapec, stark, severe Szede, a place, a station Scemn, a voice Scemn, a stem, a trunk Sceopa, a steerer, a pilot Sceopan Sciopan he steer, to direct Supan Sceopleay, outrageous, WerEUe a guide, ignorant Scteoppa, a star Sceoppobep, a rudder Sceopt, a tail Scepan, to raise, to honour ceppan, to step Szicce, a small matter Sziccian, to stick, to remain Szicel, a sting Sus, a path Scizan, to depart, to ascend Salle, still, quiet, fixed Sailney, stillness, tranquillity Scingan, to sting Scondende, standing S8copm, a storm Scopm-ye, a stormy sea Scop, a place, a dwelling Sctpens Scpans } Scpens j Scpons Sctpeam, a stream Stpeon, strength Scpican, to continue a course Scponslic, laborious, firm, power- ful 8cund, a space of time
t a staff, a letter
strong
389
Scunian, to stun, to stun the ears, to beat against
Scypian, to stir, to move, to agitate
Scypiende, moving
Scypins, stirring, motion, experience
Scypman, to be stormy
S8zypmend, stormy
8ul, a plough
Sum, some, a certain one
Sumep
Sumup
Sumup-lans, summer-long
ci the sun
Sunne
Suna ? >
‘Sane : a son ;
Sundbuend, a sailor
Sundep
Sundop
Sundep-ycop, a separate place
Sundop-s1ru, a peculiar excellence or gift
Su, the south
Suds-eayz, the south-east
Subepn, southern
Sube-peapd, southward
Sud-heald
sie peapher § southwards
Spa, as
Spa-eyne, even so
Spa yopd ypa, as far as, as much as
Spec, taste, savour
Spee
sp rt i heavy
Spepney, sluggishness
Speylice, courteously
Spe, a path
Speebep, whether, whichsoever
Spapan, to sweep
Speapz, swarthy, black
Speyan, to sleep, to smoulder
Spel, brimstone
Spezs, a sound
Spesel, the sky
Spesel-copht, heavenly bright
Spelzan
Spulzan to swallow
Spylsan
8pelzend, a gulf
Spelzan, to die, to perish
i summer
proper, peculiar, separate
890
Spencan, to trouble Speop, a father-in-law Speopcan, to darken Speopd, a sword Speocehan, to testify
Speocol
Speocul >} clear, manifest Spucol
oot clearly, plainly Spec, sweet
Spetmect, a sweetmeat
Specney, sweetness, an allurement
Spiryan, to move, to revolve
Spipt, swift
ia i swiftness
Spm, a swine
Spmcan, to labour
Spinzan, to scourge, to afflict
Spipa ?
Spypa 4
S15, strong, great
Spibe, very
8Shic, vast, excessive
Sprdlice, powerfully
Spibop, rather, more
Spiboyz, most chiefly
Sponzopney, drowsiness
Spocmeczay, sweetmeats. See ypecmes
Syhan, to soil, to stain
8yloypen, silver
S8yndeplic, peculiar
8yndeplice, singly, separately
Synn, sin
8yp, a moistening
TN Tenia a token, a sign Tacnian oe show, to declare, to Tecnan betoken Tecan, to teach Tecnan, to see to, to show Tecning, teaching, instruction Telan, to deride, to blame, to up-
braid, to compare
Tel-pypSh, reprehensible Tam, tame
a neck
GLOSSARY.
Tama, a tamer
Teap, a tear, a drop
Tedpe, frail, weak, tender
Tela, rightly, well
Tellan, to speak, to count, to reckon
Temian, to tame
Teohhian, to think, to endeavour, to suppose, to draw
Teon, to draw, to allure, to draw towards, to restrain
Teona, an injury
Teoba, the tenth
Tid, tide, time, season
Tiep, a heap, an expanse
Tispiy, a tiger
Tyhes me to persuade, to excite
Til, excellent
Tile, Thule
Tihan 2 to till, to toil, to effect a
Tolan’ cure, to endeavour
Tille, a fixed state
Tiluns
Tioluns
Tima, time
Timbpan A
Teak to build
Tyan, to irritate
Tippm, a beloved prince
Toblapan, to blow about, to scatter
Tobpedan, to spread
Tobpecan, to break
Tocluyan, to cleave, to split
Tocnapan, to distinguish, to discern
Tocuman, to arrive at ©
Todelan, to divide
Todmiyan, to drive, to disperse
Toyleoyan
Toylopan
Toyoplecan, to allow
Toyundian, to require
Toxzebdepne, together
Tosebiddan, to pray to
Toxsebiedan, to join to
Toshdan, to glide away, to slip
Tohealdan, to incline downwards
Tohopa, hope
Tol, a tool
Toleczan, to separate
Tonemnan, to name
‘ labour, pursuit, anxiety
i to flow away
‘GLOSSARY.
Toniman, to separate
Top, a tower, a rock
Topht, bright, splendid, illustrious
Toycead, a difference
Toyceadan, to divide, to discern, to distinguish
Toyciozan, to shoot in, to anticipate
Toycpiban, to wander
Toylupan, to slip asunder, to dis- solve; part. toylopen
Toycencan, to disperse; part. coycencte
Toypizan, to err, to wander
Tozellan, to reckon
Tozepan, to tear in pieces
Topeapod, the future
Topeapdey, towards
Topenan, to expect
Topendan, to turn
Tee t to overthrow, to de-
Topyppan stroy
Tpese, vexation
Tpeop, a tree
Tpeopa ? faith, fidelity, a promise,
Tpupa ; troth
Tpeopen, wooden
Tpeopian
Tpepan
Tpupian
Tpepney, trust
Tpum, strong
Tucian, to punish, to torment
Tudop, a production, a progeny
Tunse, a tongue
Tunsgel, a star, a constellation
Tupa, twice
Tpa
Tpexa
Tpesen
a oe i to doubt, to hesitate peonan
Tpeon
Theonans doubt
Tpeouns
Tpis, a twig, a small branch
Tpinchan, to twinkle
Tpiorec, two-footed
Tpiopxd, inconsistent
Tyan, to instruct
Tyoepney, frailty, weakness
to trust, to confide in
‘ two, twain
391
Tyodpian, to nourish Tyopuns, propagation Tyhz, instruction Tynope, fuel
U. Uyan, above Urop, higher Unabependhe, unbearable Unabindendhe, indissoluble Jneebel, ignoble, unnoble napehz, unexplained Jnapimed, countless, unnumbered Jnayecsendlic, indescribable, un- speakable UnaSpocenlice, unceasingly — Jnapendende Jnapendendlic ahthe unbright, less bright Jnbpoc, unbroken Jncleen, unclean Uncu%, unknown, strange Uncpebende, inanimate, unspeaking Uncynd, unnatural Undeadhe, undying, immortal Undep, under, beneath Unbdepbec, back wards, behind Undepezan, to eat under, to subvert Undepron, to undertake, to obtain, to receive, to be subservient Undepluczan, to support, to sustain Unbdepyzandan, to understand Jndepyzabolpeyc, unstable Jndeppeod, subject, put under Jndeppeodan ? to make subject, to Undephbiodan f degrade eee hat scarcely, with difficulty UneSney, uneasiness Unryesep, not fair Unyeslic, healthy, undying Unrypacodhce, honourably Ungebyde, disagreeing Ungecynbdelic Ungecyndhie Unszebdayenlice, unreasonably Unseendo0d Unsgeendodlice
adda
' unchangeable -
dddddaad
(=x ffaxlex!
{ unnatural
‘ never ending
GS. le} ba)
GLOSSARY. “\ ’ ** Ungeyeep, impassable Ungepicrull, unwise .
Unszerpeslice, inconceivably, im- moderately
Unserylo, insatiable
Unseleped, unlearned, ignorant
Unxelerendhic, incredible
Urke t unlike, different
Unszelimp, a misfortune
Unzemenszed, unmixed
Unsemez, excess
Unzemec, immeasurable
Unzemezpeyz, intemperate, mense
Unsemecyeymnery, intemperance
Ungemeclic, violent, immoderate, unbounded
Unsemerclice, immoderately, beyond measure
Ungemyndis, unmindful, forgetful
Unszened, uncompelled
Unsepad, rude, unfit, at variance
Unzepeclice, recklessly, confusedly
hi aes innumerable, infinite
Unpim quantity
Unsepiren, inconvenient
Ungepiyenhe, unbecoming
Ungepiyenhce, indecently
Ungepyodelice, roughly
Unsere, unhappy
Unseyel®, trouble, misfortune, sor- row
Unseyceadpiy, irrational, imprudent
Ungeyceadpiyney, imperfection, want of reason
dah limaes invisible
Unrepenlic
Unserce Shes
Unsercedpi5
Unsezeye, inconvenient
UnseSpep, discordant, unrelenting
UnseSpapney, trouble, discord, wickedness
Ungebylo, impatience
Ungebyloelice, impatiently
Unsecpum, infirm
Ungepealdey, involuntarily
Unsepiy
Unpir
Unsepiyy, ignorance
im-
' inconstant
t unwise, ignorant
Ungepicus, irrational a, ie Ungepunelic, unusual * Unslad, unpleasant, not glad Unsleapney, want of skill Unhal, unhealthy, unsound Unheped, unheard Unhiope, tierce, tempestuous Unhipy, unhappy Unhpop, not bent down, erect Unhpeappiend, unchangeable Unleped, unlearned Unlond, a desert Unmepe Unmeplic Unmedeme, unworthy ar : impotent, weak Unmendhnga, unexpectedly Unmenniyche, inhuman Unmerza, excess Unmuhr, weakness Unmyndhnza, undesignedly Unnede, willingly, uncompelled Unnex Unnyz Unnyzlice, unprofitably Unoreprpipedlic, unconquerable Unonpendendlic, unchangeable Unnehs Unpiht wicked, unfit, unjust Unpyhe Unpihe Unpyhz Unmhthemed, adultery, unlawful lust Unpibche, unjust, wrong Unpihclice, unjustly, unrighteously Unmbepiy, unrighteous Unpor, sorrowful Unpocney, sorrow, bewailing, sad- ness Unpyhcpipney, unrighteousness Unyamppeed, incongruous Unyceadyulney, innocence Unreildig Unycylois Unynycpo, folly Unyzill, moving, restless Unyzpens, weak -
k ignoble, not celebrated
i vain, unprofitable
‘ injustice
i guiltless, innocent
GLOSSARY.
Unrcypiende, unstirring, immoy- able
Unypeocol, imperceptible
Unzelu, faultless
Unzela, not well, amiss
Unpeapy, ruin, detriment
Unbeap, a fault, vice
Unbylois, impatient
Unzdlice, unseasonably
Unailad, destitute
Unziopis, untiringly
Uncodzled, undivided
Unczodeledlic, indivisible, inse- parable
Unczpeopa, wanting in faith, deceit
Unzpymney, infirmity
Unzpeoreald
Unzpireald
Unzpiosende, undoubting
Uncyd, inexperienced
Unpenunga, unexpectedly
Unpeop%, worthless, dishonourable
Unpeophian, to dishonour, to dis- grace
UnpeopSycipe, dishonour, unworthi- ness
Unpuilley Oo one’s will, un-
Unpillum willingly
Unpiydom, folly
Unpimmod, unpunished
Unpliegan, to change the figure, or appearance
Unppecen, unpunished
Unpup%Sney, unworthiness, mean- ness
Unpynyum, unpleasant
Unpyp®, misfortune
Upahebban, to raise, to advance
Upapepan, to uprear, to excite
Upenbte, the top, the upper part
Upserapan, to go up, to ascend
Up-on-xepihte, upright
Uppan, upon
Uppyne, rising, an up course
Uppeapd
Uppeapdey
i sincere, simple
i upwards
Uy, pl. See ic Ucadpiyan, to drive out, to expel
Ucayapan, to sea LBR 'B Ucan, outwards, from iethdt Ucan Ute Uzon Ucancyman, to come from without Ucapeallan, to well out, to spring out Ucemeyt, most remote, furthest USpiza, a philosopher Uua, woe
- let us
ac, weak aclic, weak, vain Vachice, weakly adan, to wade, to walk Vecce, a watching Ved, clothes, apparel Veodl, indigence, want Veodla, indigent Veyz, a wonder, a marvel Vers, a wave elhpeop, bloodthirsty, cruel peop, De Velhpeopney palpi cruelty, slaughter en, a waggon Veeney-piyla, the waggon shafts Vepen, a weapon Vep; prudent Vepelice, anxiously Vepyeipe, prudence Vezp%, notable, extraordinary Veyum, fruit Ver, wet Veza, liquor Veep, water Vepban, to hunt aylan, to admire, to wonder at ayuns, astonishment tae i a wall Mig Dic to wag, to move to and TO Van Von Yonn Jana, a want Vancol, unstable
dark, pale, wan j
2D
394
Vandluns, changeableness
Vandpian, to wander, to vary
Vans, a field
Vanian, to wane, to diminish, to be lessened
Vapenian, to guard one’s self
Vapos
» Veanod
Veapos
Veposd
Pas, a flight
axan
eaxan } to increase
exan
Vea, woe, misery
Vea, miserable
Veald, the weald, a wold, a forest
Vealdan, to rule, to govern, to wield
Vezloand 1
Vealbend a ruler, a governor
Pealdende, powerful
Vealdlebep, a rein
Vealhycod, an interpreter
Peallan, to boil up, to rage
Pealopizan, to roll round
foie to fall into decay, to ealupan wither
Serkien to roll eapd, a guardian
Jay to dwell
Yeapm, warm
Peay, by chance
Vecs, a wedge, a mass of metal
Vecszan, to rouse, to agitate
edende, insane, mad
ag weather, a storm
a coast, the sea-shore
es, a way Ves-papan, to travel Vesyepend, a traveller Pel, well (ela, wealth, riches Pel-zehealden, well contented Pelis, rich Vell, a well, a spring elm, heat, fire Ven Vena
Yenan, to think, to ween, to imagine
a thought, an opinion
GLOSSARY,
Jenbdan, to turn, to proceed, to bend, to govern
Venbdel-ye, the Wendel sea
endings, a change
Veod, a weed
Veopad
Veped
Vepod
Veope-man, a workman
Veopd Vypd fate, fortune Veopod, sweet foe to cast, to throw eon Veopsdhe } worthy, deserving Vypbe Veopban, to be, to exist VeopSyullic, honourable Veop%Syullce, honourably VeopSseopn, desirous of honour Veoppian, to honour, to distinguish, to enrich, to worship YeopSmynd, honour, dignity eoporeipe, dignity, advantage Veop%yeipe, dignity, advantag Veopuld-biys worldly occupa- Veopuld-bipsuns tion Veopuld-buend, a dweller in the world Vepan, to weep, to bewail Ven, a man Vepdan, to corrupt, to injure Vepis, weary, vile Vemlic, manly, worthy of a man Vepodan, to grow sweet Vepphiod, a nation; pl. men Veryan, to be Verz, the west Verc-deel, the west part; «Qe. the west Verte, a waste, a desert eyte-peapd, westward ercmbeepe, fertile Vercmeyc, most westward hilum, sometimes Vhon. See JSpon Be a ae a dwelling-place 10, wide 7id-cuS, widely known, eminent Vide, widely Vidsille, wide, spacious
a company, a host
GLOSSABY.
ae amplitude
iomeepe, far-famed, celebrated
Vir, a wife, a woman
Virian, to take a wife, to marry
Vis, war
Visend, a warrior
Visey-heapd, a leader of war
Vi-la-pei, well-away !
Pld, wild
fild-deop, a wild beast
Palla, the will
Villan 2 to will, to desire, to wish, ee to be inclined to ununs, desire
Vin, wine
Vind, the wind
Yimdan, to wind, to wander, to circle
Vindey-50m, the power of the wind
Vingeapd, a vineyard
Vingedpinc, wine-drink ; 7.e. wine
Vinnan, to labour, to toil, to con- tend, to conquer
Vinzep, winter
Vincpes, wintry
Vir, wise
Viyoom, wisdom
Wire; way, custom, wise
Viyz, food
Viz, the mind
Vica, a wise man, a senator, a noble
Pican, to know
ican, to blame, to punish
Vice, a torment, a punishment
718, with, towards
15-cpeban, to gainsay, to contra- dict, to oppose
Vibeppeapd, adverse, rebellious, in- consistent
Vibeppeapdney, adversity
Vipeppinna, an enemy
iSyopan, before
/1Smezan, to compare
idsycandan, to withstand
fiSpmnan, to oppose
Vizman, to torment, to punish, to injure
Vicnungs, punishment
Vilecza, a loathing
Vilanc, splendid, rich
Viazian, to grieve
Vilenco, splendour, prosperity, pride, arrogance
Vluzan, to behold, to look upon
lize, beauty, excellence
Vies, beautiful
/od-bpas, fury
be { wrong
Voh-ypemmend, a doer of wicked- ness
Voh-hemez, adultery, unlawful lust
fol, a plague, severity, mischief
Volcen, a cloud, the welkin
Von, error
Joncla, unstable
Jonded, a crime
Vong-yzebde, a field
on-pilla, evil desire, lust
Pon-pilnuns, evil desire, a wicked purpose, lust
Von-pypd, evil fortune
op, weeping
ops, a word
opd-hopsd, a treasury of words
Vopn, a multitude, a number
PYopuld, the world, life in this world
Vopuld-luyz, worldly lust, plea- sure
pac, exile, banishment
Vpacu
Vpec
Ypec
Y Leen to punish, to correct
Vpecan Vpecy15, banishment
)/peec-yoop, an evil place, a place of banishment
Vpenney, lust, luxury
a we oa to support
pas, anger, wrath
yey angry, violent abe :
see i quickly
Vpecca, an exile, a wretch
frengeaes injury, revenge
396
pexan, to accuse
Vpenc, a fraud, deceit
V/pisan, to tend towards, to incline, to strive
Vpimsan, to wring, to press
pican, to write
Vpicepe, a writer
: a wood fowl
Vubhung, madness, fury
byte \ a thing, a creature
uldep ? Prlboy § SY Vuly, a wolf und, a wound und, wounded Yundep Pundop undeplic undoplic undeplice snbonline i wonderfully undian, to wound Vundpian, to wonder, to wonder at, to admire undpum, wonderfully unian, to remain, to dwell vnyum, pleasant, winsome ynyumlice, happily ynyumney, pleasantness ypcan, to labour, to make yphra, a maker, a wright ypm, a worm ypnan, to warn, prevent, refuse ypre, worse. See Yyel Vypt, a plant, a herb Vypcpuma, a root
a wonder
i wonderful
Ns Yyel, evil Yyel, bad; comp. pypre; sup. pypye
Yrele, evilly, miserably, badly
Yyelian Aer ’ Yyhan t to inflict evil
Yyel-pillend, evil-minded
GLOSSARY.
Yyel-pypcan, to do evil
Yyemeyz, highest, uppermost
Ymb-ceppan, to turn round
Ymb-clyppan, to encircle, to em- brace
Ymbe, about
Ymbe-hpeapye . Yantsineonye 5 deupfome Ymb-hpyprz
Ymb-hpeopyan, to turn about, to turn round, to encompass
Ymbe-hcgan, to lie around
Ymb-fon, to encircle, to encompass
Ymb-habban, to include, to con- tain
Ymbhosa, care, anxiety
Ymb-repipan, to revolve about
Ymb-yiczan, to surround
Ymb-rppecan, to speak about
Ymb-yzandan, to surround
Ymb-rpincan, to labour after any- thing
Ymb-uzan, round about
Ypmuian, to afflict, to oppress
Ypmuing, a wretch
Ypm‘, misery
Ypnan, to run
Yppe, anger, ire
Yppinga, angrily
Ypyiend, angry
Yprungs, anger
Yyz, a tempest, a storm
Yce, outwards; sup. ycemey', fur- thest
Y%, a wave
dD. Da, as, when Depe. See Diy Deyctepne Haber: darkness Papian, to suffer, to permit, to allow Dayuns, permission Danc Done DPancian, to thank Danc-pyps, thankworthy, table Danon, thence
t thanks, will, mind, favour
accep-
GLOSSARY.
Dap ot there
Deahc, counsel, thought | Deapy, need, necessity
- Deapyan { Dupyan _ Deapylhice, carefully
Deapl, heavy
Deaple, greatly “ Deap, a custom, manner Deccan, to conceal, to cover Desen Desn eng service, office, duty, re- Denuns tinue
Dencan ‘
' to need, to have need
{ a thane, a servant
.
to think, to imagine, to
| Dencean whedivate
| Dincan ' Denoden, while Denian Denizan Deod, a country
Deodan, to join, to associate Deoden a lord, a ruler, a people’s Pi1oden. ; ruler
Deodiyc, a language, a nation Deod-lond, people’s land, a people Deor, a thief
Boat to flourish
t to serve, to minister
Dion
Deopycpold
Dipy Epalb ‘ a threshold
Deoyctpu
Dioyepo
Diyepu
Deop, a servant, a slave
Deopodom, service, servitude
Deopian, to serve
Dic é
Ricca { thick
Piczan, to eat, to receive
Pidep, thither
Dylhe ‘ the like, such
Pin, thine
Dincan, to seem, to appear
Pins, a thing
Dinzepe, an advocate, a pleader
Dingian, to plead at the bar, to obtain
darkness
397
DPiod-fpuma, a nation’s founder, a creator
Diorcpan, to darken
sae ME i to howl
Duran
Diy, this
Diyl, the shafts of a waggon
Docpian, to be conducted
Dohan, to suffer
Donc, the mind, the will, a wish
Doncal-mod, wise in mind, wise
Donecan, as often as
Dononpeapd, thenceward, from thence
Donne, than
Dopn, a thorn
Dpzexd, thread
Dpesian, to run
Dpas, course of events, space of time
Dpeagan, to vex, to harass, to afflict
Dpeat, a troop
Dpeazian ( to threaten, to chide, to
Dpietan f admonish, to terrify
Dpeactuns, correction
Dpeauns, a threatening
Dpe-pedSpe
Ppie-pedSpe
Dpidda, third
Ppie-yealo, three-fold
Dypuingan, to crowd, to throng, to rush
ns oe { three Dpiczis, thirty
t three rows of rowers
| Dpoce, the throat
DPpopian, to suffer, to endure Dpyccan, to tread on, to trample Dpym, greatness, majesty, a crowd PDpym, glorious
| Dunep, thunder
Dunpian, to thunder
Duph-yapan, to go through, to penetrate
Duph-yeon, to see through
Duph-ceon, to accomplish, to fulfil
Duph-punian, to remain, to con- tinue, to persevere
Dupyt, thirst
25
Duy, thus ; . _-Duryend, a thousand 0) Dpapian, to temper, to moderate Dpeop, perverse
Dpeopreme, a brawler
THE END.
LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, STAMFORD STRELUT AND CHARING CRUSSy
eet Sees
Fe CRIA me VANS A
ST. ALBERT’S COLLEGE LIBRARY
iy «1892 8179 | | Boethius / sg, Fox = 189.2 8179
Boethius / S. Fox
Graduate Theological Union Library 2400 Ridge Road / Berkley, CA 94709
htuw
renecee i Pert
*
yi edce
nae es ut
tay
attend reste 97,
* 7 (pitty »
Petit a
Yara teow
he
bile «“ figs Pa Livia hyt! ahi patie Wh Capapetar ees Bardo g je ire batet hy Ais babs te
a
w yovesteid? aut
BM ALN a halt seb cthtag tl gyi sseabl au Sat Us aye
8 bo ty
hs i+ ay Ay ait
thao bate oni et crea m
es
ar ont x uth) run) saree tae ru iv
tat
vant We
widvaus! van . sy rite! J Ves S ap m4 Y
Toad aid ahinlee soit od omy ot elt AED 8 Wabibatesey: ¥en "sh
1 eery © Lp bpd Oe ghee ee»
f4 (eh © seal y be {- Mp weenie dip te Pier weab ines mn lavetenrhy Prin rs
ty “7
ols
EHH NAE Nek Pim lpn dobo eS ayers
radelen«acaeth Wh RA ge aon te nl Stale we doe wee bya ay -
Stasis sean ; : rites mi Both oe
jit prnlaj els ae) wai bith vi oe ; Oe ile a fh bpesile preva
4h acre vite : Penge ssa tb eve ty te
ed gedare
4 ej at Ato Se eat hele ONE vie eee Te te
oan en iat hve eke see Lig ecar te oid a $.
tuk) Eve Qs ehh Ve Whe ¢y Pbket
wa Spi poke 140 Ae oA
wy Wiel gedye iid
Heber be: wie!
gar aed init
agin + ies
Sarena aes
. uh said lithe Shee setpse af santas f} ays
Vaal aapreyeeat 4 Viaerebueys Mr beboer ae bef ree REM tetra “e ‘ teh gs nn
Be
repeat 240 ‘
tae
Ya
i ay . meer ol DYE RCH ning
tree
He Bothy tines ete BL PER tantedalay gt }
ae wher qe ceie el
i ve tat pepe ‘ ' arb neiias | © bie ae
UR Soret NRG Heth Libel Fe a tb sebiciet i seeeg) ee
Howse beer imate sree yieh Fey arte Abate et rg pais
i
Ruri ay
shinies Her pacsteen ye thie
mleetaievat ab ged at ove bettie i preyl een Sieve the as UMAGA EAM Dae eral roar Lorie hbet Vreie esis Tey Str Gepecaiant AGeRtenaeareyel fee 44 fenreurniass Webel ee rarvinre KL obeles er] boak ay ei heteen * reorient ey by RAR alet aS st Lohagey Ab sie tpt oN descdvete esi thay mioespengt yt eee dE D he LOL MBE ORL <r papvebege eae pete. re
soneg ; Han cL eter “
fi eateries \
syntoitd’ toi yh, oP ile J [pers
U
) *
ae Roaerure Heroes
i ine
: Sistas $4, vee iev
Hee, ay Psd Het | DOP
> Sas ki i the a
iy re uk tat thee
ere La ee |
mah We t/ ete pt *
faye ¥ ean at
bine
bie
peibens i it batterers Dye
+18) be seers ye
1 Nineaoaert
mes y Aten atay ane te tienb ce
2 v! aed novy a OT
rm,
eerient im ote: fe ee Micephir bint
perth atte ary ac rortel ng senegal sgeeek scsi 8 sm
bee Se
meets Steger a he eione}ttmeae hee poe ing poet one
whe ONC ant
aA inane iter ace ta
rt +2
bs
BBA!
rete : pitt
7
Abby betes
be Herendeen tt ie men Heaths a> chet Hts tietiteses maa Ril eH ah ytd nh DALE etabagtae dace ol of af agapron hoch cu Mary cave eee be rh hs hye. L 1 oe ni Lei paraneeak enguat petits =H areeeteeeeetatrdettar iets ritesunpal bei Barton Urawe cOPK if i oh Sins oer nine a erat iss nh Ray oe it tal water evociey ileneesgiah PiCeU aire Om beuriiees ret
en mutfsieond iret te
