iN ~
Te ty ; Ne,
; rn ne SE eyes
J ‘+ yaw y ie 7” 7 “ nk . ee. ve ‘ ‘ ee ae eh “ie F ‘ - 7 , ‘a
8 | ay. | . J SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE
*
>»
MR. SWINBURNE’S WORKS.
Selections from the Poetical Works of Algernon Charles Swinburne. Fcap. 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Atalanta in Calydon. Crown 8vo, 6s. Chastelard, A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, 7s.
Poems and Ballads. First Series. Fcap. 8vo, 9s.—Crown 8vo, same price.
Poems and Ballads. Srconp Series. Fcap. 8vo, 9s.—Crown 8vo, same price.
Notes on Poems and Reviews. Demy 8vo, 1s.
Songs before Sunrise. Crown 8vo, ros. 6d.
Bothwell: A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, 12s. 6d.
Songs of Two Nations. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Essays and Studies. Crown 8vo, 12s.
Erechtheus; A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Note on Charlotte Bronte. Crown 8vo, 6s.
A Study of Shakespeare, Crown 8vo, 8s.
Songs of the Springtides. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Studies in Song. Crown 8vyo, 7s.
Mary Stuart: A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, 8s.
Tristram of Lyonesse, and other Poems. Crown 8vo, gs. A Century of Roundels. Small 4to, 8s.
A Midsummer Holiday, and other Poems. Crown 8vo, 7s. Marino Faliero: A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, 6s.
A Study of Victor Hugo. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Miscellanies, Crown 8vo, 12s.
Locrine: A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, 6s.
LONDON: CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY, W.
SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE
“-
BY
ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE
A NEW EDITION
. London CHATTO AND WINDUS, PICCADILLY 1888 :
ne be iene
Dedication.
TO JOSEPH MAZZINJ.
TAKE, since you bade it should bear, These, of the seed of your sowing, Blossom or berry or weed. Sweet though they be not, or fair, That the dew of your word kept growing, ' Sweet at least was the seed.
Men bring you love-offerings of tears, And sorrow the kiss that assuages, And slaves the hate-offering of wrongs, And ume the thanksgiving of years, And years the thanksgiving of ages ; I bring you my handful of songs.
If a perfume be lett, if a bloom, Let it live tiil Italia be risen,
To be strewn in the dust of her car When her voice shall awake from the tomb England, and France from her prison,
Sisters, a star by a star.
3.
DEDICATION.
I bring you the sword of a song, The sword of my spirit’s desire, Feeble ; but laid at your feet, That which was weak shall be strong, That which was cold shall take fire, That which was bitter be sweet.
It was wrought not with hands to smite, Nor hewn after swordsmiths’ fashion, Nor tempered on anvil of steel ; But with visions and dreams of the night, But with hope, and the patience of passion, And the signet of love for a seal.
Be it witness, till one more strong, Till a loftier lyre, till a rarer Lute praise her better than I, Be it witness before you, my song, That I knew her, the world’s banner-bearer, Who shall cry the republican cry.
Yea, even she as at first, Yea, she alone and none other, Shall cast down, shall build up, shall bring home ; Slake earth’s hunger and thirst, Lighten, and lead as a mother ;
First name of the world’s names, Rome.
ee ee
CONTENTS.
BRL samen) \ubwe ty epte THE EVE OF REVOLUTION . . A WATCH IN THE NIGHT . . SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS . THE HALT BEFORE ROME . . MENTANA : FIRST ANNIVERSARY BLESSED AMONG WOMEN. . THE LITANY OF NATIONS .. REPELS te a! VA er +e ee he BEFORE A CRUCIFIX . . « e PER R aia wy. 2 ww <a> 0 HYMN OF MAN 3 «4 «© « « THEI PILGRIMS... .« @ «© .« © ARMAND BARBBS . . +6 « « QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT . . .
BENS coh. eh tlm ol jon ee Le
TO WALT WHITMAN IN AMERICA.
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES a vs
102 109 125 130 132 140 143 150
viii CONTENTS.
A NEW YEAR’S MESSAGE .. MATER DOLOROSA. <5) ews MATER TRIUMPHALIS .. .
A MARCHING SONG . «6 «© e
SIENA Sites Ne ne ee Wee. he ane CORTRCORDIUMS 3) sehen) vonhernte IN SAN LORENZQ ° TIRESIAS ovaclema ats °
THE SONG OF THE STANDARD ON THE DOWNS .
MESSIDOR
ODE ON THE INSURRECTION IN Soa OM DOLE Tie aeaer mista atcpaats
EURY DICED ssn he) lel emuy wires
ANT APPEAL, cohicae tees arenes PERINDE AC CADAVER .. . MONOTONES).\1re ) Rei eeetremne THE TOBLATION iy lodnis tire ates A’ VEAR’S BURDEN . .-.« «
EPILOGUE e e ° ° e e e. NOTES se e e e * « e .
CANDIA
PAGE
164
> 167
171 179 TQI 205 206 207 224 229 236 240 251 252 253 258 263 265 266 271
285
at
SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE.
PRELUDE,
Between the green bud and the red Youth sat and sang by Time, and shed From eyes and tresses flowers and tears, From heart and spirit hopes and fears, Upon the hollow stream whose bed Is channelled by the foamless years ;
And with the white the gold-haired head Mixed running locks, and in Time’s ears Youth’s dreams hung singing, and Time’s truth
Was half not harsh in the ears of Youth.
Between the bud and the blown flower Youth talked with joy and grief an hour, With footless joy and wingless grief And twin-born faith and disbelief Who share the seasons to devour ; And long ere these made up their sheaf B
PRELUDE,
Felt the winds round him shake and shower The rose-red and the blood-red leaf,
Delight whose germ grew never grain,
And passion dyed in its own pain.
Then he stood up, and trod to dust
Fear and desire, mistrust and trust, And dreams of bitter sleep and swect And bound for sandals on his feet
Knowledge and patience of what must And what things may be, in the heat
And cold of years that rot and rust And alter; and his spirit’s meat
Was freedom, and his staff was wrought
Of strength, and his cloak woven of thought.
For what has he whose will sees clear To do with doubt and faith and fear, Swift hopes and slow despondencies ? His heart is equal with the sea’s And with the sea-wind’s, and his ear Is level to the speech of these, And his soul communes and takes cheer With the actual earth’s equalities, Air, light, and night, hills, winds, and streams,
And seeks not strength from strengthless dreams.
4 ae
“PRELUDE.
‘His soul is even with the sun
Whose spirit and whose eye are one, Who seeks not stars by day, nor light And heavy heat of day by night.
Him can no God cast down, whom none Can lift in hope beyond the height
Of fate and nature and things done By the calm rule of might and right
‘That bids men be and bear and do,
And die beneath blind skies or blue.
To him the lights of even and morn Speak no vain things of love or scorn, Fancies and passions miscreate By man in things dispassionate. Nor holds he fellowship forlorn With souls that pray and hope and hate, And doubt they had better not been born, And fain would lure or scare off fate And charm their doomsman from their doom And make fear dig its own false tomb.
He builds not half of doubts and half Of dreams his own soul’s cenotaph Whence hopes and fears with helpless eyes, Wrapt loose in cast-off cerecloths, rise B 2
PRELUDE,
And dance and wring their hands and laugh, And weep thin tears and sigh light sighs, And without living lips would quaff The living spring in man that lies, And drain his soul of faith and strength It might have lived on a life’s length.
He hath given himself and hath not sold To God for heaven or man for gold, Or grief for comfort that it gives, Or joy for grief’s restoratives. He hath given himself to time, whose fold Shuts in the mortal flock that lives On its plain pasture’s heat and cold _ And the equal year’s alternatives. Farth, heaven, and time, death, life, and he, Endure while they shall be to be.
“Yet between death and life are hours
To flush with love and hide in flowers ; What profit save in these?” men cry: “Ah, see, between soft earth and sky,
What only good things here are ours !” They say, “what better wouldst thou try,
What sweeter sing of ? or what powers
Serve, that will give thee ere thou die
PEELUDE,
More joy to sing and be less sad, More heart to play and grow more glad ?”
Play then and sing; we too have played, We likewise, in that subtle shade. We too have twisted through our hair Such tendrils as the wild Loves wear, And heard what mirth the Mzenads made, Till the wind blew our garlands bare And left their roses disarrayed, And smote the summer with strange air, And disengirdled and discrowned “The limbs and locks that vine-wreaths bound.
‘We too have tracked by star-proof trees The tempest of the Thyiades
Scare the loud night on hills that hid
The blood-feasts of the Bassarid, Heard their song’s iron cadences
Fright the wolf hungering from the kid, Outroar the lion-throated seas,
Outchide the north-wind if it chid, And hush the torrent-tongued ravines With thunders of their tambourines.
But the fierce flute whose notes acclaim
Dim goddesses of fiery fame,
PRELUDE.
Cymbal and clamorous kettledrum, Timbrels and tabrets, all are dumb That turned the high chill air to flame ;
The singing tongues of fire are numb That called on Cotys by her name Edonian, till they felt her come And maddened, and her mystic face Lightened along the streams of Thrace.
For Pleasure slumberless and pale, And Passion with rejected veil,
Pass, and the tempest-footed throng
Of hours that follow them with song Till their feet flag and voices fail,
And lips that were so loud so long Learn silence, or a wearier wail ;
So keen is change, and time so strong, To weave the robes of life and rend
And weave again till life have end.
But weak is change, but strengthless time,, To take the light from heaven, or climb
The hills of heaven with wasting feet. . ‘Songs they can stop that earth found meet, But the stars keep their ageless rhyme ;
Flowers they can slay that spring thought sweet,,
PRELUDE,
But the stars keep their spring sublime ; Passions and pleasures can defeat,
Actions and agonies control,
And life and death, but not the soul.
’ Because man’s soul is man’s God still, What wind soever waft his will Across the waves of day and night To port or shipwreck, left or right, By shores and shoals of good and ill; And still its flame at mainmast height Through the rent air that foam-flakes fill Sustains the indomitable light Whence only man hath strength to steer Or helm to handle without fear.
Save his own soul’s light overhead, None leads him, and none ever led, Across birth’s hidden harbour-bar, Past youth where shoreward shallows are, Through age that drives on toward the red Vast void of sunset hailed from far, To the equal waters of the dead ; Save his own soul he hath no star, And sinks, except his own soul guide, Helmless in middle turn of tide.
PRELUDE
No blast of air or fire of sun Puts out the light whereby we run
With girdled loins our lamplit race, .
And each from each takes heart of grace And spirit till his turn be done,
And light of face from each man’s face In whom the light of trust is one ;
Since only souls that keep their place By their own light, and watch things roll, And stand, have light for any soul.
A little time we gain from time To set our seasons in some chime, For harsh or sweet or loud or low, With seasons played out long ago And souls that in their time and prime Took part with summer or with snow, Lived abject lives out or sublime, And had their chance of seed to sow For service or disservice done To those days dead and this their son.
A little time that we may fill
-Or with such good works or such ill As loose the bonds or make them strong Wherein all manhood suffers wrong.
gs anki vi bi ne 7 ree PASAT ae - i 4: é | me ir aa r Mh * y : eg PRELUDE. Eg , a By rose-hung river and light-foot rill iat There are who rest not ; who think long 4 ¥
‘Till they discern as from a hill ‘ he ee At the sun’s hour of morning song, Known of souls only, and those souls free,
| The sacred spaces of the sea.
13
THE EVE OF REVOLUTION.
I.
THE trumpets of the four winds of the world Frora the ends of the earth blow battle; the night heaves, With breasts palpitating and wings refurled, With passion of couched limbs, as one who grieves Sleeping, and in her sleep she sees uncurled Dreams serpent-shapen, such as sickness weaves, Down the wild wind of vision caught and whirled, Dead leaves of sleep, thicker than autumn leaves, Shadows of storm-shaped things, Flights of dim tribes of kings, The reaping men that reap men for their sheaves, And, without grain to yield, Their scythe-swept harvest-field Thronged thick with men pursuing and fugitives, Dead foliage of the tree of sleep,
Leaves blood-coloured and golden, blown from deep to deep.
‘THE EVE OF REVOLUTION, rr
2. I hear the midnight on the mouniains cry With many tongues of thunders, and I hear Sound and resound the hollow shield of sky With trumpet-throated winds that charge and cheer, And through the roar of the hours that fighting fly, Through flight and fight and all the fluctuant fear, A sound sublimer than the heavens are high, A voice more instant than the winds are clear, Say to my spirit, “ Take Thy trumpet too, and make A rallying music in the void night’s ear, Till the storm lose its track, And all the night go back ; Till, as through sleep false life knows true life near, Thou know the morning through the night, And through the thunder silence, and through darkness light.”
z I set the trumpet to my lips and blow.
The height of night is shaken, the skies break, The winds and stars and waters come and go
By fits of breath and light and sound, that wake As out of sleep, and perish as the show
Built up of sleep, when all her strengths forsake
12 THE EVE OF REVOLUTION.
The sense-compelling spirit; the depths glow, The heights flash, and the roots and summits shake Of earth in all her mountains, And the inner foamless fountains And wellsprings of her fast-bound forces quake ; Yea, the whole air of life Is set on fire of strife, Till change unmake things made and love remake ; Reason and love, whose names are one, Seeing reason is the sunlight shed from love the sun.
4.
The night is broken eastward ; is it day, Or but the watchfires trembling here and there, Like hopes on memory’s devastated way, In moonless wastes of planet-stricken air ? © many-childed mother great and grey, O multitudinous bosom, and breasts that bare Our fathers’ generations, whereat lay The weanling peoples and the tribes that were, Whose new-born mouths long dead Those ninefold nipples fed, Dim face with deathless eyes and withered hair, Feostress of obscure lands,
Whose multiplying hands
THE EVE OF REVOLUTION. —_3
Wove the world’s web with divers races fair And cast it waif-wise on the stream,
_ The waters of the centuries, where thou sat’st to dream ;
5. O many-minded mother and visionary, Asia, that sawest their westering waters sweep With all the ships and spoils of time to carry And all the fears and hopes of life to keep, © Thy vesture wrought of ages legendary Hides usward thine impenetrable sleep, And thy veiled head, night’s oldest tributary, We know not if it speak or smile or weep. But where for us began The first live light of man And first-born fire of deeds to burn and leap, The first war fair as peace To shine and lighten Greece, And the first freedom moved upon the deep, God’s breath upon the face of time Moving, a present spirit, seen of men sublime ;
6.
There where our east looks always to thy west, Our mornings to thine evenings, Greece to thee, These lights that catch the mountains crest by crest ’ Are they of stars or beacons that we see ?
14 THE EVE OF REVOLUTION,
Taygetus takes here the winds abreast, And there the sun resumes Thermopyle , The light is Athens where those remnants rest, And Salamis the sea-wall of that sea. The grass men tread upon Is very Marathon, The leaves are of that time-unstricken tree That storm nor sun can fret Nor wind, since she that set Made it her sign to men whose shield was she ; Here, as dead time his deathless things, Eurotas and Cephisus keep their sleepless springs.
if
© hills of Crete, are these things dead ? O waves, O many-mouthed streams, are these springs dry ? Earth, dost thou feed and hide now none but slaves ? Heaven, hast thou heard of men that would not die? Is the land thick with only such men’s graves As were ashamed to look upon the sky? Ye dead, whose name outfaces and outbraves Death, is the seed of such as you gone by? Sea, have thy ports not heard Some Marathonian word Rise up to landward and to Godward fly ?
THE EVE OF REVOLUTION. 15
No thunder, that the skies Sent not upon us, rise With fire and earthquake and a cleaving cry? Nay, light is here, and shall be light, Though all the face of the hour be overborne with night.
8.
I set the trumpet to my lips and blow. The night is broken northward ; the pale plains And footless fields of sun-forgotten snow Feel through their creviced lips and iron veins Such quick breath labour and such clean blood flow As summer-stricken spring feels in her pains When dying May bears June, too young to know The fruit that waxes from the flower that wanes ; Strange tyrannies and vast, Tribes frost-bound to their past, Lands that are loud all through their length with chains, Wastes where the wind’s wings break, Displumed by daylong ache And anguish of blind snows and rack-blown rains, And ice that seals the White Sea’s lips, Whose monstrous weights crush flat the sides of shriek- ing ships ;
16 THE EVE OF REVOLUTION,
9. Horrible sights and sounds of the unreached pole, And shrill fierce climes of inconsolable air, Shining below the beamless aureole That hangs about the north-wind’s hurtling hair, A comet-lighted lamp, sublime and sole Dawn of the dayless heaven where suns despair: Earth, skies, and waters, smitten into soul, Feel the hard veil that iron centuries wear Rent as with hands in sunder, Such hands as make the thunder And clothe with form all substance and strip bare : Shapes, shadows, sounds and lights Of their dead days and nights Take soul of life too keen for death to bear ; Life, conscience, forethought, will, desire, Flood men’s inanimate eyes and dry-drawn hearts with
fire. TO.
Light, light, and light! to break and melt in sunder All clouds and chains that in one bondage bind Eyes, hands, and spirits, forged by fear and wonder And sleek fierce fraud with hidden knife behind ; There goes no fire from heaven before their thunder,
Nor are the links not malleable that wind
THE EVE OF REVOLUTION. 17
Round the snared limbs and souls that ache thereunder ; The hands are mighty, were the head not blind. Priest is the staff of king, And chains and clouds one thing, And fettered flesh with devastated mind. Open thy soul to see, Slave, and thy feet are free ; Thy bonds and thy beliefs are one in kind, (/ And of thy fears thine irons wrought Hang weights upon thee fashioned out of thine own thought.
Tt,
O soul, O God, O glory of liberty, To night and day their lightning and their light ! With heat of heart thou kindlest the quick sea, And the dead earth takes spirit from thy sight ; The natural body of things is warm with thee, And the world’s weakness parcel of thy might; Thou seest us feeble and forceless, fit to be Slaves of the years that drive us left and right, Drowned under hours like waves Wherethrough we row like slaves ; But if thy finger touch us, these take flight. If but one sovereign word Of thy live lips be heard, c
38 THE EVE OF REVOLUTION.
What man shall stop us, and what God shall smite? Do thou but look in our dead eyes, They are stars that light each other till thy sundawn rise. 12. Thou art the eye of this blind body of man, The tongue of this dumb people; shalt thou not See, shalt thou speak not for them? Time is wan And hope is weak with waiting, and swift thought Hath lost the wings at heel wherewith he ran, And on the red pit’s edge sits down distraught To talk with death of days republican . And dreams and fights long since dreamtout and fought; Of the last hope that drew To that red edge anew The firewhite faith of Poland without spot; Of the blind Russian might, And fire that is not light ; Of the green Rhineland where thy spirit wrought ; But though time, hope, and memory tire, Canst thou wax dark as they do, thou whose light is fire?
13: I set the trumpet to my lips and blow. The night is broken westward ; the wide sea That makes immortal motion to and fro : From world’s end unto world’s end, and shall be
s Cae ate Zs ~*~ of. a * / .
THE EVE OF REVOLUTION. 9
‘When nought now grafted of men’s hands shall grow And as the weed in last year’s waves are we Or spray the sea-wind shook a year ago From its sharp tresses down the storm to lee, The moving god that hides Time in its timeless tides Wherein time dead seems live eternity, That breaks and makes again Much mightier things than men, Doth it not hear change coming, or not sce P Are the deeps deaf and dead and blind, ‘To catch no light or sound from landward of imankind ?
14.
thou, clothed round with raiment of white waves, Thy brave brows lightening through the grey wet air, ‘Thou, lulled with sea-sounds of a thousand caves, _ And lit with sea-shine to thine inland lair, Whose freedom clothed the naked souls of slaves _ And stripped the muffled souls of tyrants bare, O, by the centuries of thy glorious graves, By the live light of the earth that was thy care, Live, thou must not be dead, Live ; let thine arméd head Lift itself up to sunward and the fair Cc 2
20 THE EVE OF REVOLUTION.
Daylight of time and man, Thine head republican, With the same splendour on thine helmless hair That in his eyes kept up a light Who on thy glory gazed away their sacred sight ;
15.
Who loved and looked their sense to death om thee ; Who taught thy lips imperishable things, And in thine ears outsang thy singing sea ; Who made thy foot firm on the necks of kings And thy soul somewhile steadfast—woe are we It was but for a while, and all the strings Were broken of thy spirit ; yet had he Set to such tunes and clothed it with such wings Jt seemed for his sole sake Impossible to break, And woundless of the worm that waits and stings, The golden-headed worm Made headless for a term, The king-snake whose life kindles with the spring’s, To breathe his soul upon her bloom, 3 And while she marks not turn her temple to her tomb.
THE EVE OF REVOLUTION. 2X 16,
By those eyes blinded and that heavenly head And the secluded soul adorable, O Milton’s land, what ails thee to be dead ? Thine ears are yet sonorous with his shell ‘That all the songs of all thy sea-line fed With motive sound of spring-tides at mid swell, And through thine heart his thought as blood is shed, Requickening thee with wisdom to do well; Such sons were of thy womb, England, for love of whom Thy name is not yet writ with theirs that fell, But, till thou quite forget What were thy children, yet On the pale lips of hope is as a spell ; And Shelley’s heart and Landor’s mind Lit thee with latter watch-fires ; why wilt thou be blind?
ee
‘Though all were else indifferent, all that live
Spiritless shapes of nations ; though time wait In vain on hope till these have help to give,
And faith and love crawl famished from the gate ; ‘Canst thou sit shamed and self-contemplative
With soulless eyes on thy secluded fate?
22 THE EVE OF REVOLUTION.
Though time forgive-them; thee shall he forgive Whose choice was in thine hand to be so great ? Who cast out of thy mind The passion of man’s kind, And made thee and thine old name separate ? Now when time looks to see New names and old and thee Build up our one Republic state by state, ‘England with France, and France with Spain, And Spain with sovereign Italy strike hands and reign.
18.
O known and Sa fountain-heads that fill Our dear life-springs of England! O bright race Of streams and waters that bear witness still To the earth her sons were made of! O fair face Of England, watched of eyes death cannot kill, How should the soul that lit you for a space Fall through sick weakness of a broken will To the dead cold damnation of disgrace ? Such wind of memory stirs On all green hills of hers, Such breath of record from so high a place, From years whose tongues of flame Prophesied in her name
a : -
‘ THE EVE OF REVOLUTION. 23
‘Her feet should keep truth’s bright and burning trace, We needs must have her heart with us, Whose hearts are one with man’s; she must be dead or thus.
IQ. ; Who is against us? who is on our side? Whose heart of all men’s hearts is one with man’s ? Where art thou that wast prophetess and bride, When truth and thou trod under time and chance? What latter light of what new hope shall guide Out of the snares of hell thy feet, O France? What heel shall bruise these heads that hiss and glide, What wind blow out these fen-born fires that dance Before'thee to thy death ? No light, no life, no breath, From thy dead eyes and lips shall take the trance, Till on that deadliest crime Reddening the feet of time ’ Who treads through blood and passes, time shall glance Pardon, and Italy forgive. And Rome arise up whom thou slewest, and bid thee live.
/
20.
I set the trumpet to my lips and blow. The night is broken southward ; the springs run,
24 THE EVE OF REVOLUTION.
The daysprings and the watersprings that flow Forth with one will from where their source was one, Out of the might of morning: high and low, The hungering hills feed full upon the sun, The thirsting valleys drink of him and glow As a heart burns with some divine thing done, Or as blood burns again In the bruised heart of Spain, A rose renewed with red new life begun, Dragged down with thorns and briers, That puts forth buds like fires Till the whole tree take flower in unison, And prince that clogs and priest that clings Be cast as weeds upon the dunghill of dead things.
21.
Ah heaven, bow down, be nearer! This is she, Italia, the world’s wonder, the world’s care, Free in her heart ere quite her hands be free, And lovelier than her loveliest robe of air. The earth hath voice, and speech is in the sea, Sounds of great joy, too beautiful to bear ; All things are glad because of her, but we Most glad, who loved her when the worst days were. O sweetest, fairest, first, O flower, when times were worst,
a ee ee Pe ee oe; ‘ ‘ : :
'
THE EVE OF REVOLUTION. 25
‘Thou hadst no stripe wherein we had no share. Have not our hearts held close, Kept fast the whole world’s rose ? Have we not worn thee at heart whom none would wear ? First love and last love, light of lands, Shall we not touch thee full-blown with our lips and hands
22.
O too much loved, what shall we say of thee? What shall we make of our heart’s burning fire, The passion in our lives that fain would be Made each a brand to pile into the pyre That shall burn up thy foemen, and set free The flame whence thy sun-shadowing wings aspire ? Love of our iife, what more than men are we, That this our breath for thy sake should expire, For whom to joyous death Glad gods might yield their breath, Great gods drop down from heaven to serve for hire? We are but men, are we, And thou art Italy ; What shall we do for thee with our desire ? What gift shall we deserve to give? How shall we die to do thee service or how live?
=6 THE EVE CF REVOLUTION,
2.3. The very thought in us how much we love thee Makes the throat sob with love and blinds the eyes. How should love bear thee, to behold above thee His own light burning from reverberate skies ? They give thee light, but the light given them of thee Makes faint the wheeling fires that fall and rise. What love, what life, what death of man’s should move thee, What face that lingers or what foot that flies ? It is not heaven that lights Thee with such days and nights, But thou that heaven is lit from in such wise. O thou her dearest birth, Turn thee to lighten earth, Earth too that bore thee and yearns to thee and cries ; ‘Stand up, shine, lighten, become flame, Till as the sun’s name through all nations be thy name.
24) I take the trumpet from my lips and sing. O life immeasurable and imminent love, And fear like winter leading hope like spring, Whose flower-bright brows the day-star sits above, Whose hand unweariable and untiring wing Strike music from a world that wailed and strove,
Payee ot See oer
THE EVE OF REVOLUTION. 27
Each bright soul born and every glorious thing, ». From very freedom to man’s joy thereof, O time, O change and death, Whose now not hateful breath But gives the music swifter feet to move Through sharp remeasuring tones Of refluent antiphones More tender-tuned than heart or throat of dove, Soul into soul, song into song, Life changing into life, by laws that work not wrong ;
25. O natural force in spirit and sense, that art One thing in all things, fruit of thine own fruit, O thought illimitable and infinite heart Whose blood is life in limbs indissolute That still keeps hurtless thine invisible part And inextirpable thy viewless root Whence all sweet shafts of green and each thy dart Of sharpening leaf and bud resundering shoot ; Hills that the day-star hails, Heights that the first beam scales, And heights that souls outshining suns salute, Valleys for each mouth born Free now of plenteous corn, Waters and woodlands musical or mute ; -
28 THE EVE OF REVOLUTION.
Free winds that brighten brows as free, And thunder and laughter and lightning of the sovereign ee 26. Rivers and springs, and storms that seek your prey With strong wings ravening through the skies by night: Spirits and stars that hold one choral way ; O light of heaven, and thou the heavenlier light Aflame above the souls of men that sway All generations of all years with might ; sunrise of the repossessing day, And sunrise of all-renovating right ; And thou, whose trackless foot Mocks hope’s or fear’s pursuit, Swift Revolution, changing depth with height ; And thou, whose mouth makes one All songs that seek the sun, Serene Republic of a world made white ; Thou, Freedom, whence the soul’s springs ran ; Praise earth for man’s sake living, and for earth’s sake man.
27.
Make yourselves wings, O tarrying feet of fate, And hidden hour that hast our hope to bear,
A child-god, through the morning-coloured gate That lets love in upon the golden air,
_ aaae = a - eee 2 SS PRP SP ONO EE 2 SA tl ih iia a ee ——— ee Pw =
~~
. THE VE OF REVOLUTION, é 2 eat on piibes threshold lies heart-broken hate,
Dead discord, dead injustice, dead despair ; O love long looked for, wherefore wilt thou wait, a\nd shew not yet the dawn on thy bright hair, Not yet thine hand released Refreshing the faint east, Thine hand reconquering heaven, to seat man there ? Come forth, be born and live, Thou that hast help to give And light to make man’s day of manhood fair: With flight outflying the spheréd sun, Hasten thine hour and halt not, till thy work be done.
‘err a.)
A WATCH IN THE NIGHT.
Ve
WATCHMAN, what of the night? Storm and thunder and rain, Lights that waver and wane, Leaving the watchfires unlit. © Only the balefires are bright, And the flash of the lamps now and then From a palace where spoilers sit, Trampling the children of men,
Qe
Prophet, what of the night p— I stand by the verge of the sea, Banished, uncomforted, free, Hearing the noise of the waves And sudden flashes that smite Some man’s tyrannous head, Thundering, heard among graves That hide the hosts of his dead.
A WATCH IN THE NIGHT. 3r
3,
Mourners, what of the night >—
All night through without sleep
We weep, and we weep, and we weep. Who shall give us our sons? Beaks of raven and kite,
Mouths of wolf and of hound, Give us them back whom the guns
Shot for you dead on the ground.
4.
Dead men, what of the night >—
Cannon and scaffold and sword,
Horror of gibbet and cord, Mowed us as sheaves for the grave, Mowed us down for the right.
We do not grudge or repent. Freely to freedom we gave
Pledges, till life should be spent.
5:
Statesman, what of the night P— The night will last me my time. The gold on a crown or a crime
Looks well enough yet by the lamps.
Have we not fingers to write,
Lips to swear at a need?
32
A WATCH IN THE NIGHT.
Then, when danger decamps, Bury the word with the deed.
6.
Warrior, what of the night >— Whether it be not or be Night, is as one thing to me. I for one, at the least, Ask not of dews if they blight, Ask not of flames if they slay, Ask not of prince or of priest How long ere we put them aways
qe Master, what of the night >— Child, night is not at all Anywhere, fallen or to fall, Save in our star-stricken eyes. Forth of our eyes it takes flight, Look we but once nor before
Nor behind us, but straight on the skies
Night is not then any more,
8.
Exile, what of the night >— The tides and the hours run out,
A WATCH IN THE NIGHT.
The seasons of death and of doubt The night-watches bitter and sore. In the quicksands leftward and right My feet sink down under me ; But I know the scents of the shore
a
And the broad blown breaths of the sea.
9.
Captives, what of the night >—
It rains outside overhead
Always, a rain that is red, And our faces are soiled with the rain. Here in the seasons’ despite
Day-time and night-time are one, Till the curse of the kings and the chain
Break, and their toils be undone.
Io.
Christian, what of the night >— I cannot tell; I am blind. I halt and hearken behind If haply the hours will go back And return to the dear dead light, To the watchfires and stars that of old Shone where the sky now is black, Glowed where the earth now is cold. D
33
34
A WATCH IN THE NIGHT, icine
High priest, what of the night ?— The night is horrible here With haggard faces and fear, Blood, and the burning of fire. Mine eyes are emptied of sight, Mine hands are full of the dust. If the God of my faith be a liar, - Who is it that I shall trust ?
12.
Princes, what of the night >— Night with pestilent breath Feeds us, children of death,
Clothes us close with her gloom,
Rapine and famine and fright Crouch at our feet and are fed,
Earth where we pass is a tomb,
Life where we triumph is dead.
13.
Martyrs, what of the night >— Nay, is it night with you yet ? We, for our part, we forget
What night was, if it were.
A WATCH IN THE NIGHT.
‘The loud red mouths of the fight Are silent and shut where we are.
In our eyes the tempestuous air Shines as the face of a star.
14.
England, what of the night >— Night is for slumber and sleep, Warm, no season to weep. Let me alone till the day. Sleep would I still if I might, Who have slept for two hundred years. Once I had honour, they say ; But slumber is sweeter than tears.
15.
France, what of the night >— Night is the prostitute’s noon, Kissed and drugged till she swoon, Spat upon, trod upon, whored. With bloodred rose-garlands dight, Round me reels in the dance Death, my saviour, my lord, Crowned ; there is no more France. D2
35
36
A WATCH IN THE NIGHT, 16.
Italy, what of the night p— Ah, child, child, it is long! Moonbeam and starbeam and song Leave it dumb now and dark. Yet I perceive on the height Eastward, not now very far, A song too loud for the lark, A light too strong for a star.
1. Germany, what of the night >— Long has it lulled me with dreams ¢ Now at midwatch, as it seems, Light is brought back to mine eyes, And the mastery of old and the might Lives in the joints of mine hands, Steadies my limbs as they rise, Strengthens my foot as it stands,
18.
Europe, what of the night P—
Ask of heaven, and the sea,
And my babes on the bosom of me, Nations of mine, but ungrown,
ese * 4 _ All that endure or that err:
She can answer alone : Ask not of me, but of her. i
19. ti a om Liberty, what of the night >— . <u I feel not the red rains fall, Hear not the tempest at all,
Nor thunder in heaven any more. All the distance is white
_ With the soundless feet of the sin. Night, with the woes tiat it wore, ; Night is over and aone. ox
"7
SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS.
By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, Remembering thee,
That for ages of agony hast endured, and slept, And wouldst not see.
By the waters of Babylon we stood up and sang, Considering thee,
That a blast of deliverance in the darkness rang, To set thee free.
And with trumpets and thunderings and with morning song, Came up the light ;
And thy spirit uplifted thee to forget thy wrong As day doth night.
And thy sons were dejected not any more, as then When thou wast shamed ;
When thy lovers went heavily without heart, as men Whose life was maimed,
SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS. 39
In the desolate distances, with a great desire, For thy love’s sake,
With our hearts going back to thee, they were filled with fire, Were nigh to break.
It was said to us: “ Verily ye are great of heart, But ye shall bend ; Ye are bondsmen and bondswomen, to be scourged and smart, To toil and tend.”
And with harrows men harrowed us, and subdued with spears, And crushed with shame ; And the summer and winter was, and the length of years, And no change came.
By the rivers of Italy, by the sacred streams, By town, by tower, ' There was feasting with revelling, there was sleep with dreams, Until thine hour.
And they slept and they rioted on their rose-hung beds, With mouths on flame, And with love-locks vine-chapleted, and with rose- crowned heads And robes of shame.
4o SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS..
And they knewnot theirforefathers, northehillsand streams And words of power, Nor the gods that were good to them, but with songs and dreams Filled up their hour,
By the rivers of Italy, by the dry streams’ beds, When thy time came, There was casting of crowns from them, from their young men’s heads, The crowns of shame.
By the horn of Eridanus, by the Tiber mouth, As thy day rose, :
They arose up and girded them to the north and south, By seas, by snows.
As a water in January the frost confines, Thy kings bound thee ;
As a water in April is, in the new-blown vines, Thy sons made free.
And thy lovers that looked for thee, and that mourned from far, For thy sake dead, We rejoiced in the light of thee, in the signal star Above thine head,
SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS. 41
In thy grief had we followed thee, in thy passion loved, Loved in thy loss ; In thy shame we stood fast to thee, with thy pangs were moved, Clung to thy cross,
By the hillside of Calvary we beheld thy blood, Thy bloodred tears,
As a mother’s in bitterness, an unebbing flood, Years upon years.
And the north was Gethsemane, without leaf or bloom, A garden sealed ;
And the south was Aceldama, for a sanguine fume Hid all the field.
By the stone of the sepulchre we returned to weep, From far, from prison ;
And the guards by it keeping it we beheld asleep, But thou wast risen.
And an angel’s similitude by the unsealed grave, And by the stone:
And the voice was angelical, to whose words God gave Strength like his own,
42 SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS.
“Lo, the graveclothes of Italy that are folded up In the grave’s gloom! And the guards as men wrought upon with a charmed cup, By the open tomb.
“ And her body most beautiful, and her shining head, These are not here;
For your mother, for Italy, is not surely dead: Have ye no fear.
“« As of old time she spake to you, and you hardly heard, Hardly took heed,
So now also she saith to you, yet another word, Who is risen indeed.
“By my saying she saith to you, in your ears she saith, Who hear these things, Put no trust in men’s royalties, nor in great men’s breath, Nor words of kings.
“ For the life of them vanishes and is no more seen, Nor no more known ;
Nor shall any remember him if a crown hath been, Or where a throne,
SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS. 43
“Unto each man ‘his handiwork, unto each his crown, The just Fate gives ; Whoso takes the world’s life on him and his own: lays down, He, dying so, lives.
“Whoso bears, the whole heaviness of the wronged world’s weight And puts it by, It is well with him suffering, though he face man’s fate ; How should he die?
“Seeing death has no part in him any more, no power Upon his head ;
He has bought his eternity with a little hour, And is not dead.
“For an hour, if ye look for him, he is no more found,
For one hour’s space ; Then ye lift up your eyes to him and behold him crowned,
A deathless face.
“On the mountains of memory, by the world’s well- springs, In all men’s eyes, Where the light of the life of him is on all past things,
Death only dies.
44 SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS,
* Not the light that was quenched for us, nor the deeds that were, Nor the ancient days, Nor the sorrows not sorrowful, nor the face most fair Of perfect praise.”
So the angel of Italy’s resurrection said, So yet he saith; —
So the son of her suffering, that from breasts nigh dead Drew life, not death.
That the pavement of Golgotha should be white as snow Not red, but white ;
That the waters of Babylon should no longer flow, And men see light.
aed.
THE HALT BEFORE ROME.
SEPTEMBER, 1867.
Is it so, that the sword is broken, Our sword, that was halfway drawn? Is it so, that the light was a spark, , That the bird we hailed as the lark Sang in her sleep in the dark, | And the song we took for a token Bore false witness of dawn?
Spread in the sight of the lion, © Surely, we said, is the net
Spread but in vain, and the snare
Vain ; for the light is aware,
And the common, the chainless air,
Of his coming whom all we cry on; Surely in vain is it set.
‘Surely the day is on our side,
And heaven, and the sacred sun 5
46
THE HALT BEFORE ROME,
Surely the stars, and the bright
Immemorial inscrutable night :
Yea, the darkness, because of our light,
Is no darkness, but blooms as a bower-side When the winter is over and done;
Blooms underfoot with young grasses Green, and with leaves overhead, Windflowers white, and the low New-dropped blossoms of snow ; And or ever the May winds blow, And or ever the March wind passes, Flames with anemones red.
We are here in the world’s bower-garden, We that have watched out the snow. Surely the fruitfuller showers, _ The splendider sunbeams are ours ; Shall winter return on the flowers, And the frost after April harden, And the fountains in May not flow?
We have in our hands the shining
And the fire in our hearts of a star. Who are we that our tongues should palter, Hearts bow down, hands falter,
THE HALT BEFORE ROME. 47
Who are clothed as with flame from the altar, That the kings of the earth, repining, Far off, watch from afar ?
Woe is ours if we doubt or dissemble, Woe, if our hearts not abide.
Are our chiefs not among us, we said,
Great chiefs, living and dead,
To lead us glad to be led?
For whose sake, if a man of us tremble, He shall not be on our side.
What matter if these lands tarry,
- That tarried (we said) not of old? France, made drunken by fate, England, that bore up the weight Once of men’s freedom, a freight Holy, but heavy to carry
For hands overflowing with gold.
Though this be lame, and the other Fleet, but blind from the sun,
And the race be no more to these,
Alas! nor the palm to seize,
Who are weary and hungry of ease,
Yet, O Freedom, we said, O our mother Is there not left to thee one?
48
THE HALT BEFORE ROME,
Is there not left of thy daughters, Is there not one to thine hand? Fairer than these, and of fame Higher from of old by her name ; Washed in her tears, and in flame Bathed as in baptism of waters, Unto all men a chosen land.
Her hope in her heart was broken, Fire was upon her, and clomb,
Hiding her, high as her head ;
And the world went past her, and said
(We heard it say) she was dead ;
And now, behold, she hath spoken, She that was dead, saying, “Rome.”
O mother of all men’s nations,
Thou knowest if the deaf world heard ! Heard not now to her lowest Depths, where the strong blood slowest Beats at her bosom, thou knowest, In her toils, in her dim tribulations,
Rejoiced not, hearing the word.
The sorrowful, bound unto sorrow, The woe-worn people, and all That of old were discomforted,
THE HALT BEFORE ROME. 49.
And men that famish for bread,
And men that mourn for their dead,
She bade them be glad on the morrow, Who endured in the day of her thrall.
The blind, and the people in prison, Souls without hope, without home, How glad were they all that heard ! When the winged white flame of the word Passed over men’s dust, and stirred Death ; for Italia was risen, And risen her light upon Rome,
The light of her sword in the gateway Shone, an unquenchable flame,
Bloodless, a sword to release,
A light from the eyes of peace,
To bid grief utterly cease,
And the wrong of the old world straightway Pass from the face of her fame :
Hers, whom we turn to and cry on, Italy, mother of men: From the light of the face of her glory, At the sound of the storm of her story, That the sanguine shadows and hoary E
5°
THE HALT BEFORE ROME.
Should flee from the foot of the lion, Lion-like, forth of his den.
As the answering thunder to thunder Is the storm-beaten sound of her past; As the calling of sea unto sea Is the noise of her years yet to be; For this ye knew not is she, Whose bonds are broken in sunder; This is she at the last.
So spake we aloud, high-minded, Full of our will; and behold,
The speech that was halfway spoken
Breaks, as a pledge that is broken, _
As a king’s pledge, leaving in token
Grief only for high hopes blinded, New grief grafted on old.
We halt by the walls of the city, Within sound of the clash of her chain. Hearing, we know that in there The lioness chafes in her lair, Shakes the storm of her hair, Struggles in hands without pity, Roars to the lion in vain.
| | :
Whose hand is stretched forth upon her?
- Whose curb is white with her foam? Clothed with the cloud of his deeds, Swathed in the shroud of his creeds,
Who is this that has trapped her and leads,
Who turns to despair and dishonour
Her name, her name that was Rome?
Over fields without harvest or culture,
Over hordes without honour or love,
Over nations that groan with their kings,
As an imminent pestilence flings
Swift death from her shadowing wings,
So he, who hath claws as a vulture, Plumage and beak as a dove.
He saith, “I am pilot and haven, Light and redemption I am
Unto souls overlaboured,” he saith ;
And to all men the blast of his breath
Is a savour of death unto death ;
And the Dove of his worship a raven, And a wolf-cub the life-giving Lamb.
He calls his sheep as a shepherd, Calls from the wilderness home, E 2
THE HALT BEFORE ROME. ——-
52
THE HALT BEFORE ROME,
““Come unto me and be fed,” To feed them with ashes for bread And grass from the graves of the dead, Leaps on the fold as a leopard,
Slays, and says, “I am Rome.”
Rome, having rent her in sunder, With the clasp of an adder he clasps; Swift to shed blood are his feet, And his lips, that have man for their meat, Smoother than oil, and more sweet Than honey, but hidden thereunder Festers the poison of asps.
As swords are his tender mercies, His kisses as mortal stings ; Under his hallowing hands
_ Life dies down in all lands ;
Kings pray to him, prone where he stands, And his blessings, as other men’s curses,
Disanoint where they consecrate kings.
With an oil of unclean consecration, With effusion of blood and of tears, With uplifting of cross and of keys,
THE HALT BEFORE ROME.
Priest, though thou hallow us these, Yet even as they cling to thy knees Nation awakens by nation,
King by king disappears,
How shall the spirit be loyal
To the shell of a spiritless thing ? Erred once, in only a word, The sweet great song that we heard Poured upon Tuscany, erred, Calling a crowned man royal
That was no more than a king.
Sea-eagle of English feather, A song-bird beautiful-souled, She knew not them that she sang; The golden trumpet that rang From Florence, in vain for them, sprang As a note in the nightingales’ weather Far over Fiesole rolled.
‘She saw not—happy, not seeing— Saw not as we with her eyes
Aspromonte ; she felt
Never the heart in her melt
53
54
THE HALT BEFORE ROME,
As in us when the news was dealt Melted all hope out of being, Dropped all dawn from the skies.
In that weary funereal season,
In that heart-stricken grief-ridden time, The weight of a king and the worth, With anger and sorrowful mirth,
We weighed in the balance of earth, And light was his word as a treason,
And neavy his crown as a crime.
Banners of kings shall ye follow None, and have thrones on your side None; ye shall gather and grow Silently, row upon row, Chosen of Freedom to go ladly where darkness may swallow, Gladly where death may divide.
Have we not men with us royal,
Men the masters of things ? In the days when our life is made new, All souls perfect and true Shall adore whom their forefathers slew 3. And these indeed shall be loyal,
And those indeed shall be kings,
TRE HALT BEFORE ROME. 55
Yet for a space they abide with us, Yet for a little they stand,
Bearing the heat of the day.
When their presence is taken away,
We shall wonder and worship, and say,
“Was not a star on our side with us ? Was not a God at our hand?”
These, O men, shall ye honour, Liberty only, and these. For thy sake and for all men’s and mine, Brother, the crowns of them shine Lighting the way to her shrine, That our eyes may be fastened upon her, That our hands may encompass her knees.
In this day is the sign of her shown to you ; Choose ye, to live or to die.
Now is her harvest in hand ;
Now is her light in the land ;
Choose ye, to sink or to stand,
For the might of her strength is made known to you
Now, and her arm is on high.
Serve not for any man’s wages, Pleasure nor glory nor gold ;
56
THE HALT BEFORE ROME,
Not by her side are they won Who saith unto each of you, “Son, Silver and gold have I none ; I give but the love of all ages, And the life of my people of old.”
Fear not for any man’s terrors ; Wait not for any man’s word ;
Patiently, each in his place,
Gird up your loins to the race ;
Following the print of her pace,
Purged of desires and of errors, March to the tune ye have heard.
March to the tune of the voice of her, Breathing the balm of her breath,
Loving the light of her skies.
Blessed is he on whose eyes
Dawns but her light as he dies;
Blessed are ye that make choice of her, Equal to life and to death,
Ye that when faith is nigh frozen, Ye that when hope is nigh gone,
THE HALT BEFORE ROME, 57
Still, over wastes, over waves,
Still, among wrecks, among graves,
Follow the splendour that saves,
Happy, her children, her chosen, Loyally led of her on,
The sheep of the priests, and the cattle That feed in the penfolds of kings,
Sleek is their flock and well-fed ;
Hardly she giveth you bread,
Hardly a rest for the head,
Till the day of the blast of the battle And the storm of the wind of her wings.
Ye that have joy in your living, Ye that are careful to live,
You her thunders go by:
Live, let men be, let them lie,
Serve your season, and die ;
Gifts have your masters for giving, Gifts hath not Freedom to give ;
She, without shelter or station, She, beyond limit or bar,
Urges to slumberless speed
Armies that famish, that bleed,
58
THE HALT BEFORE ROME,
Sowing their lives for her seed, That their dust may rebuild her a nation, That their souls may relight her a star.
Sappy are all they that follow her ; Them shall no trouble cast down ; Though she slay them, yet shall they trust in her, For unsure there is nought nor unjust in her, Blemish is none, neither rust in her ; Though it threaten, the night shall not swallow her, Tempest and storm shall not drown.
Hither, O strangers, that cry for her, Holding your lives in your hands,
Hither, for here is your light,
Where Italy is, and her might ;
Strength shall be given you to fight,
Grace shall be given you to die for her, For the flower, for the lady of lands ;
Turn ye, whose anguish oppressing you Crushes, asleep and awake, For the wrong which is wrought as of yore; That Italia may give of her store, Having these things to give and no more; Only her hands on you, blessing you ; Only a pang for her sake ;
ae Oy te.) ee
THE HALT BEFORE ROME.
Only her bosom to die on; Only her heart for a home, _ And a name with her children to be From Calabrian to Adrian sea Famous in cities made free That ring to the roar of the lion Proclaiming republican Rome.
59
tomy gaggle
60
MENTANA: FIRST ANNIVERSARY.
At the time when the stars are grey, And the gold of the molten moon Fades, and the twilight is thinned, And the sun leaps up, and the wind, A light rose, not of the day, A stronger light than of noon.
As the light of a face much loved Was the face of the light that clomb ; As a mother’s whitened with woes Her adorable head that arose ; As the sound of a god that is moved, Her voice went forth upon Rome.
At her lips it fluttered and failed Twice, and sobbed into song, And sank as a flame sinks under ; Then spake, and the speech was thunder, And the cheek as he heard it paled Of the wrongdoer grown grey with the wrong.
MENTANA;: FIRST ANNIVERSARY. 65
“Ts it time, is it time appointed, Angel of time, is it neat?
For the spent night aches into day
When the kings shall slay not or pray,
a\nd the high-priest, accursed and anointed, Sickens to deathward with fear.
“For the bones of my slain are stirred, And the seed of my earth in her womb Moves as the heart of a bud Beating with odorous blood To the tune of the loud first bird Burns and yearns into bloom,
“T lay my hand on her bosom;
My hand on the heart of my earth, And I feel as with shiver and sob The triumphant heart in her throb, The dead petals dilate into blossom,
The divine blood beat into birth.
‘© my earth, are the springs in thee dry? O sweet, is thy body a tomb?
Nay, springs out of springs derive,
And summers from summers alive,
And the living from them that die ; No tomb is here, but a womb.
62
MENTANA;: FIRST ANNIVERSARY,
“© manifold womb and divine,
Give me fruit of my children, give! TI have given thee my dew for thy root, Give thou me for my mouth of thy fruit ; Thine are the dead that are mine,
And mine are thy sons that live.
“ O goodly children, O strong
Italian spirits, that wear My glories as garments about you, Could time or the world misdoubt you, Behold, in disproof of the wrong,
The field of the grave-pits there.
“And ye that fell upon sleep, We have you too with us yet. Fairer than life or than youth Is this, to die for the truth: No death can sink you so deep As their graves whom their brethren forget.
“Were not your pains as my pains ? As my name are your names not divine? Was not the light in your eyes Mine, the light of my skies, And the sweet shed blood of your veins, O my beautiful martyrs, mine?
MENTANA: FIRST ANNIVERSARY.
“‘Of mine earth were your dear limbs made, Of mine air was your sweet life’s breath; At the breasts of my love ye were fed, O my children, my chosen, my dead, At my breasts where again ye are laid, At the old mother’s bosom, in death.
“But ye that live, O their brothers, Be ye to me as they were;
Give me, my children that live,
What these dead grudged not to give,
Who alive were sons of your mother’s, Whose lips drew breath of your air.
** Till darkness by dawn be cloven, Let youth’s self mourn and abstain;
And love’s self find not an hour,
And spring’s self wear not a flower,
And Lycoris, with hair unenwoven, Hail back to the banquet in vain.
“So sooner and surer the glory That is not with us shall be,
And stronger the hands that smite
The heads of the sons of night,
And the sound throughout earth of our story Give all men heart to be free.”
63
64
BLESSED AMONG WOMEN, ‘To THe StcnorA CaiROL. I.
BLESSED was she that bare,
Hidden in flesh most fair, For all men’s sake the likeness of all love;
Holy that virgin’s womb,
The old record saith, on whom The glory of God alighted as a dove;
Blessed, who brought to gracious birth The sweet-souled Saviour of a man-tormented earth,
2.
But four times art thou blest, At whose most holy breast
Four times a godlike soldier-saviour hung ; And thence a fourfold Christ Given to be sacrificed
To the same cross as the same bosom clung ; Poured the same blood, to leave the same
Light on the many-folded mountain-skirts of fame.
BLESSED AMONG WOMEN, 65
a
3 Shall they and thou not live, The children thou didst give
Forth of thine hands, a godlike gift, to death, Through fire of death to pass For her high sake that was
Thine and their mother, that gave all you breath ? Shall ye not live till time drop dead,
O mother, and each her children’s consecrated head ?
4. Many brought gifts to take For her love’s supreme sake, Life and life’s love, pleasure and praise and rest, And went forth bare; but thou, So much once richer, and now Poorer than all these, more than these be blest ; Poorer so much, by so much given, Than who gives earth for heaven’s sake, not for earth’s sake heaven. 5. Somewhat could each soul save, What thing soever it gave, But thine, mother, what has thy soul kept back? None of thine all, not one, To serve thee and be thy son, F
66 BLESSED AMONG WOMEN,
Feed with love all thy days, lest one day lack ; All thy whole life’s love, thine heart’s whole,
Thou hast given as who gives gladly, O thou the supreme
soul. 6. The heart’s pure flesh and blood, The heaven thy motherhood, The live lips, the live eyes, that lived on thee; The hands that clove with sweet Blind clutch to thine, the feet That felt on earth their first way to thy knee; The little laughter of mouths milk-fed,
Now open again to feed on dust among the dead ;
7: The fair, strong, young men’s strength, Light of life-days and length, And glory of earth seen under and stars above, And years that bring to tame Now tie wild falcon fame,
Now, to stroke smooth, the dove-white breast of love ;
The life unlived, the unsown seeds, Suns unbeholden, songs unsung, and undone deeds.
8.
Therefore shall man’s love be As an own son to thee,
t
BLESSED AMONG WOMEN.
And the world’s worship of thee for a child ; All thine own land as one New-born, a nursing son, All thine own people a new birth undefiled ; : And all the unborn Italian time, And all its glory, and all its works, thy seed sublime.
9.
That henceforth no man’s breath,
Saying “Italy,” but saith In that most sovereign word thine equal name ;
Nor can one speak of thee
But he saith “ Italy,” Seeing in two suns one co-eternal flame ;
One heat, one heaven, one heart, one fire, One light, one love, one benediction, one desire.
To.
Blest above praise and prayer And incense of men’s air, Thy place is higher than where such voices rise As in men’s temples make Music for some vain sake, This God’s or that God’s, in one weary wise ; Thee the soul silent, the shut heart, The locked lips of the spirit praise thee that thou art. F 2
63 BLESSED AMONG WOMEN. II.
Yea, for man’s whole life’s length, And with man’s whole soul’s strength, We praise thee, O holy, and bless thee, O mother of lights ; And send forth as on wings The world’s heart’s thanksgivings, Song-birds to sing thy days through and thy nights ; And wrap thee around and arch thee above With the air of benediction and the heaven of love.
12,
And toward thee our unbreathed words Fly speechless, winged as birds, As the Indian flock, children of Paradise, The winged things without feet, Fed with God’s dew for meat, That live in the air and light of the utter skies ; So fleet, so flying a footless flight, With wings for feet love seeks thee, to partake thy sight.
13.
Love like a clear sky spread Bends over thy loved head, As a new heaven bends over a new-born earth,
BLESSED AMONG WOMEN, 69
\
When the old night’s womb is great With young stars passionate And fair new planets fiery-fresh from birth ; And moon-white here, there hot like Mars, Souls that are worlds shine on thee, spirits that are stars.
Cb.
Till the whole sky burns through With heaven’s own heart-deep hue, With passion-coloured glories of lit souls ; And thine above all names Writ highest with lettering flames Lightens, and all the old starriest aureoles And al! the old holiest memories wane, And the old names of love’s chosen, found in thy sight vain. 15. And crowned heads are discrowned, . And stars sink without sound, And love’s self for thy love’s sake waxes pale ; Seeing from his storied skies In what new reverent wise Thee Rome’s most highest, her sovereign daughters, hail ; Thee Portia, thee Veturia grey, Thee Arria, thee Cornelia, Roman more than they.
7° BLESSED AMONG WOMEN. PG;
Even all these as all we Subdue themselves to thee, Bow their heads haloed, quench their fiery fame ; Seen through dim years divine, Their faint lights feminine Sink, then spring up rekindled from thy flame ; Fade, then reflower and reillume From thy fresh spring their wintering age with new-blown bloom.
17 To thy much holier head Even theirs, the holy and dead, Bow themselves each one from her heavenward height 3 Each in her shining turn, > All tremble toward thee and yearn | To melt in thine their consummated light ; Till from day’s Capitolian dome One glory of many glories lighten upon Rome.
38.
Hush thyself, song, and cease, Close, lips, and hold your peace ; What help hast thou, what part have ye herein?
BLESSED AMONG WOMEN. 73
But you, with sweet shut eyes,
Heart-hidden memories, Dreams and dumb thoughts that keep what things have been Silent, and pure of all words said, Praise without song the living, without dirge the dead.
19. Thou, strengthless in these things, Song, fold thy feebler wings, And as a pilgrim go forth girt and shod, And where the new graves are, And where the sunset star, To the pure spirit of man that men call God, To the high soul of things, that is Made of men’s heavenlier hopes and mightier memories ;
20.
To the elements that make For the soul’s living sake
This raiment of dead things, of shadow and trance, That give us chance and time Wherein to aspire and climb
And set our life’s work higher than time or chance ; The old sacred elements, that give
The breath of life to days that die, to deeds that live ;
72 BLESSED AMONG WOMEN.
21.
To them, veiled gods and great, There bow thee and dedicate The speechless spirit in these thy weak words hidden ; And mix thy reverent breath With holier air of death, At the high feast of sorrow a guest unbidden, Till with divine triumphal tears Thou fill men’s eyes who listen with a heart that hears.
se ee ee
ee a
eS
73
THE LITANY OF NATIONS.
pa Ta, pa Ta, Boay PoBspby dadrpere. fEscu. Supp. 890.
CHORUS,
Ir with voice of words or prayers thy sons may reach thee, We thy latter sons, the men thine after-birth, We the children of thy grey-grown age, O Earth, O our mother everlasting, we beseech thee,
' By the sealed and secret ages of thy life ;
By the darkness wherein grew thy sacred forces ; By the songs of stars thy sisters in their courses ; By thine own song hoarse and hollow and shrill with strife ; By thy voice distuned and marred of modulation ; By the discord of thy measure’s march with theirs ; By the beauties of thy bosom, and the cares ; By thy glory of growth, and splendour of thy station ; By the shame of men thy children, and the pride ;
14 THE LITANY OF NATIONS.
By the pale-cheeked hope that sleeps and weeps and passes, As the grey dew from the morning mountain-grasses ;
By the white-lipped sightless memories that abide ;
By the silence and the sound of many sorrows ;
By the joys that leapt up living and fell dead ; By the veil that hides thy hands and breasts and head,
Wrought of divers-coloured days and nights and mor-
LOWS ;
Isis, thou that knowest of God what worlds are worth, Thou the ghost of God, the mother uncreated,
Soul for whom the floating forceless ages waited
As our forceless fancies wait on thee, O Earth ;
Thou the body and soul, the father-God and mother,
If at all it move thee, knowing of all things done Here where evil things and good things are not one,
But their faces are as fire against each other ;
By thy morning and thine evening, night and day ;
By the first white light that stirs and strives and hovers As a bird above the brood her bosom covers,
By the sweet last star that takes the westward way ;
- By the night whose feet are shod with snow or thunder, Fledged with plumes of storm, or soundless as the dew ; By the vesture bound of many-folded blue
Round her breathless breasts, and all the woven wonder ;
By the golden-growing eastern stream of sea;
| i
eee ee ee ee ee
TIE LITANY OF NATIONS. 75
By the sounds of sunrise moving in the mountains ; By the forces of the floods and unsealed fountains ; Thou that badest man be born, bid man be free.
GREECE.
I am she that made thee lovely with my beauty From north to south:
Mine, the fairest lips, took first the fire of duty From thine own mouth.
Mine, the fairest eyes, sought first thy laws and knew
them
Truths undefiled ;
Mine, the fairest hands, took freedom first into them, A weanling child.
By my light, now he lies sleeping, seen above him Where none sees other ;
By my dead that loved and living men that love him; (Cho.) Hear us, O mother.
ITALY.
I am she that was the light of thee enkindled When Greece grew dim ; She whose life grew up with man’s free life, and dwindled
With wane cf him.
76 THE LITANY OF NATIONS.
She that once by sword and once by word imperial Struck bright thy gloom ;
And a third time, casting off these years: funereal, Shall burst thy tomb.
By that bond ’twixt thee and me whereat affrighted Thy tyrants fear us ;
By that hope and this remembrance reunited ; (Cho.) O mother, hear us.
SPAIN.
{ am she that set my seal upon the nameless West worlds of seas ;
And my sons as brides took unto them the tameless Hesperides.
Till my sins and sons through sinless lands dispersed, With red flame shod,
Made accurst the name of man, and thrice accurséd The name of God.
Lest for those past fires the fires of my repentance Hell’s fume yet smother,
Now my blood would buy remission of my sentence ; (Cho.) Hear us, O mother.
FRANCE,
J am she that was thy sign and standard-bearer, Thy voice and cry ;
NN
THE LITANY OF NATIONS. “7
She that washed thee with her blood and left thee fairer The same was I.
Were not these the hands that raised thee fallen and fed
thee,
?
These hands defiled ? Was not I thy tongue that spake, thine eye that led thee, Not I thy child?
_ By the darkness on our dreams, and the dead errors
Of dead times near us ; By the hopes that hang around thee, and the terrors ; (Cho.) O mother, hear us,
RUSSIA.
I am she whose hands are strong and her eyes blinded And lips athirst
Till upon the night of nations many-minded One bright day burst :
Till the myriad stars be molten into one light, And that light thine ;
Till the soul of man be parcel of the sunlight, And thine of mine.
By the snows that blanch not him nor cleanse from
slaughter
Who slays his brother ;
By the stains and by the chains on me thy daughter;
| (Cho.) Hear us, O mother
78 THE LITANY OF NATIONS, SWITZERLAND.
T am she that shews on mighty limbs and maiden Nor chain nor stain ; For what blood can touch these hands with gold un. laden, These feet what chain? By the surf of spears one shieldless bosom breasted And was my shield, Till the plume-plucked Austrian vulture-heads twin crested Twice drenched the field ; By the snows and souls untrampled and untroubled That shine to cheer us, Light of those to these responsive and redoubled ; (Cho.) O mother, hear us.
GERMANY.
I am she beside whose forest-hidden fountains Slept freedom armed,
By the magic born to music in my mountains Heart-chained and charmed.
By those days the very dream whereof delivers My soul from wrong ;
By the sounds that make of all my ringing rivers None knows what song ;
THE LITANY OF NATIONS. ie
By the many tribes and names of my division One from another ;
By the single eye of sun-compelling vision ; (Cho.) Hear us, O mother.
ENGLAND,
I am she that was and was not of thy chosen, Free, and not free ;
She that fed thy springs, till now her springs are frozen ; Yet I am she.
By the sea that clothed and sun that saw me splendid And fame that crowned,
By the song-fires and the sword-fires mixed and blended That robed me round ;
By the star that Milton’s soul for Shelley’s lighted, Whose rays insphere us ;
By the beacon-bright Republic far-off sighted ; (Cho.) O mother, hear us.
CHORUS.
‘Surn away from us the cross-blown blasts of error, That drown each other ;
Turn away the fearful cry, the loud-tongued terror, O Earth, O mother.
Turn away their eyes who track, their hearts who follow, The pathless past ;
80 THE LITANY OF NATIONS.
Shew the soul of man, as summer shews the swallow, The way at last. By the sloth of men that all too long endure men On man to tread ; By the cry of men, the bitter cry of poor men That faint for bread ; By the blood-sweat of the people in the garden Inwalled of kings ; 5 By his passion interceding for their pardon Who do these things ; By the sightless souls and fleshless limbs that labour For not their fruit ; By the foodless mouth with foodless heart for neighbour, That, mad, is mute ; By the child that famine eats as worms the blossom —Ah God, the child! By the milkless lips that strain the bloodless bosom Till woe runs wild ; By the pastures that give grass to feed the lamb in, Where men lack meat ; By the cities clad with gold and shame and famine; By field and street ; By the people, by the poor man, by ne master That men call slave ; By the cross-winds of defeat and of disaster, By wreck, by wave ;
a ‘Though no star steer us, "By the waves that wash the morning we beseech thee.
O mother, hear us.
82
HERTHA.
I am that which began ; Out of me the years roll ; Out of me God and man ; I am equal and whole ; God changes, and man, and the form of them bodily; I am the soul.
Before ever land was, Before ever the sea, Or soft hair of the grass, Or fair limbs of the tree, Or the flesh-coloured fruit of my branches, L was, and thy soul was in me.
First life on my sources First drifted and swam ; Out of me are the forces That save it or damn ; Out of me man and woman, and wild-beast and bird; before God was, I am.
HERTHA. 83
Beside or above me Nought is there to go; Love or unlove me, Unknow me or know, I am that which unloves me and loves; I am stricken, and I am the blow.
I the mark that is missed And the arrows that miss, I the mouth that is kissed And the breath in the kiss, ‘The search, and the sought, and the seeker, the soul and the body that is,
I am that thing which blesses My spirit elate ; That which caresses With hands uncreate My limbs unbegotten that measure the length of the: measure of fate.
But what thing dost thou now, Looking Godward, to cry “T am J, thou art thou, I am low, thou art high”? I am thou, whom thou seekest to find him; find thou but thyself, thou art I.
34 HERTHA,
J the grain and the furrow, The plough-cloven clod And the ploughshare drawn thorough, The germ and the sod, The deed and the doer, the seed and the sower, the dust which is God.
Hast thou known how I fashioned thee, Child, underground ? Fire that impassioned thee, Tron that bound, Dim changes of water, what thing of all these hast thou
known of or found P
Canst thou say in thine heart Thou hast seen with thine eyes With what cunning of art Thou wast wrought in what wise, By what force of what stuff thou wast shapen, and showz on my breast to the skies P
Who hath given, who hath sold it thee, Knowledge of me ? Hath the wilderness told it thee? Hast thou learnt of the sea? Hast thou communed in spirit with night? have the winds taken counsel with thee?
¢ a
”" “
we a
ee)
"2
. ee ee ee PS
ee a a
*
HERTHA, 85
Have I set such a star To show light on thy brow That thou sawest from afar What I show to thee now ? ave ye spoken as brethren together, the sun and the mountains and thou?
What is here, dost thou know it? What was, hast thou known ? Prophet nor poet Nor tripod nor throne Nor spirit nor flesh can make answer, but only thy mother alone.
Mother, not maker, * Born, and not made ; Though her children forsake her, Allured or afraid, Praying prayers to the God of their fashion, she stirs not for all that have prayed.
A creed is a rod, And a crown is of night ; ‘But this thing is God, To be man with thy might, To grow straight in the strength of thy spirit, and live out thy life as the light.
86 HERTEFA,-
I am in thee to save thee, As my soul in thee saith, Give thou as I gave thee, Thy life-blood and breath, Green leaves of thy labour, white flowers of thy thought, and red fruit of thy death.
Be the ways of thy giving As mine were to thee ; The free life of thy living, Be the gift of it free ; Not as servant to lord, nor as master to slave, shalt thow give thee to me.
O children of banishment, Souls overcast, Were the lights ye see vanish meant Alway to last, Ye would know not the sun overshining the shadows andi stars overpast.
I that saw where ye trod The dim paths of the night Set the shadow called God In your skies to give light ; But the morning of manhood is risen, and the shadow- less soul is in sight.
er eee el veer Se Oe a
HERTHA, 87
The tree many-rooted That swells to the sky With frondage red-fruited, The life-tree am I ; Tn the buds of your lives is the sap of my leaves: ye shall live and not die.
~ But the Gods of your fashion That take and that give, In their pity and passion ~~ ‘That scourge and forgive, They are worms that are bred in the bark that falls off; they shall die and not live.
My own blood is what stanches The wounds in my bark ; Stars caught in my branches Make day of the dark, And are worshipped as suns till the sunrise shall tread out their fires as a spark.
Where dead ages hide under The live roots of the tree, In my darkness the thunder Makes utterance of me ; In the clash of my boughs with each other ye hear the waves sound of the sea.
83 HERTHA.
That noise is of Time, As his feathers are spread And his feet set to climb Through the boughs overhead, And my foliage rings round him and rustles, and branches are bent with his tread.
The storm-winds of ages Blow through me and cease, The war-wind that rages, The spring-wind of peace, Ere the breath of them roughen my tresses, ere one of my blossoms increase.
All sounds of all changes, All shadows and lights On the world’s mountain-ranges And stream-riven heights, Whose tongue is the wind’s tongue and language of storm- clouds on earth-shaking nights ;
All forms of all faces, All works of all hands In unsearchable places Of time-stricken lands, All death and all life, and all reigns and all ruins, drop through me as sands,
ween
Though sore be my burden And more than ye know, And my growth have no guerdon
= But only to grow, Yet I fail not of growing for lightnings above me or e deathworms below.
These too have their part in me, As I too in these ; fe Such fire is at heart in me, Such sap is this tree’s, Which hath in it all sounds and all secrets of infinite lands and of seas,
In the spring-coloured hours When my mind was as May’s, There brake forth of me flowers By centuries of days, Strong blossoms with perfume of manhood, shot out from my spirit as rays.
And the sound of them springing And smell of their shoots Were as warmth and sweet singing And strength to my roots ; And the lives of my children made perfect with freedom of soul were my fruits.
Ad 1s
go HERTHA,
I bid you but be ; I have need not of prayer ; | I have need of you free As your mouths of mine air ; That my heart may be greater within me, beholding the fruits of me fair.
More fair than strange fruit is Of faiths ye espouse ; In me only the root is That blooms in your boughs ; Behold now your God that ye made you, to feed him with faith of your vows.
In the darkening and whitening Abysses adored, With dayspring and lightning For lamp and for sword, God thunders in heaven, and his angels are red with the wrath of the Lord.
O my sons, O too dutiful Toward Gods not of me, Was not I enough beautiful ? Was it hard to be free ? Fort behold, Iam with you, am in you and of you; look forth now and see.
HERTHA, 91
Lo, winged with world’s wonders, With miracles shod, With the fires of his thunders For raiment and rod, God trembles in heaven, and his angels are white with the terror of God.
For his twilight is come on him, His anguish is here ; And his spirits gaze dumb on him, Grown grey from his fear ; And his hour taketh hold on him stricken, the last of his infinite year.
Thought made him and breaks him, Truth slays and forgives ; But to you, as time takes him, This new thing it gives, Even love, the beloved Republic, that feeds upon tree- dom and lives.
For truth only is living, Truth only is whole, And the love of his giving Man’s polestar and pole ; Man, pulse of my centre, and fruit of my body, and seed of my soul.
Halt t
ee
One birth of my bosom ; i One beam of mine eye; One topmost blossom | That scales the sky; Man, equal and one with me, man that is man that is I. ~
~
93
BEFORE A CRUCIFIX,
Here, down between the dusty trees, At this lank edge of haggard wood, Women with labour-loosened knees, With gaunt backs bowed by servitude, Stop, shift their loads, and pray, and fare Forth with souls easier for the prayer.
The suns have branded black, the rains Striped grey this piteous God of theirs ; The face is full of prayers and pains, To which they bring their pains and prayers: Lean limbs that shew the labouring bones, And ghastly mouth that gapes and groans.
God of this grievous people, wrought After the likeness of their race,
By faces like thine own besought, Thine own blind helpless eyeless face
I too, that have nor tongue nor knee
For prayer, I have a word to thee.
94
BEFORE A CRUCIFTX.
It was for this then, that thy speech Was blown about the world in flame And men’s souls shot up out of reach Of fear or lust or thwarting shame— That thy faith over souls should pass As sea-winds burning the grey grass ?
It was for this, that prayers like these Should spend themselves about thy feet,
And with hard overlaboured knees Kneeling, these slaves of men should beat
Bosoms too lean to suckle sons
And fruitless as their orisons ?
It was for this, that men should make Thy name a fetter on men’s necks, Poor men’s made poorer for thy sake, And women’s withered out of sex? It was for this, that slaves should be, Thy word was passed to set men free ?
The nineteenth wave of the ages rolls Now deathward since thy death and birth. Hast thou fed full men’s starved-out souls? Hast thou brought freedom upon earth P Or are there less oppressions done In this wild world under the sun?
om
BEFORE A CRUCIFIX, Y5
Nay, if indeed thou be not dead, Before thy terrene shrine be shaken, Look down, turn usward, bow thine head ; O thou that wast of God forsaken, Look on thine household here, and see These that have not forsaken thee.
hy faith is fire upon their lips,
Thy kingdom golden in their hands ; They scourge us with thy words for whips,
They brand us with thy words for brands ; The thirst that made thy dry throat shrink To their moist mouths commends the drink.
The toothéd thorns that bit thy brows Lighten the weight of gold on theirs ; Thy nakedness enrobes thy spouse With the soft sanguine stuff she wears Whose old limbs use for ointment yet Thine agony and bloody sweat.
The blinding buffets on thine head On their crowned heads confirm the crown ; Thy scourging dyes their raiment red, And with thy bands they fasten down For burial in the blood-bought field The nations by thy stripes unhealed.
96
BEFORE A CRUCIFIX.
With iron for thy linen bands And unclean cloths for winding-sheet They bind the people’s nail-pierced hands, They hide the people’s nail-pierced feet 5 And what man or what angel known Shall roll back the sepulchral stone ?
But these have not the rich man’s grave To sleep in when their pain is done. These were not fit for God to save. As naked hell-fire is the sun In their eyes living, and when dead These have not where to lay their head.
They have no tomb to dig, and hide ; Earth is not theirs, that they should sleep. On all these tombless crucified No lovers’ eyes have time to weep. So still, for all man’s tears and creeds, The sacred body hangs and bleeds.
Through the left hand a nail is driven, Faith, and another through the right, Forged in the fires of hell and heaven, Fear that puts out the eye of light ; And the feet soiled and scarred and pale Are pierced with falsehood for a nail,
BEFORE A CRUCIFIX, 97
And priests against the mouth divine Push their sponge full of poison yet
And bitter blood for myrrh and wine, And on the same reed is it set
Wherewith before they buffeted
The people’s disanointed head.
O sacred head, e) desecrate, O labour-wounded feet and hands,
O blood poured forth in pledge to fate Of nameless lives in divers lands,
O slain and spent and sacrificed
People, the grey-grown speechless Christ!
Is there a gospel in the red Old witness of thy wide-mouthed wounds ? From thy blind stricken tongueless head What desolate evangel sounds A hopeless note of hope deferred ? What word, if there be any word?
O son of man, beneath man’s feet Cast down, O common face of man
Whereon all blows and buffets meet, O royal, O republican
Face of the people bruised and dumb
And longing till thy kingdom come!
98
BEFORE A CRUCIFIX.
The soldiers and the high priests part Thy vesture : all thy days are priced,
And all the nights that eat. thine heart. And that one seamless coat of Christ,
The freedom of the natural soul,
They cast their lots for to keep whole.
No fragment of it save the name
They leave thee for a crown of scorns Wherewith to mock thy naked shame
And forehead bitten through with thorns And, marked with sanguine sweat and tears, The stripes of eighteen hundred years.
And we seek yet if God or man Can loosen thee as Lazarus, Bid thee rise up republican And save thyself and all of us; But no disciple’s tongue can say When thou shalt take our sins away.
And mouldering now and hoar with moss Between us and the sunlight swings
The phantom of a Christless cross Shadowing the sheltered heads of kings
And making with its moving shade
The souls of harmless men afraid.
BEFORE A CRUCIFIX.
Ait creaks and rocks to left and right, Consumed of rottenness and rust, Worm-eaten of the worms of night, Dead as their spirits who put trust, Round its base muttering as they sit, In the time-cankered name of it.
‘Thou, in the day that breaks thy prison, People, though these men take thy name, And hail and hymn thee rearisen, Who made songs erewhile of thy shame, Give thou not ear ; for these are they Whose good day was thine evil day.
Set not thine hand unto their cross. Give not thy soul up sacrificed. Change not the gold of faith for dross Of Christian creeds that spit on Christ. Let not thy tree of freedom be Regrafted from that rotting tree.
This dead God here against my face Hath help for no man ; who hath seen The good works of it, or such grace As thy grace in it, Nazarene, As that from thy live lips which ran For man’s sake, O thou son of man ?
H 2
99
300
BEFORE A CRUCIFiX.
The tree of faith ingraffed by priests
Puts its foul foliage out above thee, And round it feed man-eating beasts
Because of whom we dare not love thee ; Though hearts reach back and memories ache, We cannot praise thee for their sake.
O hidden face of man, whereover
The years have woven a viewless veil, If thou wast verily man’s lover,
What did thy love or blood avail ? Thy blood the priests make poison of, And in gold shekels coin thy love.
So when our souls look back to thee They sicken, seeing against thy side, Too foul to speak of or to see, The leprous likeness of a bride, Whose kissing lips through his lips grown Leave their God rotten to the bone.
When we would see thee man, and know What heart thou hadst toward men indeed, Lo, thy blood-blackened altars ; lo, The lips of priests that pray and feed While their own hell’s worm curls and licks The poison of the crucifix.
. pia Se
BEFORE A CRUCIFIX,
Thou bad’st let children come to thee ; What children now but curses come ? What manhood in that God can be Who sees their worship, and is dumb? No soul that lived, loved, wrought, and died, Is this their carrion crucified.
Nay, if their God and thou be one,
If thou and this thing be the same, Thou shouldst not look upon the sun;
The sun grows haggard at thy name. Come down, be done with, cease, give o’er; Hide thyself strive not, be no more.
Ior
102
TENEBRZ.
Ar the chill high tide of the night, At the turn of the fluctuant hours, When the waters of time are at height, Ina vision arose on my sight The kingdoms of earth and the powers
In a dream without lightening of eyes I saw them, children of earth, Nations and races arise, Each one after his wise, Signed with the sign of his birth,
Sound was none of their feet,
Light was none of their faces ; In their lips breath was not, or heat, But a subtle murmur and sweet
As of water in wan waste placcs,
Pale as from passionate years, Years unassuaged of desire,
rf r Se eee
+)
TENEBRE, 103:
Sang they soft in mine ears, Crowned with jewels of tears, Girt with girdles of fire.
A slow song beaten and broken,
As it were from the dust and the dead, As of spirits athirst unsloken, As of things unspeakable spoken,
As of tears unendurable shed.
In the manifold sound remote,
In the molten murmur of song, There was but a sharp sole note Alive on the night and afloat,
The cry of the world’s heart’s wrong.
As the sea in the strait sea-caves,
The sound came straitened and strange ; A noise of the rending of graves, : A tidal thunder of waves,
The music of death and of change.
“We have waited so long,” they say, “For a sound of the God, for a breath, For a ripple of the refluence of day, For the fresh bright wind of the fray, For the light of the sunrise of death.
104
TENEBRE,
“We have prayed not, we, to be strong, To fulfil the desire of our eyes ;
—Howbeit they have watched for it long,
Watched, and the night did them wrong, Yet they say not of day, shall it rise ?
“They are fearful and feeble with years, Yet they doubt not of day if it be; Yea, blinded and beaten with tears, Yea, sick with foresight of fears, Yet a little, and hardly, they see.
““We pray not, we, for the palm,
For the fruit ingraffed of the fight, For the blossom of peace and the balm, And the tender triumph and calm
Of crownless and weaponless right.
“We pray not, we, to behold The latter august new birth, The young day’s purple and gold, And divine, and rerisen as of old, The sun-god Freedom on earth.
“ Peace, and world’s honour, and fame, We have sought after none of these things ; The light of a life like flame
ally
TENEBRA. 10§
Passing, the storm of a name Shaking the strongholds of kings:
‘Nor, fashioned of fire and of air,
The splendour that burns on his head Who was chiefest in ages that were, Whose breath blew palaces bare,
Whose eye shone tyrannies dead ;
“ All these things in your day
Ye shall see, O our sons, and shall hold Surely ; but we, in the grey Twilight, for one thing we pray,
In that day though our memories be cold:
“To feel on our brows as we wait
An air of the morning, a breath From the springs of the east, from the gate Whence freedom issues, and fate,
‘Sorrow, and triumph, and death :
“From a land whereon time hath not trod, Where the spirit is bondless and bare, And the world’s rein breaks, and the rod, And the soul of a man, which is God, He adores without altar or prayer:
106
TENEBRA.
“For alone of herself and her right She takes, and alone gives grace:
And the colours of things lose light,
And the forms, in the limitless white Splendour of space without space :
* And the blossom of man from his tomb Yearns open, the flower that survives ; And the shadows of changes consume In the colourless passionate bloom Of the live light made of our lives:
* Seeing each life given is a leaf
Of the manifold multiform flower, And the least among these, and the chief, As an ear in the red-ripe sheaf
Stored for the harvesting hour.
*O spirit of man, most holy,
The measure of things and the root, In our summers and winters a lowly Seed, putting forth of them slowly
Thy supreme blossom and fruit ;
‘In thy sacred and perfect year, The souls that were parcel of thee
FR
TENEBRA 107
In the labour and life of us here Shall be rays of thy sovereign sphere, Springs of thy motion shall be.
“There is the fire that was man,
The light that was love, and the breath That was hope ere deliverance began, And the wind that was life for a span,
And the birth of new things, which is death.
“There, whosoever had light, And, having, for men’s sake gave; All that warred against night ; All that were found in the fight Swift to be slain and to save;
“ Undisbranched of the storms that disroot us, Of the lures that enthrall unenticed ;
The names that exalt and transmute us ;
The blood-bright splendour of Brutus, The snow-bright splendour of Christ,
“There all chains are undone ; Day there seems but as night ;
Spirit and sense are as one
In the light not of star nor of sun; Liberty there is the light.
108 TENEBRAS.
“She, sole mother and maker,
Stronger than sorrow, than strife, Deathless, thouzh death overtake her; Faithful, though faith should forsake her;
Spirit, and saviour, and life.”
109
HYMN OF MAN.
(DuRING THE SEssION IN RoME OF THE
CEcUMENICAL COUNCIL.)
In the grey beginning of years, in the twilight of things that began,
The word of the earth in the ears of the world, was it God? was it man?
The word of the earth to the spheres her sisters, the note of her song,
The sound of her speech in the ears of the starry and
sisterly throng, Was it praise or passion or prayer, was it love or devo-
tion or dread, When the veils of the shining air first wrapt her jubilant
head ? When her eyes new-born of the night saw yet no star
out of reach ; When her maiden mouth was alight with the flame of
musical speech ;
L1O HYMN OF MAN.
When her virgin feet were set on the terrible heavenly way: ?
And her virginal lids were wet with the dew of the birth of the day:
Eyes that had looked not on time, and ears that had heard not of death ;
Lips that had learnt not the rhyme of change and pas- sionate breath,
The rhythmic anguish of growth, and the motion of mutable things,
Of love that longs and is loth, and plume-plucked hope without wings,
Passions and pains without number, and life that runs and is lame,
From slumber again to slumber, the same race set for the same,
Where the runners outwear each other, but running with lampless hands
No man takes light from his brother tili blind at the goal he stands :
Ah, did they know, did they dream of it, counting the cost and the worth?
The ways of her days, did they seem then good to the new-souled earth?
Did her heart rejoice, and the might of her spirit exult in her then,
wake
a
HYMN OF MAN, Ill
Child yet no child of the night, and motherless mother of men? —
Was it Love brake forth flower-fashion, a bird with gold on his wings,
Lovely, her firstborn passion, and impulse of firstborn things ? .
Was Love that nestling indeed that under the plumes of the night
Was hatched and hidden as seed in the furrow, and brought forth bright?
Was it Love lay shut in the shell world-shaped, having over him there
Black world-wide wings that impel the might of the night through air?
And bursting his shell as a bird, night shook through her sail-stretched vans,
And her heart as a water was stirred, and its heat was the firstborn man’s.
For the waste of the dead void air took form of a world at birth,
And the waters and firmaments were, and light, and the life-giving earth.
The beautiful bird unbegotten that night brought forth without pain
In the fathomless years forgotten whereover the dead
gods reign,
112 HYMN OF MAN,
Was it love, life, godhead, or fate? we say the spirit is one
That moved on the dark to create out of darkness the stars and the sun.
Before the growth was the grower, and the seed ere the plant was sown ;
But what was seed cf the sower? and the grain of him, whence was it grown ?
Foot after foot ye go back and travail and make your- selves mad ;
Blind feet that feel for the track where highway is none to be had.
Therefore the God that ye make you is grievous, and gives not aid,
Because it is but for your sake that the God of your making is made.
Thou and IJ and he are not gods made men for a span,
But God, if a God there be, is the substance of men
~ which is man.
Our lives are as pulses or pores of his manifold body and breath ;
As waves of his sea on the shores where birth is the beacon of death.
We men, the multiform features of man, whatsoever we be,
Recreate him of whom we are creatures, and all we only are he.
HYMN OF MAN. “Ee
Not each man of all men is God, but God is the fruit of the whole ;
Indivisible spirit and blood, indiscernible body from soul.
Not men’s but man’s is the glory of godhead, the kingdom of time,
The mountainous ages made hoary with snows for the spirit to climb.
A God with the world inwound whose clay to his footsole clings ;
A manifold God fast-bound as with iron of adverse things.
A soul that labours and lives, an emotion, a strenuous breath,
From the flame that its own mouth gives reillumed, and. refreshed with death. -
In the sea whereof centuries are waves the live God plunges and swims ;
His bed is in all men’s graves, but the worm hath not hold on his limbs.
Night puts out not his eyes, nor time sheds change on his head ;
With such fire as the stars of the skies are the roots of his heart are fed.
Men are the thoughts passing through it, the veins that fulfil it with blood,
IiA HYMN OF MAN. \
With spirit of sense to renew it as springs fulfilling a flood.
Men are the heartbeats of man, the plumes that feather his wings,
Storm-worn, since being began, with the wind and thunder of things.
Things are cruel and blind; their strength detains and deforms :
And the wearying wings of the mind still beat up the stream of their storms.
Still, as one swimming up stream, they strike out blind in the blast,
In thunders of vision and dream, and lightnings of future and past.
We are baffled and caught in the current and bruised upon edges of shoals ;
As weeds or as reeds in the torrent of things are the wind-shaken souls.
Spirit by spirit goes under, a foam-bell’s bubble of breath,
That blows and opens in sunder and blurs not the~ mirror of death.
For a worm or a thorn in his path is a man’s soul quenched 7 as a flame ;
For his lust of an hour or his wrath shall the worm and the man be the same.
HIYMN OF MAN, 5 =
© God sore stricken of things! they have wrought him a raiment of pain ;
Cana God shut eyelids and wings at a touch on the nerves of the brain?
O shamed and sorrowful God, whose force goes out at a blow!
What world shall shake at his nod? at his coming what wilderness glow ?
What help in the work of his hands? what light in the track of his feet ?
His days are snowflakes or sands, with cold to consume him and heat.
. He is servant with Change for lord, and for wages he hath to his hire
Folly and force, and a sword that devours, and a ravening fire.
From the bed of his birth to his grave he is driven as a wind at their will ;
Lest Change bow down as his slave, and the storm and the sword be still ;
Lest earth spread open her wings to the sunward, and sing with the spheres ;
Lest man be master of things, to prevail on their forces and fears.
By the spirit are things overcome; they are stark, and the spirit hath breath ;
12
116 HYMN OF MAN.
It hath speech, and their forces are dumb ; it is living, and things are of death.
But they know not the spirit for master, they feel not force from above,
While man makes love to disaster, and woos desolation with love.
Yea, himself too hath made himself chains, and his own hands plucked out his eyes ;
For his own soul only constrains him, his own mouth only denies.
The herds of kings and their hosts and the flocks of the high priests bow
To. a master whose face is a ghost’s; O thou that wast God, is it thou?
Thou madest man in the garden; thou temptedst man,. and he fell ;
Thou gavest him poison and pardon for blood and burnt- offering to sell.
Thou hast sealed thine elect to Salvation, fast locked with faith for the key ;
Make now for thyself expiation, and be thine atonement ~ for thee.
Ah, thou that darkenest heaven—ah, thou that bringest a sword—
By the crimes of thine hands unforgiven they beseech thee to hear them, O Lord,
HYMN OF MAN. 117
By the balefires of ages that burn for thine incense, by creed and by rood,
By the famine and passion that yearn and that hunger to find of thee food,
By the children that asked at thy throne of the priests that were fat with thine hire
For bread, and thou gavest a stone; for light, and thou madest them fire ;
By the kiss of thy peace like a snake’s kiss, that leaves the soul rotten at root; -
By the savours of. gibbets and stakes thou hast planted to bear to thee fruit ;
By torture and terror and treason, that make to thee weapons and wings ;
By thy power upon men for a season, made out of the malice of things ;
‘© thou that hast built thee a shrine of the madness of man and his shame,
And hast hung in the midst for a sign of his worship the lamp of thy name ;
‘That hast shown him for heaven in a vision a void world’s shadow and shell,
And hast fed thy delight and derision with fire of belief as of hell;
‘That hast fleshed on the souls that believe thee the fang
of the death-worm fear.
118 HYMN OF MAN,
With anguish of dreams to deceive them whose faith cries out in thine ear ;
By the face of the spirit confounded before thee and humbled in dust,
By the dread wherewith life was astounded and shamed out of sense of its trust,
By the scourges of doubt and repentance that fell on the soul at thy nod,
Thou art judged, O judge, and the sentence is gone forth against thee, O God.
Thy slave that slept is awake; thy slave but slept for a span ; J
Yea, man thy slave shall unmake thee, who made thee lord over man.
For his face is set to the east, his feet on the past and its dead ;
The sun rearisen is his priest, and the heat thereof hallows his head.
His eyes take part in the morning ; his spirit outsounding the sea
Asks no more witness or warning from temple or tripod or tree.
He hath set the centuries at union; the night is afraid at his name ;
Equal with life, in communion with death, he hath found them the same.
oT Ashen
HYMN OF MAN. . 119
Past the wall unsurmounted that bars out our vision with iron and fire
He hath sent forth his soul for the stars to comply with and suns to conspire.
His thought takes flight for the centre wherethrough it hath part in the whole ;
The abysses forbid it not enter: the stars make room for the soul.
Space is the soul’s to inherit; the night is hers as the day ;
Lo, saith man, this is my spirit ; how shall not the worlds make way ?
Space is thought’s, and the wonders thereof, and the secret of space ;
Is thought not more than the thunders and lightnings ? shall thought give place?
Is the body not more than the vesture, the life not more ‘than the meat?
The will than the word or the gesture, the heart than the hands or the feet?
Is the tongue not more than the speech is? the head not more than the crown?
And if higher than is heaven be the reach of the soul, . shall not heaven bow down?
Time, father of life, and more great than the life it begat
and began,
120 HYMN OF MAN.
Earth’s keeper and heaven’s and their fate, lives, thinks, and hath substance in man.
Time’s motion that throbs in his blood is the thought that gives heart to the skies,
And the springs of the fire that is food to the sunbeams are light to his eyes.
The minutes that beat with his heart are the words to which worlds keep chime, |
And the thought in his pulses is part of the blood and the spirit of time.
He saith to the ages, Give ; and his soul foregoes not her share ;
Who are ye that forbid him to live, and would feed him with heavenlier air?
Will ye feed him with poisonous dust, and restore him with hemlock for drink,
Till he yield you his soul up in trust, and have heart not to know or to think?
He hath stirred him, and found out the flaw in his fetters, and cast them behind ;
His soul to his soul is a law, and his mind is a light to
his mind.
The seal of his knowledge is sure, the truth and his spitit are wed ;
Men perish, but man shall endure; lives die, but the life is not dead,
HYMN OF MAN. 121
He hath sight of the secrets of season, the roots of the years and the fruits :
His soul is at one with the reason of things that is sap to the roots.
He can hear in their changes a sound as the conscience of consonant spheres ;
He cam see through the years flowing round him the law lying under the years.
Who are ye that would bind him with curses and blind him with vapour of prayer?
Your might is as night that disperses when light is alive in the air.
The bow of your godhead is broken, the arm of your conquest is stayed ;
Though ye call down God to bear token, for fear of you none is afraid.
Will ye turn back times, and the courses of stars, and the season of souls?
Shall God’s breath dry up the sources that feed time full as it rolls ?
Nay, cry on him then till he show you a sign, till he lift up a rod ;
Hath he made not the nations to know him of old if indeed he be God ?
Is no heat of him left in the ashes of thousands burnt up
for his sake?
122 HYMN OF MAN.
Can prayer not rekindle the flashes that shone in his face from the stake ?
Cry aloud; for your God is a God and a Saviour; cry, make yourselves lean ;
Is he drunk or asleep, that the rod of his wrath is unfelt and unseen ?
Is the fire of his old loving-kindness gone out, that his pyres are acold?
Hath he gazed on himself unto blindness, who made men blind to behold ?
Cry out, for his kingdom is shaken; cry out, for the people blaspheme ;
Cry aloud till his godhead awaken; what doth he to sleep and to dream ?
Cry, cut yourselves, gash you with knives and with scourges, heap on to you dust ;
Is his life but as other gods’ lives? is not this the Lord God of your trust ?
Is not this the great God of your sires, that with souls and with bodies was fed,
And the world was on flame with his fires? O fools, he was God, and is dead.
He will hear not again the strong crying of earth in his ears as before,
And the fume of his multitudes dying shall flatter his nostrils no more.
ass
eh
“\
HYMN OF MAN. 123
By the spirit he ruled as his slave is he slain who was mighty to slay,
And the stone that is sealed on his grave he shall rise not and roll not away.
Yea, weep to him, lift up your hands; be your eyes as a fountain of tears ;
Where he stood there is nothing that stands; if he call, there is no man that hears. i
He hath doffed his king’s raiment of lies now the wane of his kingdom is come ;
Ears hath he, and hears not; and eyes, and he sees not ; and mouth, and is dumb.
His red king’s raiment is ripped from him naked, his staff broken down ;
And the signs of his empire are stripped from him shud- dering ; and where is his crown ?
And in vain by the wellsprings refrozen ye cry for the warmth of his sun—
O God, the Lord God of thy chosen, thy will in thy king- dom be done.
Kingdom and will hath he none in him left him, nor warmth in his breath ;
Till his corpse be cast out of the sun will ye know not the truth of his death?
Surely, ye say, he is strong, though the times be against
him and men ;
£24 HYMN OF MAN,
Yet a little, ye say, and how long, till he come to show judgment again ?
Shall God then die as the beasts die? who is it hath broken his rod ?
© God, Lord God of thy priests, rise up now and show thyself God.
They cry out, thine elect, thine aspirants to heavenward,
‘ whose faith is as flame ;
O thou the Lord God of our tyrants, they call thee, their God, by thy name.
By thy name that in hell-fire was written, and burned at the point of thy sword,
Thou art smitten, thou God, thou art smitten; thy death is upon thee, O Lord.
And the love-song of earth as thou diest resounds through the wind of her wings—
Glory to Man in the highest! for Man is the master of
~ things,
_————————E
125
THE PILGRIMS.
Wuo is your lady of love, O ye that pass Singing ? and is it for sorrow of that which was That ye sing sadly, or dream of what shall be ? For gladly at once and sadly it seems ye sing. —Our lady of love by you is unbeholden ; For hands she hath none, nor eyes, nor lips, nor golden Treasure of hair, nor face nor form ; but we That love, we know her more fair than anything.
—Is she a queen, having great gifts to give ? —Yea, these; that whoso hath seen her shall not live Except he serve her sorrowing, with strange pain, Travail and bloodshedding and bitterer tears ; And when she bids die he shall surely die. And he shall leave all things under the sky And go forth naked under sun and rain And work and wait and watch out all his years.
126 THE PILGRIMS
—Hath she on earth no place of habitation ? . -—Age to age calling, nation answering nation, Cries out, Where is she? and there is none to say ; For if she be not in the spirit of men, For if in the inward soul she hath no place, In vain they cry unto her, seeking her face, In vain their mouths make much of her; for they
Cry with vain tongues, till the heart lives again.
—O ye that follow, and have ye no repentance ? For on your brows is written a mortal sentence, An hieroglyph of sorrow, a fiery sign, That in your lives ye shall not pause or rest, Nor have the sure sweet common love, nor keep Friends and safe days, nor joy of life nor sleep.
—These have we not, who have one thing, the divine
Face and clear eyes of faith and fruitful breast.
—And ye shall die before your thrones be won. —Yea, and the changed world and the liberal sun Shall move and shine without us, and we lie Dead ; but if she too move on earth and live, But if the old world with all the old irons rent Laugh and give thanks, shall we be not content? Nay, we shall rather live, we shall not die, Life being so little and death so good to give.
—
THE PILGRIMS. 127
—And these men shall forget you.—Yea, but we Shall be a part of the earth and the ancient sea, And heayen-high air august, and awful fire, And all things good ; and no man’s heart shall beat But somewhat in it of our blood once shed Shall quiver and quicken, as now in us the dead Blood of men slain and the old same life’s desire Plants in their fiery footprints our fresh feet.
—But ye that might be clothed with all things pleasant, Ye are foolish that put off the fair soft present,
That clothe yourselves with the cold future air ;
When mother and father and tender sister and brother
And the old live love that was shall be as ye, Dust, and no fruit of loving life shall be.
—She shall be yet who is more than all these were,
Than sister or wife or father unto us or mother.
—lIs this worth life, is this, to win for wages ? Lo, the dead mouths of the awful grey-grown ages, The venerable, in the past that is their prison, In the outer darkness, in the unopening grave, Laugh, knowing how many as ye now say have said, How many, and all are fallen, are fallen and dead :
128 THE PILGRIMS.
Shall ye dead rise, and these dead have not risen P —Not we but she, who is tender and swift to save.
—Are ye not weary and faint not by the way, Seeing night by night devoured of day by day, Seeing hour by hour consumed in sleepless fire ? Sleepless : and ye too, when shall ye too sleep ? —We are weary in heart and head, in hands and feet, And surely more than all things sleep were sweet, ‘Than all things save the inexorable desire
Which whoso knoweth shall neither faint nor weep.
—Is this so sweet that one were fain to follow ? Is this so sure where all men’s hopes are hollow, Even this your dream, that by much tribulation Ye shall make whole flawed hearts, and bowed necks straight ? —Nay, though our life were blind, our death were fruitless, Not therefore were the whole world’s high hope rootless ; But man to man, nation would turn to nation, And the old life live, and the old great word be great.
—Pass on then and pass by us and let us be, For what light think ye after life to see?
\
THE PILGRIMS. 129
And if the world fare better will ye know? And if man triumph who shall seek you and say ? —Enough of light is this for one life’s span, That all men born are mortal, but not man: And we men bring death lives by night to sow, That man may reap and eat and live by day.
130
ARMAND BARBES.
I.
Fire out of heaven, a flower of perfect fire, That where the roots of life are had its root And where the fruits of time are brought forth fruit ; A faith made flesh, a visible desire, That heard the yet unbreathing years respire And speech break forth of centuries that sit mute Beyond all feebler footprint of pursuit ; That touched the highest of hope, and went up higher; A heart love-wounded whereto love was law, A soul reproachless without fear or flaw, A shining spirit without shadow of shame, A memory made of all men’s love and awe ; Being disembodied, so thou be the same,
What need, O soul, to sign thee with thy name?
I. All woes of all men sat upon thy soul And all their wrongs were heavy on thy head ; With all their wounds thy heart was pierced and bled,
ARMAND BARBES, 13K
And in thy spirit as in a mourning scroll ‘The world’s huge sorrows were inscribed by roll, All theirs on earth who serve and faint for bread, All banished men’s, all theirs in prison dead, Thy love had heart and sword-hand for the whole. “This was my day of glory,” didst thou say, When, by the scaffold thou hadst hope to climb For thy faith’s sake, they brought thee respite; “ Nay, { shall not die then, I have missed my day.” O hero, O our help, O head sublime, Thy day shall be commensurate with time.
QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT.
Am I not he that hath made thee and begotten thee, I, God, the spirit of man? Wherefore now these eighteen years hast thou forgotten me, From whom thy hfe began ? Thy life-blood and thy life-breath and thy beauty, Thy might of hands and feet, Thy soul made strong for divinity of duty And service which was sweet. Through the red sea brimmed with blood didst thou not follow me, As one that walks in trance ? Was the storm strong to break or the sea to swallow thee, When thou wast free and France? I am Freedom, God and man, O France, that plead with thee ; How long now shall I plead ? Was I not with thee in travail, and in need with thee, Thy sore travail and need?
NAVE
QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT. 133
Thou wast fairest and first of my virgin-vested daughters, Fairest and foremost thou ;
And thy breast was white, though thy hands were red
with slaughters,
Thy breast, a harlot’s now.
O foolish virgin and fair among the fallen, A ruin where satyrs dance,
A garden wasted for beasts to crawl and brawl in, What hast thou done with France?
Where is she who bared her bosom but to thunder, Her brow to storm and flame,
And before her face was the red sea cloven in sunder And all its waves made tame?
And the surf wherein the broad-based rocks were shaking She saw far off divide,
At the blast of the breath of the battle blownand breaking, And weight of wind and tide ;
And the ravin and the ruin of thronéd nations And every royal race,
And the kingdoms and kings from the state of their high
stations
That fell before her face.
Yea, great was the fall of them, all that rose against her, From the earth’s old-historied heights ;
For my hands were fire, and my wings as walls that
fenced her,
134 QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT.
Mine eyes as pilot-lights. Not as guerdons given of kings the gifts I brought her, Not strengths that pass away ; But my heart, my breath of life, O France, O daughter, I gave thee in that day. Yea, the heart’s blood of a very God I gave thee, Breathed in thy mouth his breath ; Was my word as a man’s, having no more strength to save thee From this worse thing than death ? Didst thou dream of it only, the day that I stood nigh thee, . Was all its light a dream? When that iron surf roared backwards and went by thee Unscathed of storm or stream : When thy sons rose up and thy young men stood to- gether, One equal face of fight, And my flag swam high as the swimming sea-foam’s feather, Laughing, a lamp of light ? Ah the tordly laughter and light of it, that lightened Heaven-high, the heaven’s whole length! Ah the hearts of heroes pierced, the bright lips whitened Of strong men in their strength! Ah the banner-poles, the stretch of straightening streamers
QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT. 135
Straining their full reach out ! Ah the men’s hands making true the dreams of dreamers, The hopes brought forth in doubt! Ah the noise of horse, the charge and thunder of drum- ming, And swaying and sweep of swords! Ah the light that led them through of the world’s life coming, Clear of its lies and lords! By the lightning of the lips of guns whose flashes Made plain the strayed world’s way ; By the flame that left her dead old sins in ashes, Swept out of sight of day ; By thy children whose bare feet were shod with thunder, Their bare hands mailed with fire ; By the faith that went with them, waking fear and wonder, Heart’s love and high desire ; By the tumult of the waves of nations waking Blind in the loud wide night ; By the wind that went on the world’s waste waters, making Their marble darkness white, As the flash of the flakes of the foam flared lamplike, leaping From wave to gladdening wave, Making wide the fast-shut eyes of thraldom sleeping The sleep of the unclean grave ;
“136 QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT.
By the fire of equality, terrible, devouring, Divine, that brought forth good ; By the lands it purged and wasted and left flowering With bloom of brotherhood ; By the lips of fraternity that for love’s sake uttered Fierce words and fires of death, But the eyes were deep as love’s, and the fierce lips fluttered With love’s own living breath ; By thy weaponed hands, brows helmed, and bare feet spurning The bared head of a king ; By the storm of sunrise round thee risen and burning, Why hast thou done this thing? Thou hast mixed thy limbs with the son of a harlot, a stranger, Mouth to mouth, limb to limb, Thou, bride of a God, because of the bridesman Danger, To bring forth seed to him. For thou thoughtest inly, the terrible bridegroom wakes me, When I would sleep, to go; The fire of his mouth consumes, and the red kiss shakes me, More bitter than a blow. Rise up, my beloved, go forth to meet the stranger,
QUIA MULTUM AMAVIMZ. 137
Put forth thine arm, he saith ; fear thou not at all though the bridesman should be Danger, The bridesmaid should be Death. I the bridegroom, am I not with thee, O bridal nation, O wedded France, to strive ? To destroy the sins of the earth with divine devasta- tion, Till none be left alive ? Lo her growths of sons, foliage of men and frondage, Broad boughs of the old-world tree, With iron of shame and with pruning-hooks of bondage They are shorn from sea to sea. Lo, I set wings to thy feet that have been wingless, Till the utter race be run ; Till the priestless temples cry to the thrones made king- less, Are we not also undone? Till the immeasurable Republic arise and lighten Above these quick and dead, And her awful robes be changed, and her red robes whiten, Her warring-robes of red. But thou wouldst not, saying, I am weary and faint to follow, Let me lie down and rest ;
138 QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT.
And hast sought out shame to sleep with, mire to wallow, Yea, a much fouler breast; And thine own hast made prostitute, sold and shamed and bared it, Thy bosom which was mine, And the bread of the word I gave thee hast soiled, and shared it Among these snakes and swine. As a harlot thou wast handled and polluted, Thy faith held light as foam, That thou sentest men thy sons, thy sons imbruted, To slay thine elder Rome. Therefore, O harlot, I gave thee to the accurst one, By night to be defiled, To thy second shame, and a fouler than the first one, That got thee first with child. Yet I know thee turning back now to behold me, To bow thee and make thee bare, Not for sin’s sake but penitence, by my feet to hold me, And wipe them with thine hair. _ And sweet ointment of thy grief thou hast brought thy master, And set before thy lord, From a box of flawed and broken alabaster, Thy broken spirit, poured.
© 4
QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT. 139
And love-offerings, tears and perfumes, hast thou given me, To reach my feet and touch ; Therefore thy sins, which are many, are forgiven thee,
Because thou hast loved much. 18 brumaire, an 78.
140
GENESIS.
In the outer world that was before this earth, That was before all shape or space was born,
Before the blind first hour of time had birth, Before night knew the moonlight or the morn ;
Yea, before any world had any light, Or anything called God or man drew breath, Slowly the strong sides of the heaving night Moved, and brought forth the strength of life and death.
And the sad shapeless horror increate That was all things and one thing, without fruit, Limit, or law; where love was none, nor hate,
Where no leaf came to blossom from no root ;
The very darkness that time knew not of,
Nor God laid hand on, nor was man found there, Ceased, and was cloven in several shapes ; above
Light, and night under, and fire, earth water, and air.
GENESIS. 141
Sunbeams and starbeams, and all coloured things, All forms and all similitudes began ;
And death, the shadow cast by life’s wide wings, And God, the shade cast by the soul of man.
Then between shadow and substance, night and light, Then between birth and death, and deeds and days, The illimitable embrace and the amorous fight That of itself begets, bears, rears, and slays,
The immortal war of mortal things, that is Labour and life and growth and good and ill, The mild antiphonies that melt and kiss, The violent symphonies that meet and kill,
All nature of all things began to be. But chiefliest in the spirit (beast or man, Planet of heaven or blossom of earth or sea) The divine contraries of life began. :
For the great labour of growth, being many, is one ; One thing the white death and the ruddy birth ;
The invisible air and the all-beholden sun, And barren water and many-childed earth.
And these things are made manifest in men From the beginning forth unto this day: Time writes and life records them, and again
Death seals them lest the record pass away.
142 GENESTS.,
For if death were not, then should growth not be, Change, nor the life of good nor evil things ; Nor were there night at all nor light to see, Nor water of sweet nor water of bitter springs.
For in each man and each year that is born
Are sown the twin seeds of the strong twin powers 5 The white seed of the fruitful helpful morn,
The black seed of the barren. hurtful hours.
And he that of the black seed eateth fruit, To him the savour as honey shall be sweet ; And he in whom the white seed hath struck root, He shall have sorrow and trouble and tears for meat.
And him whose lips the sweet fruit hath made red In the end men loathe and make his name a rod ;
‘And him whose mouth on the unsweet fruit hath fed In the end men follow and know for very God.
And of these twain, the black seed and the white, All things come forth, endured of men and done; And still the day is great with child of night, And still the black night labours with the sun.
And each man and each year that lives on earth Turns hither or thither, and hence or thence is fed ; And as a man before was from his birth, So shall a man be after among the dead,
143
TO WALT WHITMAN IN AMERICA,
SEND but a song oversea for us, Heart of their hearts who are free,
Heart of their singer, to be for us More than our singing can be;
Ours, in the tempest at error,
With no light but the twilight of terror ; Send us a song oversea!
Sweet-smelling of pine-leaves and grasses, And blown as a tree through and through
With the winds of the keen mountain-passes, And tender as sun-smitten dew ;
Sharp-tongued as the winter that shakes
The wastes of your limitless lakes, Wide-eyed as the sea-line’s blue.
O strong-winged soul with prophetic Lips. hot with the bloodbeats of song,
With tremor of heartstrings magnetic, With thoughts as thunders in throng,
144 TO WALT WHITMAN IN AMERICA.
With consonant ardours of chords That pierce men’s souls as with swords And hale them hearing along,
Make us too music, to be with us As a word from a world’s heart warm,
To sail the dark as a sea with us, Full-sailed, outsinging the storm,
A song to put fire in our ears
Whose burning shall burn up tears, Whose sign bid battle reform ;
A note in the ranks of a clarion, A word in the wind of cheer,
To consume as with lightning the carrion That makes time foul for us here ;
In the air that our dead things infest
A blast of the breath of the west,
Till east way as west way is clear.
Out of the sun beyond sunset,
From the evening whence morning shall be, With the rollers in measureless onset,
With the van of the storming sea, With the world-wide wind, with the breath That breaks ships driven upon death,
With the passion of all things free,
ZO WALT WHITMAN IN AMERICA.
With the sea-steeds footless and frantic, White myriads for death to bestride In the charge of the ruining Atlantic Where deaths by regiments ride, With clouds and clamours of waters, With a long note shriller than slaughter’s On the furrowless fields world-wide,
With terror, with ardour and wonder, With the soul of the season that wakes When the weight of a whole year’s, thunder
In the tidestream of autumn breaks, Let the flight of the wide-winged word Come over, come in and be heard,
Take form and fire for our sakes.
For a continent bloodless with travail Here toils and brawls as it can, And the web of it who shall unravel Of all that peer on the plan ; Would fain grow men, but they grow not, And fain be free, but they know not One name for freedom and man?
One name, not twain for division ; One thing, not twain, from the birth; Spirit and substance and vision, L
145
146
TO WALT WHITMAN IN AMERICA,
Worth more than worship is worth ; Unbeheld, unadored, undivined, The cause, the centre, the mind,
The secret and sense of the earth.
Here as a weakling in irons, Here as a weanling in bands As a prey that the stake-net environs, Our life that we looked for stands ; And the man-child naked and dear, Democracy, turns on us here
Eyes trembling with tremulous hands,
It sees not what season shall bring to it Sweet fruit of its bitter desire ;
Few voices it hears yet sing to it, Few pulses of hearts reaspire ;
Foresees not time, nor forehears
The noises of imminent years, Earthquake, and thunder, and fire:
When crowned and weaponed and curbless It shal! walk without helm or shield
The bare burnt furrows and herbless Of war’s last flame-stricken field,
Till godlike, equal with time,
ome
ZO WALT WHITMAN IN AMERICA, 147
It stand in the sun sublime, In the godhead of man revealed.
Round your people and over them Light like raiment is drawn, Close as a garment to cover them Wrought not of mail nor of lawn ; Here, with hope hardly to wear, Naked nations and bare Swim, sink, strike out for the dawn.
Chains are here, and a prison, Kings, and subjects, and shame ; If the God upon you be arisen, How should our songs be the same? How, in confusion of change, How shall we sing, in a strange Land, songs praising his name?
God is buried and dead to us, Even the spirit of earth, Freedom ; so have they said to us, Some with mocking and mirth, Some with heartbreak and tears ; And a God without eyes, without ears, Who shall sing of him, dead in the birth? L2
148
TO WALT WHITMAN IN AMEKICA,
The earth-god Freedom, the lonely Face lightening, the footprint unshod, Not as one man crucified only Nor scourged with but one life’s rod ; The soul that is substance of nations, Reincarnate with fresh generations ; The great god Man, which is God.
But in weariest of years and obscurest Doth it live not at heart of all things,
The one God and one spirit, a purest Life, fed from unstanchable springs ?
Within love, within hatred it is,
And its seed in the stripe as the kiss,
And in slaves is the germ, and in kings,
Freedom we call it, for holier
Name of the soul’s there is none; Surelier it labours, if slowlier,
Than the metres of star or of sun ; Slowlier than life into breath, Surelier than time into death,
It moves till its labour be done.
Till the motion be done and the measure Circling through season and clime,
ov
20 WALY WHITMAN IN AMERICA.
Slumber and sorrow and pleasure, Vision of virtue and crime ; Till consummate with conquering eyes, A soul disembodied, it rise From the body transfigured of time.
Till it rise and remain and take station With the stars of the worlds that rejoice ;
Till the voice of its heart’s exultation Be as theirs an invariable voice ;
By no discord of evil estranged,
By no pause, by no breach in it changed, By no clash in the chord of its choice.
It is one with the world’s generations,
With the spirit, the star, and the sod ; With the kingless and king-stricken nations,
With the cross, and the chain, and the ro¢ The most high, the most secret, most lonely The earth-soul Freedom, that only
Lives, and that only is God.
149
“2 4
150
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES, I. IN CHURCH.
Tuou whose birth on earth Angels sang to men, While thy stars made mirth, Saviour, at thy birth, This day born again ;
As this night was ‘bright With thy cradle-ray,
Very light of light,
Turn the wild world’s night To thy perfect day.
God whose feet made sweet Those wild ways they trod,
From thy fragrant feet
Staining field and street With the blood of God ;
| CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES,
God whose breast is rest In the time of strife, In thy secret breast * Sheltering souls opprest From the heat of life ;
God whose eyes are skies Love-lit as with spheres By the lights that rise To thy watching eyes, Orbéd lights of tears ;
God whose heart hath part In all grief that is,
Was not man’s the dart
That went through thine heart, And the wound not his?
Where the pale souls wail, Held in bonds of death,
Where all spirits quail,
Came thy Godhead pale Still from human breath—
Pale from life and strife, Wan with manhood, came
152 CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES.
Forth of mortal life, Pierced as with a knife, Scarred as with a flame.
Thou the Word and Lord In all time and space
‘Heard, beheld, adored,
With all ages poured Forth before thy face,
Lord, what worth in earth Drew thee down to die?
What therein was worth,
Lord, thy death and birth ? What beneath thy sky ?
Light above all love
By thy love was lit, And brought down the Dove Feathered from above
With the wings of it.
From the height of night, Was not thine the star That led forth with might By no worldly light Wise men from afar ?
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES,
Yet the wise men’s eyes Saw thee not more clear
Than they saw thee rise
Who in shepherd’s guise Drew as poor men near.
Yet thy poor endure,
And are with us yet ; Be thy name a sure Refuge for thy poor
Whom men’s eyes forget.
Thou whose ways we praise, Clear alike and dark, Keep our works and ways This and all thy days Safe inside thine ark.
Who shall keep thy sheep, Lord, and lose not one?
Who save one shall keep,
Lest the shepherds sleep ? Who beside the Son?
From the grave-deep wave, From the sword and flame, Thou, even thou, shalt save
143
154 CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES, Souls of king and slave Only by thy Name.
Light not born with morn Or her fires above, Jesus virgin-born,
Held of men in scorn,
Turn their scorn to love.
Thou whose face gives grace
As the sun’s doth heat, Let thy sunbright face
Lighten time and space Here beneath thy feet.
Bid our peace increase,
Thou that madest morn ; Bid oppressions cease ;
Bid the night be peace ; Bid the day be born.
IL. OUTSIDE CHURCH.
WE whose days and ways
All the night makes dark, What day shall we praise
oat
’ in
CIIRISTMAS ANTIPHONES, 155
Of these weary days That our life-drops mark ?
We whose mind is blind, Fed with hope of nought ;
Wastes of worn mankind,
Without heart or mind, Without meat or thought ;
We with strife of life Worn till all life cease, Want, a whetted knife, Sharpening strife on strife, How should we love peace P
Ye whose meat is sweet And your wine-cup red,
Us beneath your feet
Hunger grinds as wheat, Grinds to make you bread.
Ye whose night is bright With soft rest and heat. Clothed like day with light,
Us the naked night Slays from street to street.
156 CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES
Hath your God no rod, That ye tread so light ? Man on us as God, God as man hath trod, Trod us down with might.
We that one by one
- Bleed from either’s rod,
What for us hath done
Man beneath the sun, What for us hath God?
We whose blood is food Given your wealth to feed,
From the Christless rood
Red with no God’s blood, But with man’s indeed ;
How shall we that see Night-long overhead
Life, the flowerless tree,
Nailed whereon as we Were our fathers deac—
We whose ear can hear, Not whose tongue can name, Famine, ignorance, fear,
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES. 157
Bleeding tear by tear
Year by year of shame,
Till the dry life die
Out of bloodless breast, Out of beamless eye, Out of mouths that cry
Till death feed with rest—
How shall we as ye, Though ye bid us, pray?
Though ye call, can we
Hear you call, or see, Though ye show us day ?
We whose name is shame,
We whose souls walk bare, Shall we call the same God as ye by name,
Teach our lips your prayer ?
God, forgive and give, For His sake who died ?
Nay, for ours who live,
How shall we forgive Thee, then, on our side
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES,
We whose right to light Heaven’s high noon denies,
Whom the blind beams smite
That for you shine bright, ‘And but burn our eyes,
With what dreams of beams Shall we build up day, At what sourceless streams Seek to drink in dreams
Ere they pass away ?
In what street shall meet, At what market-place,
Your feet and our feet,
With one goal to greet,
Having run one race P
What one hope shall ope For us all as one
One same horoscope,
Where the soul sees hope That outburns the sun?
At what shrine what wine, At what board what bread, Salt as blood or brine,
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES, 159
Shall we share in sign How we poor were fed?
In what hour what power Shall we pray for morn,
If your perfect hour,
When all day bears flower, Not for us is born?
A Hi BEYOND CHURCH.
Yr that weep in sleep,
Souls and bodies bound, Ye that all night keep Watch for change, aud weep
That no change is found ;
Ye that cry and die,
And the world goes on Without ear or eye, And the days go by
Till all days are gone 3
Man shall do for you, Men the sons of man,
titer ee
490 CARISTMAS ANTIPHONES,
What. no God would do That they sought unto While the blind years ran.
Brotherhood of good, Equal laws and rights, Yreedom, whose sweet food
Feeds the multitude All their days and nights,
With the bread full-fed e Of her body blest And the soul’s wine shed From her table spread Where the world is guest,
Mingling me and thee, When like light of eyes ‘Flashed through thee and me Truth shall make us free, Liberty make wise ;
These are they whom day Follows and gives light
Whence they see to slay
Night, and burn away All the seed of night.
7 Bi, i
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES.
What of thine and mine, What of want and wealth, When one faith is wine For my heart and thine And one draught is health?
For no sect elect Is the soul’s wine poured And her table decked ; Whom should man reject From man’s common board ?
Gods refuse and choose, Grudge and sell and spare ; None shall man refuse, None of all men lose, None leave out of care.
No man’s might of sight Knows that hour before ; No man’s hand hath might To put back that light For one hour the more.
Not though all men call, Kneeling with void hands, Shall they see light fall M
165
162
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES,
Till it come for all Tribes of men and lands.
No desire brings fire Down from heaven by prayer, Though man’s vain desire Hang faith’s wind-struck lyre Out in tuneless air.
One hath breath and saith What the tune shall be— Time, who puts his breath Into life and death, Into earth and sea.
To and fro years flow, Fill their tides and ebb, As his fingers go Weaving to and fro One unfinished web.
All the range of change Hath its bounds therein, All the lives that range | All the byways strange : Named of death or sin.
en
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES.
Star from far to star
Speaks, and white moons wake, Watchful from afar What the night s ways are
For the morning's sake.
Many names and flames Pass and flash and fall,
Night-begotten names,
And the night reclaims, As she bare them, all.
But the sun is one,
And the sun’s name Right; And when light is none Saving of the sun,
All men shall have light.
All shall see and be Parcel of the morn ;
Ay, though blind were we,
None shall choose but see When that day is born,
M 2
163
- r= —
164
A NEW YEAR’S MESSAGE.
To JoserpH Mazzini.
“Send the stars light, but send not love to me.” Shelley.
I,
Out of the dawning heavens that hear Young wings and feet of the new year
Move through their twilight, and shed round Soft showers of sound,
Soothing the season with sweet rain,
If greeting come to make me fain,
What is it I can send again?
2
I know not if the year shall send Tidings to usward as a friend,
And salutation, and such things
Bear on his wings
As the soul turns and thirsts unto
With hungering eyes and lips that sue For that sweet food which makes all new.
A NEW YEAR'S MESSAGE.
3. I know not if his light shall be Darkness, or else light verily : 1 know but that it will not part Heart’s faith from heart, Truth from the trust in truth, nor hope From sight of days unscaled that ope Beyond one poor year’s horoscope.
4. That faith in love which love’s self gives, O master of my spirit, lives, Having in presence unremoved Thine head beloved, The shadow of thee, the semitone Of thy voice heard at heart and known, The light of thee not set nor flown.
5. Seas, lands, and hours, can these divide Love from love’s service, side from side, Though no sound pass nor breath be heard Of one good word ? To send back words of trust to thee Were to send wings to love, when he
With his own strong wings covers me.
105
166
A NEW YEARS MESSAGE. 6.
Who shall teach singing to the spheres, Or motion to the flight of years ?
Let soul with soul keep hand in hand And understand,
As in one same abiding-place
We keep one watch for one same face To rise in some short sacred space.
q-
And all space midway is but nought
’ To keep true heart from faithful thought,
As under twilight stars we wait By Time’s shut gate Till the slow soundless hinges turn, And through the depth of years that yearm The face of the Republic burn. 1870.
167
‘ MATER DOLOROSA.
Citoyen, lui dit Enjolras, ma mére, c’est la République. Les Misérailes.
Who is this that sits by the way, by the wild wayside,
In a rent stained raiment, the robe of a cast-off bride,
In the dust, in the rainfall sitting, with soiled feet bare,
With the night for a garment upon her, with torn wet hair? §
She is fairer of face than the daughters of men, and her ~
eyes, Worn through with her tears, are deep as the depth of skies.
This is she for whose sake being fallen, for whose abject sake,
Earth groans in the blackness of darkness, and men’s hearts break.
This is she for whose love, having seen her, the men that were
Poured life out as water, and shed their souls upon air.
168 MATER DOLOROSA.
This is she for whose glory their years were counted as foam ;
Whose face was a light upon Greece, was a fire upon Rome.
Is it now not surely a vain thing, a foolish and vain, To sit down by her, mourn to her, serve her, partake in the pain ?
She is grey with the dust of time on his manifold ways, Where her faint feet stumble and falter through yearlong days. Shall she help us at ali, O fools, give fruit or give fame,
Who herself is a name despised, a rejected name P
We have not served her for guerdon. If any do so,
That his mouth may be sweet with such honey, we care not to know.
We have drunk from a wine-unsweetened, a perilous cup,
A draught very bitter. The kings of the earth stood up,
And the rulers took counsel together, to smite her and slay ;
And the blood of her wounds is given us to drink to-day.
Can these bones live? or the leaves that are dead leaves bud ?
Or the dead blood drawn from her veins be in your veins blood ?
MATER DOLOROSA. 169
Will ye gather up water again that was drawn and shed ?
In the blood is the life of the veins, and her veins are dead.
For the lives that are over are over, and past things past;
She had her day, and it is not ; was first, and is last.
Is it nothing unto you then, all ye that pass by,
If her breath be left in her lips, if she live now or die ?
Behold now, O people, and say if she be not fair,
Whom your fathers followed to find her, with praise and prayer,
And rejoiced, having found her, though roof they had none nor bread ;
But ye care not ; what is it to you if her day be dead ?
It was well with our fathers ; their sound was in all men’s
lands ; There was fire in their hearts, and the hunger of fight in
their hands. Naked and strong they went forth in her strength like
flame, For her love’s and her name’s sake of old, her republican
name. But their children, by kings made quiet, by priests made wise, ; Love better the heat of their hearths than the light of her
eyes.
170 MATER DOLOROSA.
Are they children of these thy children indeed, who have sold,
O golden goddess, the light of thy face for gold
Are they sons indeed of the sons of thy dayspring of hope,
Whose lives are in fief of an emperor, whose souls of a Pope?
Hide then thine head, O belovéd ; thy time is done ;
Thy kingdom is broken in heaven, and blind thy sun.
What sleep is upon you, to dream she indeed shall rise,
When the hopes are dead in her heart as the tears in her eyes?
If ye sing of her dead, will she stir? if ye weep for her, weep?
Come away now, leave her; what hath she to do but
| sleep? But ye that mourn are alive, and have years to be ; And life is good, and the world is wiser than we.
Yea, wise is the world and mighty, with years to give,
And years to promise ; but how long now shall it live?
And foolish and poor is faith, and her ways are bare,
Till she find the way of the sun, and the morning air.
In that hour shall this dead face shine as the face of the sun,
And the soul of man and her soul and the worid’s be one.
- . eee aide ye
172
MATER TRIUMPHALIS.
MotueER of man’s time-travelling generations, Breath of his nostrils, heartblood of his heart,
God above all Gods worshipped of all nations, Light above light, law beyond law, thou art.
Thy face is as a sword smiting in sunder
Shadows and chains and dreams and iron things ; The sea is dumb before thy face, the thunder
Silent, the skies are narrower than thy wings.
Angels and Gods, spirit and sense, thou takest In thy right hand as drops of dust or dew ; The temples and the towers of time thou breakest, His thoughts and words and works, to make them
new.
All we have wandered from thy ways, have hidden Eyes from thy glory and ears from calls they heard ;
Called of thy trumpets vainly, called and chidden, Scourged of thy speech and wounded of thy word.
172 MATER TRIUMPHAALIS,
We have known thee and have not known thee ; stood beside thee, Felt thy lips breathe, set foot where thy feet trod, Loved and renounced and worshipped and denied thee, As though thou wert but as another God.
«One hour for sleep,” we said, “and yet one other ; All day we served her, and who shall serve by night ?” Not knowing of thee, thy face not knowing, O mother, O light wherethrough the darkness is as light.
Men that forsook thee hast thou not forsaken, Races of men that knew not hast thou known ; Nations that slept tnou hast doubted not to waken,
Worshippers of strange Gods to make thine own.
All old grey histories hiding thy clear features, O secret spirit and sovereign, all men’s tales, Creeds woven of men thy children and thy creatures, They have woven for vestures of thee and for veils,
Thine hands, without election or exemption, Feed all men fainting from false peace or strife, O thou, the resurrection and redemption, The godhead and the manhood and the life.
’)
sabi tane
MATER TRIUMPHALIS. 173
Thy wings shadow the waters ; thine eyes lighten The horror of the hollows of the night ;
The depths of the earth and the dark places brighten Under thy feet, whiter than fire is white.
Death is subdued to thee, and hell’s bands broken ; Where thou art only is heaven; who hears not thee, Time shall not hear him; when men’s names are spoken, A nameless sign of death shall his name be.
Deathless shall be the death, the name be nameless ; Sterile of stars his twilight time of breath ;
With fire of hell shall shame consume him shameless, And dying, all the night darken his death.
The years are as thy garments, the world’s ages As sandals bound and loosed from thy swift feet ; Time serves before thee, as one that hath for wages Praise or shame only, bitter words or sweet.
Thou sayest ‘“‘ Well done,” and all a century kindles ; Again thou sayest “ Depart from sight of me,” And all the light of face of all men dwindles, “ And the age is as the broken glass of thee.
174 | MATER TRIUMPHALIS.
The night is as a seal set on men’s faces, On faces fallen of men that take no light,
Nor give light in the deeps of the dark places, Blind things, incorporate with the body of night.
Their souls are serpents winterbound and frozen, Their shame is as a tame beast, at their feet
Couched ; their cold lips deride thee and thy chosen, Their lying lips made grey with dust for meat.
Then when their time is full and days run over, The splendour of thy sudden brow made bare
Darkens the morning ; thy bared hands uncover The veils of light and night and the awful air.
And the world naked as a new-born maiden Stands virginal and splendid as at birth, With all thine heaven of all its light unladen,
Of all its love unburdened all thine earth.
For the utter earth and the utter air of heaven And the extreme depth is thine and the extreme height ; Shadows of things and veils of ages riven Are as men’s kings unkingdomed in thy sight.
<“F
a)
MATER TRIUMPHALIS, 175
Through the iron years, the centuries brazen-gated, By the ages’ barred impenetrable doors,
From the evening to the morning have we waited, Should thy foot haply sound on the awful floors.
The floors untrodden of the sun’s feet glimmer, The star-unstricken pavements of the night ; Do the lights burn inside? the lights wax dimmer
On festal faces withering out of sight.
The crowned heads lose the light on them ; it may be Dawn is at hand to smite the loud feast dumb ;
To blind the torch-lit centuries till the day be, The feasting kingdoms till thy kingdom come.
Shall it not come ? deny they or dissemble, Is it not even as lightning from on high
Now? and though many a soul close eyes and tremble, How should they tremble at all who love thee as I?
I am thine harp between thine hands, O mother ! All my strong chords are strained with love of thee. We grapple in love and wrestle, as each with other Wrestle the wind and the unreluctant sea.
176 MATER TRIUMPHALIS,
I am no courtier of thee sober-suited, Who loves a little for a little pay.
Me not thy winds and storms nor thrones disrooted Nor molten crowns nor thine own sins dismay.
Sinned hast thou sometime, therefore art thou sinless ; Stained hast thou been, who art therefore without stain ; Even as man’s soul is kin to thee, but kinless Thou, in whose womb Time sows the all-various grain,
I do not bid thee spare me, O dreadful mother! I pray thee that thou spare not, of thy grace. How were it with me then, if ever another
Should come to stand before thee in this my place?
I am the trumpet at thy lips, thy clarion Full of thy cry, sonorous with thy breath ; The graves of souls born worms and creeds grown car- rion Thy blast of judgment fills with fires of death.
Thou art the player whose organ-keys are thunders, And I beneath thy foot the pedal prest ;
Thou art the ray whereat the rent night sunders, And I the cloudlet borne upon thy breast.
MATER TRIUMPHALIS.
I shall burn up before thee, pass and perish, As haze in sunrise on the red sea-line ;
But thou from dawn to sunsetting shalt cherish’ The thoughts that led and souls that lighted mine.
Reared between night and noon and truth and error, Each twilight-travelling bird that trills and screams Sickens at midday, nor can face for terror The imperious heayen’s inevitable extremes.
I have no spirit of skill with equal fingers At sign to sharpen or to slacken strings ;
I keep no time of song with gold-perched singers And chirp of linnets on the wnists of kings.
I am thy storm-thrush of the days that darken, Thy petrel in the foam that bears thy bark
To port through night and tempest ; if thou hearken, My voice is in thy heaven before the lark.
My song is in the mist that hides thy morning, My cry is up before the day for thee ; I have heard thee and beheld thee and give warning, Before thy wheels divide the sky and sea. N
178 MATER TRIUMPHALIS,
Birds shall wake with thee voiced and feathered fairer,
To see in summer what I see in spring ;
I have eyes and heart to endure thee, O thunder-bearet, —
And they shall be who shall have tongues to sing.
J have love at least, and have not fear, and part not From thine unnavigable and wingless way ; Thou tarriest, and I have not said thou art not,
Nor all thy night long have denied thy day.
Darkness to daylight shall lift up thy pzean, Hill to hill thunder, vale cry back to vale,
With wind-notes as of eagles A‘schylean, And Sappho singing in the nightingale.
Sung to by mighty sons of dawn and daughters, Of this night’s songs thine ear shall keep but one ; That supreme song which shook the channelled waters,
And called thee skyward as God calls the sun.
Come, though all heaven again be fire above thee ; Though death before thee come to clear thy sky ; Let us but see in his thy face who love thee ;
Yea, though thou slay us, arise and let us die,
a 2
17g
A MARCHING SONG.
WE mix from many lands, We march for very far ; Tn hearts and lips and hands Our staffs and weapons are; The light we walk in darkens sun and moon and star,
It doth not flame and wane With years and spheres that rol, Storm cannot shake nor stain The strength that makes it whole, The fire that moulds and moves it of the sovereign soul,
We are they that have to cope With time till time retire ; We live on hopeless hope, We feed on tears and fire ; Time, foot by foot, gives back before our sheer desire.
From the edge of harsh derision, From discord and defeat, N 2
180 A MARCHING SONG.
From doubt and lame division, We pluck the fruit and eat ; And the mouth finds it bitter, and the spirit sweet.
We strive with time at wrestling Till time be on our side And hope, our plumeless nestling, A full-fledged eaglet ride Down the loud length of storm its windward wings divide.
We are girt with our belief, Clothed with our will and crowned ; Hope, fear, delight, and grief, Before our will give ground ;
Their calls are in our ears as shadows of dead sound.
All but the heart forsakes us, All fails us but the will ; Keen treason tracks and takes us In pits for blood to fill ; Friend falls from friend, and faith for faith lays wait to kill.
Out under moon and stars
And shafts of the urgent sun
:
' A MARCHING SONG. 181
Whose face on prison-bars And mountain-heads is one, Our march is everlasting till time’s march be done
Whither we know, and whence, And dare not care wherethrough. Desires that urge the sense, Fears changing old with new, Perils and pains beset the ways we press into ;
Earth gives us thorns to tread, And all her thorns are trod ; Through lands burnt black and red We pass with feet unshod ; Whence we would be man shall not keep us, nor man’s God.
Through the great desert beasts Howl at our backs by night, And thunder-forging priests Blow their dead bale-fires bright, And on their broken anvils beat out bolts for fight.
Inside their sacred smithies Though hot the hammer rings,
ns <i
182 A MARCHING SONG.
Their steel links snap like withies, Their chains like twisted strings, ‘Their surest fetters are as plighted words of kings
O nations undivided, O single people and free, We dreamers, we derided, We mad blind men that see, We bear you witness ere ye come that ye shall be.
Ye sitting among tombs, Ye standing round the gate, Whom fire-mouthed war consumes, Or cold-lipped peace bids wait,
All tombs and bars shall open, every grave and grate.
The locks shall burst in sunder, The hinges shrieking spin, When time, whose hand is thunder, Lays hand upon the pin, And shoots the bolts reluctant, bidding all men-in.
These eyeless times and earless, Shall these not see and hear, And all their hearts burn fearless That were afrost for fear? Is day not hard upon us, yea, not our day near?
A MARCHING SONG, 183
France ! from its grey dejection Make manifest the red Tempestuous resurrection Of thy most sacred head ! Break thou the covering cerecloths ; rise up from the dead.
And thou, whom sea-walls sever From lands unwalled with seas, Wilt thou endure for ever, O Milton’s England, these ? Thou that wast his Republic, wilt thou clasp their knees ?
These royalties rust-eaten, These worm-corroded lies, That keep thine head storm-beaten And sunlike strength of eyes From the open heaven and air of intercepted skies ;
These princelings with gauze winglets That buzz in the air unfurled, These summer-swarming kinglets, These thin worms crowned and curled, That bask and blink and warm themselves about the world ;
184 A MARCHING SONG
These fanged meridian vermin, Shrill gnats that crowd the dusk, Night-moths whose nestling ermine Smells foul of mould and musk, Blind flesh-flies hatched by dark and hampered in their husk ;
These honours without honour, These ghost-like gods of gold, This earth that wears upon her To keep her heart from cold No memory more of men that brought it fire of old ;
These limbs, supine, unbuckled, In rottenness of rest, These sleepy lips blood-suckled And satiate of thy breast, These dull wide mouths that drain thee dry and call thee blest ;
These masters of thee mindless | That wear thee out of mind, These children of thee kindless That use thee out of kind, Whose hands strew gold before thee and contempt behind ;
A MARCHING SONG. 185
Who have turned thy name to laughter, Thy séa-like sounded name That now none hearkens after For faith in its free fame, Who have robbed thee of thy trust and given thee of their shame ;
These hours that mock each other, These years that kill and die, Are these thy gains, our mother, For all thy gains thrown by ? Is this that end whose promise made thine heart so high ?
With empire and with treason The first right hand made fast, But in man’s nobler season To put forth help the last, Love turns from thee, and memory disavows thy past.
Lest thine own sea disclaim thee, Lest thine own sons despise, Lest lips shoot out that name thee And seeing thee men shut eyes, Take thought with all thy people, turn thine head and
rise.
186 A MARCHING SONG.
Turn thee, lift up thy face ; What ails thee to be dead ? Ask of thyself for grace, Seek of thyself for bread, And who shall starve or shame thee, blind or bruise thine head ?
The same sun in thy sight, The same sea in thine ears, ‘That saw thine hour at height, That sang thy song of years, Behold and hearken for thee, knowing thy hopes and fears.
O people, O perfect nation, O England that shall be, How long till thou take station ? How long till thralls live free ? How long till all thy soul be one with all thy sea?
' Ye that from south to north, Ye that from east to west, Stretch hands of longing forth And keep your eyes from rest, ° Lo, when ye will, we bring you gifts of what is best. -
A MARCHING SONG. 187
From the awful northland pines That skirt their wan dim seas To the ardent Apennines And sun-struck Pyrenees, One frost on all their frondage bites the blossoming
trees.
The leaves look up for light, For heat of helpful air ; The trees of oldest height And thin storm-shaken hair Seek with gaunt hands up heavenward if the sun be
there.
The woods where souls walk lonely, The forests girt with night, Desire the day-star only And firstlings of the light Not seen of slaves nor shining in their masters’ sight.
We have the morning star, O foolish people, O kings! With us the day-springs are, Even all the fresh day-springs ; For us, and with us, all the multitudes of things.
7
18S A MARCHING SONG.
O sorrowing hearts of slaves, We heard you beat from far! We bring the light that saves, We bring the morning star ; Freedom’s good things we bring you, whence all good things are.
With us the winds and fountains And lightnings live in tune ; The morning-coloured mountains That burn into the noon, The mist’s mild veil on valleys muffled from the moon:
The thunder-darkened highlands And lowlands hot with fruit, Sea-bays and shoals and islands, And cliffs that foil man’s foot, © And all the flower of large-limbed life and all the root ;
The clangour of sea-eagles That teach the morning mirth With baying of heaven’s beagles ‘That seek their prey on earth, By sounding strait and channel, gulf and reach and firth.
A MARCHING SONG. 189
With us the fields and rivers, The grass that summer thrills, The haze where morning quivers, The peace at heart of hills, The sense that kindles nature, and the soul that fills.
With us all natural sights, All notes of natural scale ; With us the starry lights ; With us the nightingale ; With us the heart and secret of the worldly tale.
The strife of things and beauty, The fire and light adored, Truth, and life-lightening duty, Love without crown or sword, That by his might and godhead makes man god and lord.
These have we, these are ours, That no priests give nor kings ;
The honey of all these flowers, The heart of all these springs ;
Ours, for where freedom lives not, there live no good
things.
| Rise, ere | the idawribe? sen ; ye: ai - Come, and be all souls fed ; From field and street and prison : = cas ~ Come, for the feast i is spread ;
ES) for the truth is. living ; wake, for night is dead
198
SIENA,
{InsIDE this northern summer's fold
‘The fields are full of naked gold, Broadcast from heaven on lands it loves ; The green veiled air is full of doves ; Soft leaves that sift the sunbeams let Light on the small warm grasses wet Fall in short broken kisses sweet,
And break again like waves that beat Round the sun’s feet.
But I, for all this English mirth Of golden-shod and dancing days, And the old green-girt sweet-hearted earth Desire what here no spells can raise. Far hence, with holier heavens above, The lovely city of my love Bathes deep in the sun-satiate air That flows round no fair thing more fair
Her beauty bare.
192
STENA.
There the utter sky is holier, there
More pure the intense white height of air,
More clear men’s eyes that mine would meet,
And the sweet springs of things more sweet.
There for this one warm note of doves . A clamour of'a thousand loves : a: Storms the night’s ear, the day’s assails,
From the tempestuous nightingales,
And fills, and fails.
O gracious city well-beloved, Italian, and a maiden crowned, Siena, my feet are no more moved Toward thy strange-shapen mountain-bound ; But my heart in me turns and moves, O lady loveliest of my loves, Toward thee, to lie before thy feet And gaze from thy fair fountain-seat Up the sheer street ;
And the house midway hanging see ‘That saw Saint Catherine bodily, Felt on its floors her sweet feet move, And the live light of fiery love
Burn from her beautiful strange face,
As in the sanguine sacred place
SIENA. ies
Where in pure hands she took the head Severed, and with pure lips still red Kissed the lips dead.
For years through, sweetest of the saints, In quiet without cease she wrought, Till cries of men and fierce complaints From outward moved her maiden thought ; And prayers she heard and sighs toward France, ‘God, send us back deliverance, Send back thy servant, lest we die !” With an exceeding bitter cry They smote the sky.
Then in her sacred saving hands
She took the sorrows of the lands,
With maiden palms she lifted up
The sick time’s blood-embittered cup, And in her virgin garment furled
The faint limbs of a wounded world. Clothed with calm love and clear desire, She went forth in her soul’s attire,
A missive fire.
Across the might of men that strove It shone, and over heads of kings ; Oo
104 STENA.,
And molten in red flames of love
Were swords and many monstrous things ; And shields were lowered, and snapt were spears, And sweeter-tuned the clamorous years; And faith came back, and peace, that were Fled ; for she bade, saying, “Thou, God’s heir, Hast thou no care ?
“Lo, men lay waste thine heritage Still, and much heathen people rage Against thee, and devise vain things. What comfort in the face of kings, What counsel is there? Turn thine eyes And thine heart from them in like wise ; Turn thee unto thine holy place To help us that of God for grace Require thy face.
‘For who shall hear us if not thou In a strange land? what doest thou there?
Thy sheep are spoiled, and the ploughers plough Upon us; why hast thou no care
For all this, and beyond strange hills
Liest unregardful what snow chills
Thy foldless flock, or what rains beat?
Lo, in thine ears, before thy feet,
‘Thy lost sheep bleat.
SIENA. 195
“ And strange men feed on faultless lives, And there is blood, and men put knives, Shepherd, unto the young lamb’s throat ; And one hath eaten, and one smote, And one had hunger and is fed Full of the flesh of these, and red With blood of these as who drinks wine. And God knoweth, who hath sent thee a sign, If these were thine.”
But the Pope’s heart within him burned, So that he rose up, seeing the sign,
And came among them; but she turned Back to her daily way divine,
And fed her faith with silent things,
And lived her life with curbed white wings,
And mixed herself with heaven and died :
_ And now on the sheer city-side Smiles like a bride.
You see her in the fresh clear gloom, Where walls shut out the flame and bloom Of full-breathed summer, and the roof Keeps the keen ardent air aloof And sweet weight of the violent sky: There bodily beheld on high, She seems as one hearing in tune
oO 2
196
SIENA,
Heaven within heaven, at heaven’s full noon,
In sacred swoon:
A solemn swoon of sense that aches With imminent blind heat of heaven, While all the wide-eyed spirit wakes, Vigilant of the supreme Seven, Whose choral flames in God’s sight move, Made unendurable with love, That without wind or blast of breath Compels all things through life and death Whither God saith.
There on the dim side-chapel wall
‘Thy mighty touch memorial,
Razzi, raised up, for ages dead,
And fixed for us her heavenly head :
And, rent with plaited thorn and rod, Bared the live likeness of her God
To men’s eyes turning from strange lands, Where, pale from thine immortal hands, Christ wounded stands ;
And the blood blots his holy hair And white brows over hungering eyes That plead against us, and the fair Mute lips forlorn of words or sighs
mad
a ee ONG? rp a oe tee a” A
o<te <5.
SIENA, ‘97
In the great torment that bends down
His bruised head with the bloomless crown, White as the unfruitful thorn-flower,
A God beheld in dreams that were
Beheld of her.
In vain on all these sins and years Falls the sad blood, fall the slow tears ; In vain poured forth as watersprings, Priests, on your altars, and ye, kings, About your seats of sanguine gold ; Still your God, spat upon and sold, Bleeds at your hands ; but now is gone All his flock from him saving one ;
Judas alone.
Surely your race it was that he,
O men signed backward with his name, Beholding in Gethsemane
Bled the red bitter sweat of shame, Knowing how the word of Christian should Mean to men evil and not good, Seem to men shameful for your sake, Whose lips, for all the prayers they make, Man’s blood must slake.
STENA,
But blood nor tears ye love not, you That my love leads my longing to,
Fair as the world’s old faith of flowers, O golden goddesses of ours!
From what Idalian rose-pleasance
Hath Aphrodite bidden glance
The lovelier lightnings of your feet? From what sweet Paphian sward or seat
Led you more sweet ?
O white three sisters, three as oné, With flowerlike arms for flowery bands Your linked limbs glitter like the sun, And time lies beaten at your hands. Time and wild years and wars and men Pass, and ye care not whence or when; With calm lips over sweet for scorn, Ye watch night pass, O children born Of the old-world morn. p
Ah, in this strange and shrineless place, What doth a goddess, what a Grace, ° Where no Greek worships her shrined limbs With wreaths and Cytherean hymns? Where no lute makes luxurious
The adoring airs in Amathus,
OS, ae Be
SIENA,
Till the maid, knowing her mother near, Sobs with love, aching with sweet fear ? What do ye here?
For the outer land is sad, and wears A raiment of a flaming fire ; sud the fierce fruitless mountain stairs Climb, yet seem wroth and loth to aspire, Climb, and break, and are broken down, And through their clefts and crests the town Looks west and sees the dead sun lie, In sanguine death that stains the sky
With angry dye.
And from the war-worn wastes without In twilight, in the time of doubt,
One sound comes of one whisper, where Moved with low motions of slow air The great trees nigh the castle swing In the sad coloured evening ;
“ Ricorditi di me, che son
La Pia’—that small sweet word alone
Is not yet gone.
“ Ricorditi di me” —the sound Sole out of deep dumb days remote
199
200
STENA.
Across the fiery and fatal ground
Comes tender as a hurt bird’s note To where, a ghost with empty hands, A woe-worn ghost, her palace stands In the mid city, where the strong Bells turn the sunset air to song, And the towers throng.
With other face, with speech the same,
A mightier maiden’s likeness came
Late among mourning men that slept,
A sacred ghost that went and wept,
White as the passion-wounded Lamb,
Saying, “‘ Ah, remember me, that am
Italia.” (From deep sea to Sea
Earth heard, earth knew her, that this was she, “ Ricorditi.
“Love made me of all things fairest thing, And Fate unmade me; this knows he Who with God’s sacerdotal ring Enringed mine hand, espousing me.” Yea, in thy myriad-mooded woe, Yea, Mother, hast thou not said so? Have not our hearts within us stirred, O thou most holiest, at thy word ? Have we not heard?
SIENA. 20!
As this dead tragic land that she
Found deadly, such was time to thee ;
Years passed thee withering in the red Maremma, years that deemed thee dead, Ages that sorrowed or that scorned ;
And all this while though all they mourned Thou sawest the end of things unclean,
And the unborn that should see thee a queen. Have we not seen?
‘The weary poet, thy sad son, Upon thy soil, under thy skies, Saw all Italian things save one— Italia ; this thing missed his eyes ; The old mother-might, the breast, the face, That reared, that lit the Roman race ; This not Leopardi saw; but we, What is it, Mother, that we see, What if not thee?
Look thou from Siena southward home, Where the priest’s pall hangs rent on Rome, And through the red rent swaddling-bands Toward thine she strains her labouring hands. Look thou and listen, and let be
All the dead quick, all the bond free ;
202
SIENA,
In the blind eyes let there be sight ; In the eighteen centuries of the night Let there be light.
Bow down the beauty of thine head, Sweet, and with lips of living breath Kiss thy sons sleeping and thy dead, That there be no more sleep or death. Give us thy light, thy might, thy love, Whom thy face seen afar above Drew to thy feet; and when, being free, Thou hast blest thy children born to thee, Bless also me.
Me that when others played or slept Sat still under thy cross and wept
Me who so early and unaware
Felt fall on bent bared brows and hair (Thin drops of the overflowing flood !) The bitter blessing of thy blood ;
The sacred shadow of thy pain, Thine, the true maiden-mother, slain And raised again,
Me consecrated, if I might,
To praise thee, or to love at least,
eee ee ee ee
r7
SIENA, 203
O mother of all men’s dear delight, Thou madest a choral-souled boy-priest, ‘Before my lips had leave to sing, Or my hands hardly strength to cling About the intolerable tree Whereto they had nailed my heart and thee And said, “ Let be.”
For to thee too the high Fates gave Grace to be sacrificed and save,
That being arisen, in the equal sun, God and the People should be one ;
By those red roads thy footprints trod, Man more divine, more human God, Saviour ; that where no light was known But darkness, and a daytime flown, Light should be shown.
Let there be light, O Italy!
For our feet falter in the night. O lamp of living years to be,
O light of God, let there be light! Fill with a love keener than flame Men sealed in spirit with thy name,
The cities and the Roman skies.
204
SIENA.
Where men with other than man’s eyes Saw thy sun rise.
For theirs thou wast and thine were they Whose names outshine thy very day ; For they are thine and theirs thou art Whose blood beats living in man’s heart, Remembering ages fled and dead Wherein for thy sake these men bled ; They that saw Trebia, they that see Mentana, they in years to be
That shall see thee.
For thine are all of us, and ours
Thou ; till the seasons bring to birtli A perfect people, and all the powers
Be with them that bear fruit on earth : Till the inner heart of man be one With freedom, and the sovereign sun ; And Time, in likeness of a guide. Lead the Republic as a bride Up to God’s side.
205
COR CORDIUM.
O Heart of hearts, the chalice of love’s fire, Hid round with flowers and all the bounty of bloom ; O wonderful and perfect heart, for whom The lyrist liberty made life a lyre ; O heavenly heart, at whose most dear desire Dead love, living and singing, cleft his tomb, And with him risen and regent in death’s room All day thy choral pulses rang full choir ; O hcart whose beating blood was running song, O sole thing sweeter than thine own songs were, Help us for thy free love’s sake to be free, True for tay truth’s sake, for thy strength’s sake strong, Till very liberty make clean and fair The nursing earth as the sepulchral sea.
IN SAN LORENZO.
Is thine hour come to wake, O slumbering Night?
Hath not the Dawn a message in thine ear?
Though thou be stone and sleep, yet shalt thou hear When the word falls from heaven—Let there be light. Thou knowest we would not do thee the despite
To wake thee while the old sorrow and shame were
near ;
We spake not loud for thy sake, and for fear Lest thou shouldst lose the rest that was thy right, The blessing given thee that was thine alone,
The happiness to sleep and to be stone:
Nay, we kept silence of thee for thy sake Albeit we knew thee alive, and left with thee The great good gift to feel not nor to see ;
But will not yet thine Angel bid thee wake ?
207
TIRESIAS,
PART I.
Ir is an hour before the hour of dawn. Set in mine hand my staff and leave me here Outside the hollow house that blind men fear, More blind than I who live on life withdrawn And feel on eyes that see not but foresee The shadow of death which clothes Antigone.
Here lay her living body that here lies Dead, if man living know what thing is death, If life be all made up of blood and breath,
And no sense be save as of ears and eyes. But heart there is not, tongue there is not found, To think or sing what verge hath life or bound.
In the beginning when the powers that made The young child man a little loved him, seeing His joy of life and fair face of his being,
And bland and laughing with the man-child played,
203 TIRE STAS.
As friends they saw on our divine one day King Cadmus take to queen Harmonia.
The strength of soul that builds up as with hands Walls spiritual and towers and towns of thought Which only fate, not force, can bring to nought,
Took then to wife the light of all men’s lands,
War’s child and love’s, most sweet and wise strong,
Order of things and rule and guiding song,
It was long since: yea, even the sun that saw Remembers hardly what was, nor how long, And now the wise heart of the worldly song
Is perished, and the holy hand of law Can set no tune on time, nor help again
The power of thought to build up life for men,
Yea, surely are they now transformed or dead, | And sleep below this world, where no sun warms, Or move about it now in formless forms
Incognizable, and all their lordship fled ;
And where they stood up singing crawl and hiss With fangs that kill behind their lips that kiss.
and
TIRESIAS, 209
Yet though her marriage-garment, seeming fair Was dyed in sin and woven of jealousy To turn their seed to poison, time shall see The gods reissue from them, and repair Their broken stamp of godhead, and again Thought and wise love sing words of law to men.
J, Tiresias the prophet, seeing in Thebes Much evil, and the misery of men’s hands Who sow with fruitless wheat the stones and sands, With fruitful thorns the fallows and warm glebes, Bade their hands hold lest worse hap came to pass , But which of you had heed of Tiresias ?
I am as Time’s self in mine own wearied mind, Whom the strong heavy-footed years have led From night to night and dead men unto dead,
And from the blind hope to the memory blind ; For each man’s life is woven, as Time’s life is, Of blind young hopes and old blind memorics,
I am a soul outside of death and birth. I\see before me and afterward I see, O child, O corpse, the live dead face of thee, Whose life and death are one thing upon earth P
KN
ane TIRESIAS.
Where day kills night and night again kills day And dies; but where is that Harmonia?
O all-beholden light not seen of me, Air, and warm winds that under the sun’s eye . Stretch your strong wings at morning ; and thou, sky, Whose hollow circle engirdling earth and sea All night the set stars limit, and all day The moving sun remeasures ; ye, I say,
Ye heights of hills, and thou Dircean spring Inviolable, and ye towers that saw cast down
bP SD bh te Or ED Ee
Seven kings keen-sighted toward your seven-faced town : And quenched the red seed of one sightless king ; ; And thou, for death less dreadful than for birth, - Whose wild leaves hide the horror of the earth,
«) mountain whereon gods made chase of kings, Cithzeron, thou that sawest on Pentheus dead Fangs of a mother fasten and wax red And satiate with a son thy swollen springs, And heardst her cry fright all thine eyries’ nests 5
Who gave death suck at sanguine-suckling breasts ;
Yea, and a grief more grievous, without name,
A curse too grievous for the name of grief,
Peis
ae
TIRE SIAS, 210
‘Thou sawest, and heardst the rumour scare belief Even unto death and madness, when the flame
Was lit whose ashes dropped about the pyre
That of two brethren made one sundering fire ;
O bitter nurse, that on thine hard bare knees Rear’dst for his fate the bloody-footed child Whose hands should be more bloodily defiled
And the old blind feet walk wearier ways than these, Whose seed, brought forth in darkness unto doom, Should break as fire out of his mother’s womb ;
i bear you witness as ye bear to me, Time, day, night, sun, stars, life, death, air, sea, earth, And ye that round the human house of birth
Watch with veiled heads and weaponed hands, and see Good things and evil, strengthless yet and dumb, Sit in the clouds with cloudlike hours to come ;
Ye forces without form and viewless powers That have the keys of all our years in hold, That prophesy too late with tongues of gold, In a strange speech whose words are perished hours, I witness to you what good things ye give As ye to me what evil while I live. P 2
212 TIRESTAS.
What should I do to blame you, what to praise, For floral hours and hours funereal ? What should I do to curse or bless at all For winter-woven or summer-coloured days ? Curse he that will and bless you whoso can, 4
I have no common part in you with man.
I hear a springing water, whose quick sound Makes softer the soft sunless patient air, And the wind’s hand is laid on my thin hair Light as a lover’s, and the grasses round Have odours in them of green bloom and rain
Sweet as the kiss wherewith sleep kisses pain. a
x hear the low sound of the spring of time Still beating as the low live throb of blood, And where its waters gather head and flood
J hear change moving on them, and the chime Across them of reverberate wings of hours
Sounding, and feel the future air of flowers.
The wind of change is soft as snow, and sweet The sense thereof as roses in the sun, The faint wind springing with the springs that runy The dim sweet smell of flowering hopes, and heat Of unbeholden sunrise ; yet how long
I know not, till the morning put forth song
-
;
TIRESIAS, 213
1 prophesy of life, who live with death ; Of joy, being sad ; of sunlight, who am blind; Of man, whose ways are alien from mankind And his lips are not parted with man’s breath ; J am a word out of the speechless years, The tongue of time, that no man sleeps who hears.
I stand a shadow across the door of doom, Athwart the lintel of death’s house, and wait ; Nor quick nor dead, nor flexible by fate,
Nor quite of earth nor wholly of the tomb ,
A voice, a vision, light as fire or air, Driven between days that shall be and that were.
J prophesy, with feet upon a grave, Of death cast out and life devouring death As flame doth wood and stubble with a breath ; Of freedom, though all manhood were one slave ; Of truth, though all the world were liar ; of love, That time nor hate can raze the witness of.
Life that was given for love’s sake and his law’s Their powers have no more power on; they divide Spoils wrung from lust or wrath of man or pride,
And keen oblivion withcut pity or pause Sets them on fire and scatters them on air Like ashes shaken from a suppliant’s hair.
PM Gai TIRESTAS.
But life they lay no hand on ; life once given No force of theirs hath competence to take ; Life that was given for some divine thing’s sake, To mix the bitterness of earth with heaven, Light with man’s night, and music with his breath, Dies not, but makes its living food of death.
I have seen this, who live where men are not, In the high starless air of fruitful night On that serenest and obscurest height
Where dead and unborn things are one in thought And whence the live unconquerable springs Feed full of force the torrents of new things.
I have seen this, who saw long since, being man, As now I know not if indeed I be, The fair bare body of Wisdom, good to see And evil, whence my light and night began ; Light on the goal and darkness on the way,
Light all through night and darkness all through day.
Mother, that by that Pegasean spring Didst fold round in thine arms thy blinded son, Weeping “ O holiest, what thing hast thou done, What, to my child? woe’s me that see the thing ! Is this thy love to me-ward, and hereof Must I take sample how the gods can love ?
, TIRESIAS, ars
“O child, thou hast seen indeed, poor child of mine, The breasts and flanks of Pallas bare in sight, But never shalt see more the dear sun’s light ;
O Helicon, how great a pay is thine For some poor antelopes and wild-deer dead,
My child’s eyes hast thou taken in their stead—”
Mother, thou knewest not what she had to give, Thy goddess, though then angered, for mine eyes ; Fame and foreknowledge, and to be most wise,
And centuries of high-thoughted life to live,
And in mine hand this guiding staff to be As eyesight to the feet of men that see.
Perchance I shall not die at all, nor pass The general door and lintel of men dead ; Yet even the very tongue of wisdom said What grace should come with death to Tiresias, What special honour that God’s hand accord Who gathers all men’s nations as their lora
And sometimes when the secret eye of thought Is changed with obscuration, and the sense Aches with long pain of hollow prescience,
And fiery foresight with foresuffering bought Seems even to infect my spirit and consume, Hunger and thirst come on me for the tomb.
216 TIRESIAS.,
I could be fain to drink my death and sleep, And no more wrapped about with bitter dreams
Talk with the stars and with the winds and streains
And with the inevitable years, and weep ; For how should he who communes with the years Be sometime not a living spring of tears ?
O child, that guided of thine only will Didst set thy maiden foot against the gate To strike it open ere thine hour of fate, Antigone, men say not thou didst ill, For love’s sake and the reverence of his awe
Divinely dying, slain by mortal law ;
For love is awful as immortal death. And through thee surely hath thy brother won Rest, out of sight of our world-weary sun,
And in the dead land where ye ghosts draw breath A royal place and honour; so wast thou
Happy, though earth have hold of thee too now,
So hast thou life and name inviolable And joy it may be, sacred and severe, Joy secret-souled beyond.all hope or fear, A monumental joy wherein to dwell Secluse and silent, a selected state,
Serene possession of thy proper fate,
—_— ae = OT GN EO
=e
ep Re Fe
a ln at
TIRESIAS, 217
Thou art nat dead as these are dead who live Full of blind years, a sorrow-shaken kind, Nor as these are am I the prophet blind;
They have not life that have not heart to give Life, nor have eyesight who lack heart to see When to be not is better than to be.
O ye whom time but bears with for a span, How long will ye be blind and dead, how long Make your own souls part of your own soul's wrong ? Son of the word of the most high gods, man} Why wilt thou make thine hour of light and breath Empticr of all but shame than very death?
Fool, wilt thou live for ever? though thou care With all thine heart for life to keep it fast, Shall not thine hand forego it at the last Lo, thy sure hour shall take thee by the hair Sleeping, or when thou knowest not, or wouldst fly ;
And as men died much mightier shalt thou die.
Yea, they are dead, men much more worth than thot ; The savour of heroic lives that were, Is it not mixed into thy common air?
The sense of them is shed about thee now: Fee! not thy brows a wind blowing from far? Aches not thy forehead with a future star?
218 TIRESTIAS,
The light that thou may’st make out of thy name Is in the wind of this same hour that drives, Blown within reach but once of all men’s lives ;
And he that puts forth hand upon the flame Shall have it for a garland on his head
To sign him fora king among the dead.
Rut these men that the lessening years behold, | Who sit the most part without flame or crown, And brawl and sleep and wear their life-days down |
With joys and griefs ignobler than of old, : And care not if the better day shall be,— ; Are these or art thou dead, Antigone?
PART II.
As when one wakes out of a waning dream And sees with instant eyes the naked thought Whereof the vision as a web was wrought,
I saw beneath a heaven of cloud and gleam, Ere yet the heart of the young sun waxed brave, . One like a prophet standing by a grave.
In the hoar heaven was hardly beam or breath, And all the coloured hills and fields were grey, And the wind wandered seeking for the day,
TIRESTIAS, 219
And wailed as though he had found her done to death And this grey hour had built to bury her The hollow twilight for a sepulchre.
But in my soul I saw as in a glass
A pale and living body full of grace
There lying, and over it the prophet’s face Fixed ; and the face was not of Tiresias,
For such a starry fire was in his eyes
As though their light it was that made the skies.
Such eyes should God’s have been when very love Looked forth of them and set the sun aflame, And such his lips that called the light by name
And bade the morning forth at sound thereof ; His face was sad and masterful as fate,
And like a star’s his look compassionate.
Like a star’s gazed on of sad eyes so long It seems to yearn with pity, and all its fire As a man’s heart to tremble with desire And heave as though the light would bring forth song ; Yet from his face flashed lightning on the land, And like the thunder-bearer’s was his hand.
The steepness of strange stairs had tired his feet, And his lips yet seemed sick of that salt bread
220 TIRESIAS,
Wherewith the lips of banishment are fed ; But nothing was there in the world so swect
As the most bitter love, like God’s own grace,
Wherewith he gazed on that fair buried face.
Grief and glad pride and passion and sharp shame, Wrath and remembrance, faith and hope and hate And pitiless pity of days degenerate,
Were in his eyes as an incorporate flame That burned about her, and the heart thereof And central flower was very fire of love.
But all about her grave wherein she slept Were noises of the wild wind-footed years Whose footprints flying were full of blood and tears, Shrieks as of Mzenads on their hills that leapt And yelled as beasts of ravin, and their meat Was the rent flesh of their own sons to eat:
And fiery shadows passing with strange cries, And Sphinx-like shapes about the ruined lands, And the red reek of parricidal hands |
And intermixture of incestuous eyes,
And light as of that self-divided flame Which made an end of the Cadmean name.
TIRESTAS.
And I beheld again, and lo the grave,
And the bright body laid therein as dead, And the same shadow across another head That bowed down silent on that sleeping slave Who was the lady of empire from her birth And light of all the kingdoms of the earth.
Within the compass of the watcher’s hand All strengths of other men and divers powers Were held at ease and gathered up as flowers ; His heart was as the heart of his whole land, And at his feet as natural servants lay Twilight and dawn and night and labouring day.
He was most awful of the sons of God. Even now men seeing seemed at his lips to see The trumpet of the judgment that should be, And in his night hand terror for a rod, And in the breath that made the mountains bow The horned fire of Moses on his brow,
The strong wind of the coming of the Lord Had blown as flame upon him, and brought down On his bare head from heaven fire for a crown, And fire was girt upon him as a sword To smite and lighten, and on what ways he trod
There fell from him the shadow of a God.
222 TIRESTIAS,
Pale, with the whole world’s judgment in his eyes, He stood and saw the grief and shame endure That he, though highest of angels, might not cure,
And the same sins done under the same skies,
And the same slaves to the same tyrants thrown,
And fain he would have slept, and fain been stone
But with unslumbering eyes he watched the sleep That sealed her sense whose eyes were suns of old; And the night shut and opened, and behold,
The same grave where those prophets came to weep, But she that lay therein had moved and stirred, And where those twain had watched her stood a thir
The tripled rhyme that closed in Paradise With Love’s name sealing up its starry speech— ° The tripled might of hand that found in reach
All crowns beheld far off of all men’s eyes, Song, colour, carven wonders of live stone—
These were not, but the very soul alone.
The living spirit, the good gift of grace, The faith which takes of its own blood to give That the dead veins of buried hope may live, Came on her sleeping, face to naked face, And from a soul more sweet than all the south
Ereathed love upon her sealed and breathless meuith.
Between her lips the breath was blown as fire, And through her flushed veins leapt the liquid life, And with sore passion and ambiguous strife The new birth rent her and the new desire, The will to live, the competence to be, The sense to hearken and the soul to see.
And the third prophet standing by her grave Stretched forth his hand and touched her, and her eyes Opened as sudden suns in heaven might rise, And her soul caught from his the faith to save ; Faith above creeds, faith beyond records, born Of the pure, naked, fruitful, awful morn.
For in the daybreak now that night was dead The light, the shadow, the delight, the pain, The purpose and the passion of those twain, Seemed gathered on that third prophetic head, And all their crowns were as one crown, and one His face with her face in the living sun.
For even with that communion of their eyes His whole soul passed into her and made her strong ; And all the sounds and shows of shame and wrong, “fhe hand that slays, the lip that mocks and lies, Temples and thrones that yet men seem to see,— Are these dead or art thou dead, Italy ?
224
THE SONG OF THE STANDARD.
MaIveN most beautiful, mother most bountiful, lady of lands,
Queen and republican, crowned of the centuries whose years are thy sands,
See for thy sake what we bring to thee, Italy, here in our hands.
This is the banner thy gonfalon, fair in the front of thy fight,
Red from the hearts that were pierced for thee, white as thy mountains are white,
Green as the spring of thy soul everlasting, whose life- blood is light,
Take to thy bosom thy banner, a fair bird fit for the nest,
Feathered for flight into sunrise or sunset, for eastward or west,
Fledged for the flight everlasting, but held yet warm to thy breast.
ih ie
~~" ==
os ee el
ee ee ee . .
THE SONG OF THE STANDARD. 225
Gather it close to thee, song-bird or storm-bearer, eagie or dove,
Lift it to sunward, a beacon beneath to the beacon above,
Green as our hope in it, white as our faith in it, red as our love.
Thunder and splendour of lightning are hid in the folds of it furled ;
Who shall unroll it but thou, as thy bolt to be handled and hurled, as
Out of whose lips is the honey, whose bosom the milk of the world?
Out of thine hands hast thou fed us with pasture of colour and song ;
Glory and beauty by birthright to thee as thv garments belong ;
Out of thine hands thou shalt give us as surely deli-. verance from wrong.
Out of thine eyes thou hast shed on us love as a lamp in our night,
Wisdom a lodestar to ships, and remembrance a flame- coloured light ;
Qut of thine eyes thou shalt shew us as surely the sun- dawn of right.
Ce Lee ae en
226 THE SONG OF THE STANDARD,
Turn to us, speak to us, Italy, mother, but once and a word, ;
None shall not follow thee, none shall not serve thee, not one that has heard ;
Twice hast thou spoken a message, and time is athirst for the third.
Kingdom and empire of peoples thou hadst, and thy lordship made one
North sea and south sea and east men and west men that look on the sun ;
Spirit was in thee and counsel, when soul in the nations
was none.
Banner and beacon thou wast to the centuries of storm- wind and foam,
Ages that clashed in the dark with each other, and years without home ;
Empress and prophetess wast thou, and what wilt thou : now be, O Rome? :
Ah, by the faith and the hope and the love that have need of thee now,
Shines not thy face with the forethought of freedom, and burns not thy brow?
Who is against her but all men? and who is beside her but thou?
- THE SONG OF THE STANDARD. 227
Art thou not better than all men? and where shall she turn but to thee ?
Lo, not a breath, not a beam, not a beacon from mid- land to sea ; ;
Freedom cries out for a sign among nations, and none will be free,
England in doubt of her, France in despair of her, all without heart—
Stand on her side in the vanward of ages, and strike on her part !
Strike but one stroke for the love of her love of thee, sweet that thou art!
Take in thy right hand thy banner, a strong staff fit for thine hand ;
Forth at the light of it lifted shall foul things flock from the land ;
Faster than stars from the sun shall they fly, being lighter than sand.
Green thing to green in the summer makes answer, and rose-tree to rose ; 4 Lily by lily the year becomes perfect ; and none of us - knows What thing is fairest of all things on earth as it brightens
and blows.
® 228 THE SONG OF THE STANDARD.
This thing is fairest in all time of all things, in all time is best—
Freedom, that made thee, our mother, and suckled her sons at thy breast ;
Take to thy bosom the nations, and there shall the world
come to rest.
|
229
ON THE DOWNS.
_ A FAINT sea without wind or sun 3
A sky like flameless vapour dun ; A valley like an unsealed grave That no man cares to weep upon, Bare, without boon to crave, Or flower to save.
And on the lip’s edge of the down,
Here where the bent-grass burns to brown In the dry sea-wind, and the heath Crawls to the cliffside and looks down, I watch, and hear beneath The low tide breathe.
Along the long lines of the cliff, Down the flat sea-line without skiff Or sail or back-blown fume for mark, ‘Through wind-worn heads of heath and stiff Stems blossomless and stark With dry sprays dark,
OE er ae
230 ON THE DOWNS.
I send mine eyes out as for news Of comfort that all these refuse. Tidings of light or living air From windward where the low clouds muse And the sea blind and bare Seems full of care.
So is it now as it was then, And as men have been such are men. There as I stood I seem to stand, Here sitting chambered, and again Feel spread on either hand Sky, sea, and land.
As a queen taken and stripped and bound Sat earth, discoloured and discrowned ; As a king’s palace empty and dead The sky was, without light or sound ; And on the summer’s head Were ashes shed.
Scarce wind enough was on the sea, Scarce hope enough there moved in me, To sow with live blown flowers of white The green plain’s sad serenity, Or with stray thoughts of light
Touch my soul’s sight. y g
ON THE DOWNS. 231
By footless ways and sterile went My thought unsatisfied, and bent With blank unspeculative eyes On the untracked sands of discontent Where, watched of helpless skies, Life hopeless lies.
East and west went my soul to find Light, and the world was bare and blind And the soil herbless where she trod And saw men laughing scourge mankind, Unsmitten by the rod Of any God.
Out of time’s blind old eyes were shed Tears that were mortal, and left dead The heart and spirit of the years, And on man’s fallen and helmless head Time’s disanointing tears Fell cold as fears.
Hope flowering had but strength to bear The fruitless fruitage of despair ; Grief trod the grapes of joy for wine, Whereof love drinking unaware Died as one undivine And made no sign.
232
ON THE DOWNS.
And soul and body dwelt apart ;
~ And weary wisdom without heart
Stared on the dead round heaven and sighed, “Ts death too hollow as thou art, Or as man’s living pride?” And saying so died.
And my soul heard the songs and groans That are about and under thrones, And felt through all time’s murmur thrill Fate’s old imperious semitones That made of good and ill One same tune still.
Then “ Where is God ? and where is aid ? Or what good end of these ?” she said ; “Ts there no God or end at all, Nor reason with unreason weighed, Nor force to disenthral Weak feet that fall ?
“No light to lighten and no rod To chasten men? Is there no God?” So girt with anguish, iron-zoned, Went my soul weeping as she trod Between the men enthroned And men that groaned.
ae. ee
ON THE DOWNS.
O fool, that for brute cries of wrong Heard not the grey glad mother’s song Ring response from the hills and waves, But heard harsh noises all day long Of spirits that were slaves And dwelt in graves.
The wise word of the secret earth Who knows what life and death are worth, And how no help and no control Can speed or stay things come to birth, Nor all worlds’ wheels that roll Crush one born soul.
With all her tongues of life and death, With all her bloom and blood and breath, From all years dead and all things done, In the ear of man the mother saith, “There is no God, O son, If thou be none.”
So my soul sick with watching heard That day the wonder of that word, “And as one springs out of a dream Sprang, and the stagnant wells were stirred Whence flows through gloom and gleam Thought’s soundless stream.
233
234 ON THE DOWNS.
Out of pale cliff and sunburnt heath, Out of the low sea curled beneath In the land’s bending arm embayed, Out of all lives that thought hears breathe Life within life inlaid,
Was answer made.
A multitudinous monotone Of dust and flower and seed and stone, In the deep sea-rock’s mid-sea sloth, In the live water’s trembling zone, In all men love and loathe, One God at growth.
One forceful nature uncreate That feeds itself with death and fate, Evil and good, and change and time, That within all men lies at wait Till the hour shall bid them climb And live sublime.
For all things come by fate to flower At their unconquerable hour, And time brings truth, and truth makes free, And freedom fills time’s veins with power, As, brooding on that sea, My thought filled me.
ON THE DOWNS. 235,
And the sun smote the clouds and slew, And from the sun the sea’s breath blew, And white waves laughed and turned and fled The long green heaving sea-field through, And on them overhead The sky burnt red.
Like a furled flag that wind sets free, On the swift summer-coloured sea Shook out the red lines of the light, The live sun’s standard, blown to lee Across the live sea’s white And green delight.
And with divine triumphant awe My spirit moved within me saw,
With burning passion of stretched eyes, Clear as the light’s own firstborn law,
In windless wastes of skies
Time’s deep dawn rise.
236
MESSIDOR.
Pur in the sickles and reap ; For the morning of harvest is red, And the long large ranks of the corn Coloured and clothed as the morn Stand thick in the fields and deep For them that faint to be fed. Let all that hunger and weep Come hither, and who would have bread Put in the sickles and reap.
Coloured and clothed as the morn, The grain grows ruddier than gold, And the good strong sun is alight In the mists of the day-dawn white, And the crescent, a faint sharp horn, In the fear of his face turns cold As the snakes of the night-time that creep From the flag of our faith unrolled. Put in the sickles and reap.
MESSTDOR
In the mists of the day-dawn white That roll round the morning star, The large flame lightens and grows Till the red-gold harvest-rows, Full-grown, are full of the light As the spirits of strong men are, Crying, Who shall slumber or sleep? Who put back morning or mar ? Put in the sickles and reap.
Till the red-gold harvest-rows For miles through shudder and shine In the wind’s breath, fed with the sun, A thousand spear-heads as one Bowed as for battle to close Line in rank against line With place and station to keep Till all men’s hands at a sign Put in the sickles and reap.
A thousand spear-heads as one Wave as with swing of the sea When the mid tide sways at its height For the hour is for harvest or fight In face of the just calm sun,
237
238
MESSIDOR.
As the signal in season may be And the lot in the helm may leap
When chance shall shake it; but ye, Put in the sickles and reap.
For the hour is for harvest or fight To clothe with raiment of red ; O men sore stricken of hours, Lo, this one, is not it ours To glean, to gather, to smite? Let none make risk of his head Within reach of the clean scythe-sweep, When the people that lay as the dead Put in the sickles and reap.
Lo, this one, is not it ours,
Now the ruins of dead things rattle As dead men’s bones in the pit, Now the kings wax lean as they sit
Girt round with memories of powers,
With musters counted as cattle
And armies folded as sheep Till the red blind husbandman battle
Put in the sickles and reap ?
Now the kings wax lean as they sit, The people grow strong to stand ;
: : | )
MESSIDOR.
‘The men they trod on and spat, The dumb dread people that sat As corpses cast in a pit, Rise up with God at their hand, And thrones are hurled on a heap, And strong men, sons of the land, Put in the sickles and reap.
The dumb dread people that sat All night without screen for the night, All day without food for the day, They shall give not their harvest away, They shall eat of its fruit and wax fat: They shall see the desire of their sight, Though the ways of the seasons be steep, They shall climb with face to the light, Put in the sickles and reap,
239
240
ODE ON THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA.
SPER eaT.
I Lap my laurel-leaf At the white feet of grief,
Seeing how with covered face and plumeless wings, With unreverted head Veiled, as who mourns his dead,
Lay Freedom couched between the thrones of kings, A wearied lion without lair,
And bleeding from base wounds, and vexed with alien air,
STR. 2.
Who was it, who, put poison to thy mouth, Who lulled with craft or chant thy vigilant eyes, © light of all men, lamp to north and south, Eastward and westward, under all men’s skies ? For if thou sleep, we perish, and thy name Dies with the dying of our ephemeral breath ; And if the dust of death o’ergrows thy flame, Heaven also is darkened with the dust of death,
THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA.
If thou be mortal, if thou change or cease, If thine hand fail, or thine eyes turn from Greece, Thy first-born, and the first-fruits of thy fame,
241
God is no God, and man is moulded out of shame.
STR. 3.
Is there change in the secret skies, , In the sacred places that see - ) The divine beginning of things, The weft of the web of the world ? Is Freedom a worm that dies, And God no God of the free ? Is heaven like as earth with her kings And time as a serpent curled Round life as a tree ?
From the steel-bound snows of the north From the mystic mother, the east, From the sands of the fiery south, From the low-lit clouds of the west, A sound of a cry is gone forth ; Arise, stand up from the feast, Let wine be far from the mouth, Let no man sleep or take rest, Till the plague hath ceased. kK
242
THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA,
Let none rejoice or make mirth Till the evil thing be stayed, Nor grief be lulled in the lute, Nor hope be loud on the lyre ; Let none be glad upon earth. O music of young man and maid, O songs of the bride, be mute. For the light of her eyes, her desire, Is the soul dismayed.
It is not a land new-born That is scourged of a stranger’s hand, That is rent and consumed with flame. We have known it of old, this face, With the cheeks and the tresses torn, With shame on the brow as a brand. We have named it of old by name, The land of the royallest race, The most holy land.
STR. 4.
Had I words of fire,
Whose words are weak as snow ; Were my heart a lyre
Whence all its love might flow
THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA. 243
In the mighty modulations of desire, In the notes wherewith man’s passion worships woe ;
Could my song release The thought weak words confine, And my grief, O Greece, Prove how it worships thine ; It would move with pulse of war the limbs of peace Till she flushed and trembled and became divine.
(Once she held for true This truth of sacred strain ; Though blood drip like dew And life run down like rain, It is better that war spare but one or two Than that many live, and liberty be slain.)
Then with fierce increase And bitter mother’s mirth, From the womb of peace, A womb that yearns for birth, As a man-child should deliverance come to Greece, A3 a saviour should the child be born on earth.
STR. 5.
O that these my days had been Ere white peace and shame were wed
R 2
244 THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA.
Without torch or dancers’ din Round the unsacred marriage-bed ! For of old the sweet-tongued law, Freedom, clothed with all men’s love, Girt about with all men’s awe,
With the wild war-eagle mated
The white breast of peace the dove, And his ravenous heart abated
And his windy wings were furled
In an eyrie consecrated
Where the snakes of strife uncurled, And her soul was soothed and sated With the welfare of the world.
ANT. 1.
But now, close-clad with peace, While war lays hand on Greece, The kingdoms and their kings stand by to see; “« Aha, we are strong,” they say, “We are'sure, we are well,” even they ; “¢ And if we serve, what ails ye to be free? We are warm, clothed round with peace and shane ;
But ye he dead and naked, dying for a name.”
ANT. 2.
i A € 1 ) ni apie © kings and queens and nations miserable,
O fools and blind, and full of sins and fears,
THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA, 245
With these it is, with you it is not well ; Ye have one hour, but these the immortal years, These for a pang, a breath, a pulse of pain, Have honour, while that honour on earth shall be : Ye for a little sleep and sloth shall gain Scorn, while one man of all men born is free. Even as the depth more deep than night or day, The sovereign heaven that keeps its eidest way, So without chance or change, so without stain, The heaven of their high memories shall nor wax nor wane.
ANT, 3.
As the soul on the lips of the dead Stands poising her wings for flight, A bird scarce quit of her prison, But fair without form or flesh, So stands over each man’s head A splendour of imminent light, A glory of fame rearisen, Of day rearisen afresh From the hells of night
In the hundred cities of Crete Such glory was not of old, Though her name was great upon earth And her face was fair on the sea.
246 THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA.
The words of her lips were sweet,
Her days were woven with gold, Her fruits came timely to birth ;
So fair she was, being free,
Who is bought and sold.
So fair, who is fairer now With her children dead at her side, Unsceptred, unconsecrated, Unapparelled, unhelped, unpitied, With blood for gold on her brow, Where the towery tresses divide ; The goodly, the golden-gated, Many-crowned, many-named, many-citied, Made like as a bride.
And these are the bridegroom’s gifts ; Anguish that straitens the breath, Shame, and the weeping of mothers, And the suckling dead at the breast, White breast that a long sob lifts ; And the dumb dead mouth, which saith, “‘ How long, and how long, my brothers ?” And wrath which endures not rest, And the pains of death.
=e ee i “=
+ phi
THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA. 247 ANT. 4.
Ah, but would that men, With eyelids purged by tears, Saw, and heard again With consecrated ears, All the clamour, all the splendour, all the slain, All the lights and sounds of war, the fates and fears ;
Saw far off aspire, With crash of mine and gate, From a single pyre The myriad flames of fate, Soul by soul transfigured in funereal fire, Hate made weak by love, and love made strong by hate,
Children without speech, And many a nursing breast ; Old men in the breach, Where death sat down a guest; With triumphant lamentation made for each, Let the world salute their ruin and their rest.
In one iron hour The crescent flared and waned, As from tower to tower, Fire-scathed and sanguine-stained,
248 THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA,
Death, with flame in hand, an open bloodred tlower, Passed, and where it bloomed no bloom of life remained.
ANT. &, Hear, thou earth, the heavy-hearted Weary nurse of waning races ; From the dust of years departed, From obscure funereal places, Raise again thy sacred head, Lift the light up of thine eyes ; Where are they of all thy dead That did more than these men dying In their godlike Grecian wise ? Not with garments rent and sighing, Neither guits of myrrh and gold, Shall their sons lament them lying, Lest the fame of them wax cold; But with lives to lives replying, Anda worship from of old.
EPODE. O sombre heart of earth and swoln with grief, That in thy time wast as a bird for mirth, Dim womb of life and many a seed and sheaf, And full of changes, ancient heart of earth, From grain and flower, from grass and every leaf, Thy mysteries and thy multitudes of birth,
THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA. 249
From hollow and hill, from vales and all thy springs, From all shapes born and breath of all lips made, From thunders, and the sound of winds and wings, From light, and from the solemn sleep of shade, From the full fountains of all living things, Speak, that this plague be stayed. Bear witness all the ways of death and life If thou be with us in the world’s old strife, If thou be mother indeed, And from these wounds that bleed Gather in thy great breast the dews that fall, And on thy sacred knees Lull with mute melodies, Mother, thy sleeping sons in death’s dim hall. For these thy sons, behold, Sons of thy sons of old, Bear witness if these be not as they were ; If that high name of Greece Depart, dissolve, decease From mouths of men and memories like as air. By the last milk that drips Dead on the child’s dead lips, By old men’s white unviolated hair, By sweet unburied faces That fill those red high places Where death and freedom found one lion’s lair,
250 THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA.
By all the bloodred tears That fill the chaliced years, The vessels of the sacrament of time, Wherewith, O thou most holy, O Freedom, sure and slowly Thy ministrant white hands cleanse earth of crime ; Though we stand off afar Where slaves and slaveries are, Among the chains and crowns of poisonous peace ; Though not the beams that shone From rent Arcadion Can melt her mists and bid her snows decrease ; Do thou with sudden wings Darken the face of kings, But turn again the beauty of thy brows on Greece ; Thy white and woundless brows, Whereto her great heart bows ; Give her the glories of thine eyes to see; Turn thee, O holiest head, Toward all thy quick and dead, For love’s sake of the souls that cry for thee; O love, O light, O flame, By thine own Grecian name, We call thee and we charge thee that all these be free.
Jan. 1867.
255
“NON DOLET.”
Ir does not hurt. She looked along the knife Smiling, and watched the thick drops mix and run Down the sheer blade; not that which had been done Could hurt the sweet sense of the Roman wife, But that which was to do yet ere the strife Could end for each for ever, and the sun : Nor was the palm yet nor was peace yet won While pain had power upon her husband's life.
It does not hurt, Italia. ‘Thou art more Than bride to bridegroom ; how shalt thou not take The gift love’s blood has reddened for thy sake? Was not thy lifeblood given for us before ? And if loye’s heartblood can avail thy need, And thou not die, how should it hurt indeed P
252
EURYDICE
TO VICTOR HUGO.
ORPHEUS, the night is full of tears and cries, And hardly for the storm and ruin shed Can even thine eyes be certain of her head Who never passed out of thy spirit’s eyes, But stood and shone before them in such wise As when with love her lips and hands were fed, And with mute mouth out of the dusty dead Strove to make answer when thou bad’st her rise.
Yet viper-stricken must her lifeblood feel The fang that stung her sleeping, the foul germ Even when she wakes of hell’s most poisonous worm, Though now it writhe beneath her wounded heel. Turn yet, she will not:fade nor fly from thee ; Wait, and see hell vield up Eurvdice
‘
AN APPEAL,
I. :
Art thou indeed among these, Thou of the tyrannous crew,
The kingdoms fed upon blood,
O queen from of old of the seas, England, art thou of them too That drink of the poisonous flood, That hide under poisonous trees?
IL
Nay, thy name from of old, Mother, was pure, or we dreamed ; _Purer we held thee than this, Purer fain would we hold ;
So goodly a glory it seemed,
A fame so bountecous of bliss,
So more precious than gold.
254
AN APPEAL. III.
A praise so sweet in our ears,
That thou in the tempest of things
As a rock for a refuge shouldst stand, In the bloodred river of tears
Poured forth tor the triumph of kings ; A safeguard, a sheltering land,
In the thunder and torrent of years.
IV.
Strangers came gladly to thee, Exiles, chosen of men,
Safe for thy sake in thy shade,
Sat down at thy feet and were free. So men spake of thee then ;
Now shall their speaking be stayed ? Ah, so let it not be!
Vv.
Not for revenge or affright,
Pride, or a tyrannous lust,
Cast from thee the crown of thy praise. Mercy was thine in thy might ;
Strong when thou wert, thou wert just ; Now, in the wrong-doing days,
Cleave thou, thou at least, to the rigitt.
AN APPEAL 255 VI.
_ How should one charge thee, how sway, Save by the memories that were?
Not thy gold nor the strength of thy ships, Nor the might of thine armies at bay, Made thee, mother, most fair ;
But a word from republican lips
Said in thy name in thy day.
Vit.
Hast thou said it, and hast thou forgot ? Is thy praise in thine ears as a scotf? ‘Blood of men guiltless was shed, Children, and souls without spot,
Shed, but in places far off ;
Let siaughter no more be, said
Milton ; and slaughter was not.
VIII.
Was it not said of thee too,
Now, but now, by thy foes,
By the slaves that had slain their France, And thee would slay as they slew— “Down with her walls that enclose Freemen that eye us askance,
Fugitives, men that are true!”
256
AN APPEAL, IX.
This was thy praise or thy blame From bondsman or freeman—to be Pure from pollution of slaves, Clean of their sins, and thy name Bloodless, innocent, free ; Now if thou be not, thy waves Wash not from off thee thy shame.
Xx.
Freeman he is not, but slave, Whoso in fear for the State
Cries for surety of blood,
Help of gibbet and grave ; Neither is any land great
Whom, in her fear-stricken mood, These things only can save.
XI.
Lo, how fair from afar, Taintless of tyranny, stands Thy mighty daughter, for years Who trod the winepress of war ; Shines with immaculate hands ; Slays not a foe, neither fears ;
Stains not peace with a scar.
forth ee prength, and a. " Breed there arise, if thou slay, “a Thy shame as a ghost from the grave. . Novemier 20, 1867.
PERINDE AC CADAVER.
{yn a vision Liberty stood By the childless charm-stricken bed Where, barren of glory and good, Knowing nought if she would not or would, England slept with her dead.
Her face that the foam had whitened, Her hands that were strong to strive,
Her eyes whence battle had lightened,
Over all was a drawn shroud tightened To bind her asleep and alive.
She turned and laughed in her dream With grey lips arid and cold; She saw not the face as a beam Burn on her, but only a gleam Through her sleep as of new-stamped gold,
But the goddess, with terrible tears In the light of her down-drawn eyes, .
PERINDE AC CADAVER, 259
Spake fire in the dull sealed ears ; “Thou, sick with slumbers and fears, Wilt thou sleep now indeed or arise ?
“With dreams and with words and with light Memories and empty desires
Thou hast wrapped thyself round all night ;
Thou hast shut up thine heart from the right, And warmed thee at burnt-out fires.
“Yet once if I smote at thy gate,
Thy sons would sleep not, but heard ; O thou that wast found so great, Art thou smitten with folly or fate
That thy sons have forgotten my word ?
“© Cromwell’s mother, O breast That suckled Milton! thy name ‘That was beautiful then, that was blest, Is it wholly discrowned and deprest, Trodden under by sloth into shame?
“‘Why wilt thou hate me and die? For none can hate me and live. What ill have I done to thee? why Wilt thou turn from me fighting, and fly, Who would follow thy feet and forgive ? S 2
260
PERINDE AC CADAVER.
“Thou hast seen me stricken, and said, What is it to me? I am strong: Thou hast seen me bowed down on my dead: And laughed and lifted thine head, And washed thine hands of my wrong.
“Thou hast put out the soul of thy sight ; Thou hast sought to my foemen as friend,
To my traitors that kiss me and smite,
To the kingdoms and empires of night That begin with the darkness, and end.
“Turn thee, awaken, arise,
With the light that is risen on the lands, With the change of the fresh-coloured skies ; Set thine eyes on mine eyes,
Lay thy hands in my hands.”
She moved and mourned as she heard, Sighed and shifted her place,
As the wells of her slumber were stirred
By the music and wind of the word, Then turned and covered her face.
‘« Ah,” she said in her sleep, “Ts my work not done with and done Y
PERINDE AC CADAVER, 261
Is there corn for my sickle to reap? And strange is the pathway, and steep, And sharp overhead is the sun.
“T have done thee service enough, Loved thee enough in my day ;
Now nor hatred nor love
Nor hardly remembrance thereof Lives in me to lighten my way.
“ And is it not well with us here?
Is change as good as is rest ? ‘What hope should move me, or fear, That eye should open or ear,
Who have long since won what is best?
“Where among us are such things As turn men’s hearts into hell? Have we not queens without stings, Scotched princes, and fangless kings ? Yea,” she said, “‘ we are well.
““We have filed the teeth of the snake Monarchy, how should it bite? Should the slippery slow thing wake, It will not sting for my sake ; Yea,” she said, “I do right.”
262
PERINDE AC CADAVER.
So spake she, drunken with dreams, Mad ; but again in her ears
A voice as of storm-swelled streams
Spake ; “No brave shame then redeemg Thy lusts of sloth and thy fears ?
“Thy poor lie slain of thine hands, Their starved limbs rot in thy sight ; As a shadow the ghost of thee stands Among men living and lands, And stirs not leftward or right.
“Freeman he is not, but slave, Who stands not out on my side ;
His own hand hollows his grave,
Nor strength is in me to save Where strength is none to abide.
‘Time shall tread on his name
That was written for honour of old, Who hath taken in change for fame Dust, and silver, and shame,
Ashes, and iron, and gold.”
263
MONOTONES.
Becavsz there is but one truth; Because there is but one banner; Because there is but one light ; Because we have with us our youth Once, and one chance and one manner Of service, and then the night ;
Because we have found not yet Any way for the world to follew Save only that ancient way ; Whosoever forsake or forget, Whose faith soever be hollow, Whose hope soever grow grey ;
Because of the watchwords of kings That are many and strange and unwritten, Diverse, and our watchword is one ; Therefore, though seven be the strings, One string, if the harp be smitten, Sole sounds, till the tune be done;
264
MONOTONES.,
Sounds without cadence or change In a weary monotonous burden, Be the keynote of mourning or mirth ; Free, but free not to range ; Taking for crown and for guerdon No man’s praise upon earth ;
Saying one sole word evermore, In the ears of the charmed world saying, Charmed by spells to its death ; One that chanted of yore To a tune of the sword-sweep’s playing In the lips of the dead blew breath ;_
Therefore I set not mine hand To the shifting of changed modulations, To the smiting of manifold strings ; While the thrones of the throned men stand, One song for the morning of nations, One for the twilight of kings.
One chord, one word, and, one way, One hope as our law, one heaven, Till slain be the great one wrong; Till the people it could not slay, Risen up, have for one star seven, For a single, a sevenfold song.
THE OBLATION.
Ask nothing more of me, sweet ; All I can give you I give. Heart of my heart, were it more, More would be laid at your feet : Love that should help you to live, Song that should spur you to soar.
All things were nothing to give Once to have sense of you more, Touch you and taste of you sweet, Think you and breathe you and live, Swept of your wings as they soar, Trodden by chance of your feet.
I that have love and no more Give you but love of you, sweet: He that hath more, let him give; He that hath wings, let him soar ; Mine is the heart at your feet Here. that must love you to live.
- See hii
266
A YEAR’S BURDEN.
Fire and wild light of hope and doubt and fear, Wind of swift change, and clouds and hours that veer As the storm shifts of the tempestuous year ;
Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.
Hope sits yet hiding her war-wearied eyes,
Doubt sets her forehead earthward and denies,
But fear brought hand to hand with danger dies, Dies and is burnt up in the fire of fight.
Hearts bruised with loss and eaten through with shame Turn at the time’s touch to devouring flame ; Grief stands as one that knows not her own name,
Nor if the star she sees bring day or night.
No song breaks with it on the violent air,
But shrieks of shame, defeat, and brute despair ;
Yet something at the star’s heart far up there Burns as a beacon in our shipwrecked sight.
A YEAR'S BURDEN. 267
O strange fierce light of presage, unknown star,
Whose tongue shall tell us what thy secrets are,
What message trembles in thee from so far? Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.
From shores laid waste across an iron sea
Where the waifs drift of hopes that were to be,
Across the red rolled foam we look for thee, Across the fire we look up for the light.
From days laid waste across disastrous years, From hopes cut down across a world of fears, We gaze with eyes too passionate for tears,
Where faith abides though hope be put to flight.
‘Old hope is dead, the grey-haired hope grown blind
That talked with us of old things out of mind,
Dreams, deeds and men the world has left behind ; Yet, though hope die, faith lives in hope’s despite.
Ay, with hearts fixed on death and hopeless hands We stand about our banner while it stands Above but one field of the ruined lands ;
Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.
268 A VEARS BURDEN.
Though France were given for prey to bird and beast, Though Rome were rent in twain of king and priest, The soul of man, the soul is safe at least
That gives death life and dead men hands to smite.
Are ye so strong, O kings, O strong men? = Nay,
Waste all ye will and gather all ye may,
Yet one thing is there that ye shall not slay, Even thought, that fire nor iron can affright.
‘The woundless and invisible thought that goes
Free throughout time as north or south wind blows,
Far throughout space as east or west sea flows, And all dark things before it are made bright.
Thy thought, thy word, O soul republican,
O spirit of life, O God whose name is man :
What sea of sorrows but thy sight shall span ? Cry wellaway, but well befall the rig ht.
With all its coils crushed, all its rings uncurled,
The one most poisonous worm that soiled the world
Is wrenched from off the throat of man, and hurled Into deep hell from empire’s helpless height.
A YEAR'S BURDEN, 269
Time takes no more infection of it now ;
Like a dead snake divided of the plough,
The rotten thing lies cut in twain; but thou, Thy fires shall heal us of the serpent’s bite.
Ay, with red cautery and a burning brand Purge thou the leprous leaven of the land ; Take to thee fire, and iron in thine hand, Till blood and tears have washed the soiled limbs white.
We have sinned against thee in dreams and wicked sleep ; Smite, we will shrink not; strike, we will not weep ; “et the heart feel thee ; let thy wound go deep ; Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.
Wound us with love, pierce us with longing, make Our souls thy sacrifices ; turn and take Our hearts for our sin-offerings lest they break, And mould them with thine hands and give them
might.
Then, when the cup of ills is drained indeed,
Will we come to thee with our wounds that bleed,
With famished mouths and hearts that thou shalt teed, And see thee worshipped as the world’s delight.
270 A VEAR’S BURDEN,
There shall be no more wars nox kingdoms won,
But in thy sight whose eyes are as the sun
All names shall be one name, all nations one, All souls of men in man’s one soul unite.
O sea whereon men labour, O great sea That heaven seems one with, shall these things not bei O earth, our earth, shall time not make us free P
Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.
EPILOGUE.
‘BETWEEN the wave-ridge and the strand I let you forth in sight of land, Songs that with storm-crossed wings and eyes Strain eastward till the darkness dies ; Let signs and beacons fall or stand, And stars and balefires set and rise ; Ye, till some lordlier lyric hand Weave the beloved brows their crown, At the beloved feet lie down.
whatsoever of life or light ‘Love hath to give you, what of might Or heart or hope is yours to live, I charge you take in trust to give For very love’s sake, in whose sight, Through poise of hours alternative And seasons plumed with light or night, Ye live and move and have your breath To sing with on the ridge of death.
a 7 ~ ,
—— =,
EPILOGUE,
I charge you faint not-all night through For love’s sake that was breathed on you To be to you as wings and feet For travel, and as blood to heat And sense of spirit to renew And bloom of fragrance to keep sweet And fire of purpose to keep true The life, if life in such things be, That I would give you forth of me.
Out where the breath of war may bear, Out in the rank moist reddened air That sounds and smells of death, and hath No light but death’s upon its path Seen through the black wind’s tangled hair, I send you past the wild time’s wrath To find his face who bade you bear Fruit of his seed to faith and love, That he may take the heart thereof.
By day or night, by sea or street, Fly till ye find and clasp his feet
And kiss as worshippers who bring
Too much love on their lips to sing, But with hushed heads accept and greet _
The presence of some heavenlier thing
Aik nails
EPILOGUE. 273
In the near air; so may ye meet His eyes, and droop not utterly For shame’s sake at the light you see.
Not utterly struck spiritless For shame’s sake and unworthiness Of these poor forceless hands that come Empty, these lips that should be dumb, This love whose seal can but impress These weak word-offerings wearisome Whose blessings have not strength to bless Nor lightnings fire to burn up aught Nor smite with thunders of their thought.
One thought they have, even love ; one light, Truth, that keeps clear the sun by night ; One chord, of faith as of a lyre ; One heat, of hope as. of a fire ; One heart, one music, and one might, One flame, one altar, and one choir ; And one man’s living head in sight Who said, when all time’s sea was foam, “ Let there be Rome,”—and there was Rome,
As a star set in space for token Like a live word of God’s mouth spoken, =
274
EPILOGOE,
Visible sound, light audible, In the great darkness thick as hell A stanchless flame of love unsloken, A sign to conquer and compel, A law to stand in heaven unbroken Whereby the sun shines, and wherethrough Time’s eldest empires are made new ;
So rose up on our generations
That light of the most ancient nations, Law, life, and light, on the world’s way, The very God of very day,
The sun-god ; from their star-like stations Far down the night in disarray
Fled, crowned with fires of tribulations, The suns of sunless years, whose light find life and law were of the night.
The naked kingdoms quenched and stark Drave with their dead things down the dark
Helmless ; their whole world, throne by throne,
Fell, and its whole heart turned to stone, Hopeless ; their hands that touched our ark Withered ; and lo, aloft, alone, ‘On time’s white waters man’s one bark, Where the red sundawn’s open eye Lit the soft gulf of low green sky.
EPILOGUE. 275
So for a season piloted It sailed the sunlight, and struck red With fire of dawn reverberate The wan face of incumbent fate That paused half pitying overhead. And almost had foregone the freight Of those dark hours the next day bred For shame, and almost had forsworn Service of night for love of morn.
Then broke the whole night in one blow, Thundering ; then all hell with one throe Heaved, and brought forth beneath the stroke Death ; and all dead things moved and woke That the dawn’s arrows had brought low, At the great sound of night that broke Thundering, and all the old world-wide woe ; And under night’s loud-sounding dome Men sought her, and she was not Rome.
Still with blind hands and robes blood-wet Night hangs on heaven, reluctant yet, With black blood dripping from her eyes On the soiled lintels of the skies, With brows and lips that thirst and threat, Heart-sick with fear lest the sun rise, T 2
276
EPILOGUE.
And aching with her fires that set, And shuddering ere dawn bursts her bars, Burns out with all her beaten stars.
In this black wind of war they fly Now, ére that hour be in the sky That brings back hope, and memory back, And light and law to lands that lack ; That spiritual sweet hour whereby The bloody-handed night and black Shall be cast out of heaven to die; Kingdom by kingdom, crown by crown, The fires of darkness are blown down.
Yet heavy, grievous yet the weight Sits on us of imperfect fate. From wounds of other days and deeds Still this day’s breathing body bleeds ; Still kings for fear and slaves for hate Sow lives of men on earth like seeds In the red soil they saturate ; And we, with faces eastward set, Stand sightless of the morning yet.
And many for pure sorrow’s sake
Look back and stretch back hands to take
EPILOGUE. 277
Gifts of night’s giving, ease and sleep,
Flowers of night’s grafting, strong to steep ‘The soul in dreams it will not break,
Songs of soft hours that sigh and sweep Its lifted eyelids nigh to wake
With subtle plumes and lulling breath
That soothe its weariness to death.
And many, called of hope and pride, Fall ere the sunrise from our side.
Fresh lights and rumours of fresh fames That shift and veer by night like flames, Shouts and blown trumpets, ghosts that glide
Calling, and hail them by dead names, Fears, angers, memories, dreams divide
Spirit from spirit, and wear out
Strong hearts of men with hope and doubt.
Till time beget and sorrow. bear The soul-sick eyeless child despair, That comes among us, mad and blind, With counsels of a broken mind, Tales of times dead and woes that were, And, prophesying against mankind, Shakes out the horror of her hair To take the sunlight with its coils And hold the living soul in toils.
278
EPILOGUE,
By many ways of death and moods Souls pass into their servitudes. Their young wings weaken, plume by plume Drops, and their eyelids gather gloom And close against man’s frauds and feuds, And their tongues call they know not whom ‘To help in their vicissitudes ; For many slaveries are, but one Liberty, single as the sun.
One light, one law, that burns up strife, And one sufficiency of life. Self-stablished, the sufficing soul Hears the loud wheels of changes roll, Sees against man man bare the knife, Sees the world severed, and is whole ; Sees force take dowerless fraud to wife, And fear from fraud’s incestuous bed Crawl forth and smite his father dead :
Sees death made drunk with war, sees time Weave many-coloured crime with crime, State overthrown on ruining state, And dares not be disconsolate. Only the soul hath feet to climb, Only the soul hath room to wait
EPILOGUE, 274
Hath brows and eyes to hold sublime Above all evil and all good, All strength and all decrepitude.
She only, she since earth began, The many-minded soul of man, From one incognisable root That bears such divers-coloured fruit, Hath ruled for blessing or for ban The flight of seasons and pursuit ; She regent, she republican, With wide and equal eyes and wings Broods on things born and dying things.
Even now for love or doubt of us The hour intense and hazardous Hangs high with pinions vibrating Whereto the light and darkness cling, Dividing the dim season thus, And shakes from one ambiguous wing Shadow, and one is luminous And day falls from it ; so the past Torments the future to the last.
And we that cannot hear or see The sounds and lights of liberty,
EPILOGUE.
The witness of the naked God
That treads on burning hours unshod With instant feet unwounded ; we
That can trace only where he trod By fire in heaven or storm at sea,
Not know the very present whole
And naked nature of the soul ;
We that see wars and woes and kings, And portents of enormous things, Empires, and agonies, and slaves, And whole flame of town-swallowing graves ; That hear the harsh hours clap sharp wings Above the roar of ranks like waves, From wreck to wreck as the world swings ; Know but that men there are who see
And hear things other far than we.
By the light sitting on their brows,
The fire wherewith their presence glows, The music falling with their feet, The sweet sense of a spirit sweet
That with their speech or motion grows
And breathes and burns men’s hearts with heat ;
By these signs there is none but knows Men who have life and grace to give,
Men who have seen the soul and live.
ee
EPILOGUE. 28%
By the strength sleeping in their eyes, The lips whereon their sorrow lies Smiling, the lines of tears unshed, The large divine look of one dead That speaks out of the breathless skies In silence, when the light is shed Upon man’s soul of memories ; The supreme look that sets love tree, The look of stars and of the sea ;
By the strong patient godhead seen
Implicit in their mortal mien, The conscience of a God held still And thunders ruled by their own will And fast-bound fires that might burn clean This worldly air that foul things fill, And the afterglow of what has been, That, passing, shows us without word What they have seen, what they have heard ;
: 3 : > ;
By all these keen and burning signs The spirit knows them and divines.
In bonds, in banishment, in grief, Scoffed at and scourged with unbelief, Foiled with false trusts and thwart designs,
Stripped of green days and hopes in leaf, Their mere bare body of glory shines
BPILOGULE,
Higher, and man gazing surelier sees What light, what comfort is of these.
So I now gazing; till the sense Being set on fire of confidence Strains itself sunward, feels out far Beyond the bright and morning star, Beyond the extreme wave’s refluence, To where the fierce first sunbeams are Whose fire intolerant and intense As birthpangs whence day. burns to be Parts breathless heaven from breathing sea
I see not, know not, and am blest, Master, who know that thou knowest,
Dear lord and leader, at whose hand The first days and the last days stand, With scars and crowns on head and breast, That fought for love of the sweet land
Or shall fight in her latter quest ; All the days armed and girt and crowned Whose glories ring thy glory round.
Thou sawest, when all the world was blind, The light that should be of mankind,
The very day that was to be ;
And how shalt thou not sometime see
i cos
; ; : : :
EPILOGUE. 283
Thy city perfect to thy mind Stand face to living face with thee, And no miscrowned man’s head behind ; The hearth of man, the human home, The central flame that shall be Rome ?
As one that ere a June day rise
Makes seaward for the dawn, and tries The water with delighted limbs That taste the sweet dark sea, and swims
Right eastward under strengthening skies, And sees the gradual rippling rims
Of waves whence day breaks blossom-wise Take fire ere light peer well above, And laughs from all his heart with love ;
And softlier swimming with raised head Feels the full flower of morning shed And fluent sunrise round him rolled That laps and laves his body bold With fluctuant heaven in water’s stead, And urgent through the growing gold Strikes, and sees all the spray flash red, And his soul takes the sun, and yearns For joy wherewith the sea’s heart burns ;
So the soul seeking through the dark Heavenward, a dove without an ark,
284
EPILOGUE;
Transcends the unnavigable sea Of years that wear out memory ; So calls, a sunward-singing lark, In the ear of souls that should be free ; So points them toward the sun for mark Who steer not for the stress of waves, And seek strange helmsmen, and are slaves.
For if the swimmer’s eastward eye Must see‘no sunrise—must put by The hope that lifted him and led Once, to have light about his head, To see beneath the clear low sky The green foam-whitened wave wax red And all the morning’s banner fly— Then, as earth’s helpless hopes go down, Let earth’s self in the dark tides drown.
Yea, if no morning must behold
Man, other than were they now cold, And other deeds than past deeds done, Nor any near or far-off sun
Salute him risen and sunlike-souled, Free, boundless, fearless, perfect, one,
Let man’s world die like worlds of old, And here in heaven’s sight only be The sole:sun on the worldless sea.
235
NOTES.
Pao: That called on Cotys ly her name.
Leuva Kérue tv roig ’"Hdwvoic. fEsch. Fr. 54 (Héwvol).
P, 11%, Was it Love brake forth flower-fashion, a lird with gold on his wings? Ar. Av. 696. P..192.
That saw Saint Catherine bodily.
Her pilgrimage to Avignon to recall the Pope into Italy as its re- deemer from the distractions of the time is of course the central act of St. Catherine’s life, the great abiding sign of the greatness of spirit and genius of heroism which distinguished this daughter of the people, and should yet keep her name fresh above the holy horde of saints, in other records than the calendar; but there is no less significance in the story which tells how she succeeded in humanizing a criminal under sentence of death, and given over by the priests as a soul doomed and desperate ; how the man thus raised and melted out of his fierce and brutal despair besought her to sustain him to the last by her presence; how, having accompanied him with comfort and support to the very scaffold, and seen his head fall, she took it up, and tuming to the,spectators who stood doubtful whether the poor wretch could be “ saved,” kissed it in sign of her faith that his sins were forgiven him. The high and fixed passion of her heroic temperament gives ber a right to remembrance and honour of
286 NOTES.
which the miracle-mongers have done their best to deprive her. Clearet ofall the refuse rubbish of thaumaturgy, her life would deserve a chroniclet who should do justice at once to the ardour of her religious imagination and to a thing far rarer and more precious—the strength and breadth of patriotic thought and devotion which sent this girl across the Alps to seek the living symbol of Italian hope and unity, and bring it back by force of simple appeal in the name of God and of the country. By the light of those solid and actual qualities which ensure to her no ignoble place on the noble roll of Italian women who have deserved well of Italy, the record of her visions and ecstasies may be read without con- temptuous intolerance of hysterical disease. The rapturous visionary and passionate ascetic was in plain matters of this earth as pure and practical a heroine as Joan of Arc.
P. 196. There on the dim side-chapel wall.
In the church of San Domenico.
P. 198. But blood nor tears ye love not, you.
In the Sienese Academy the two things notable to me were the detached wall-painting by Sodoma of the tortures of Christ bound to the pillar, and the divine though mutilated group of the Graces in the centre of the main hall. The giory and beauty of ancient sculpture refresh and satisfy beyond expression a sense wholly wearied and well- nigh nauseated with contemplation of endless sanctities and agoniey attempted by medizeval art, while yet as handless as accident or bate barism has left the sculptured goddesses.
P. 201.
Saw ail Italian things save one.
, QOpatria mia, vedo le murae gli archi, E le colonne e i sin tlacri e Perme
Me E eo P. 2146 cae a % Mother, that ly that Pegasean spring. ; are Call. Lav. Pall. 105-112. P 275. ¢ roe With black blood dripping from her eyes.
ak dppdrwy ordlovow alua dvogiriéc. “Esch, Cho. 1058,
Ee SON AND CO. PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HAN: LONDON AND EDINBURGH
October, 1890.
PUBLISHED BY
CHATTO © WINDUS
214, PICCADILLY, LONDON, w.
Sold by all Booksellers, or sent post-free for the published price by the Publishers,
American Literature, A Li- brary of, from the Earliest Settlement to the Present Time. Compiled and Edited by EpMuND CLARENCE STED- MAN and ELLEN Mackay Hurcuinson, Eleven Vols., royal 8vo, cloth extra. A few
copies are forsale in England by Messrs. CHATTO
& WINDUS (published in New York by C. L.
WEBSTER & CO.’ the price of which may be
learned from any bookseller.
Vol, I. Early Colonial Literature, r6¢7—1675, Vol. II, Later Colonial Literature, 1676—1704. Vol. Lil, Literature of the Revolution, 1765—1787. Vol. 1V. Literature of the Republic, Constitu- tional Period, 1788—1820. Vol. 5. Literature of the Republic, 1821—1834. Vols. VI., VII., VIII, Jiterature of the Republic, 1835—1860. Vols. IX., X., XI. Literature of the Republic, 1861—1888 : fully representing Writers that have arisen since the beginning of the Civil War. Vol. XI. con- tains also Biographical Notices of all Authors represented in the ‘** Library,” and an exhaustive Topical Index. =% About.—The Fellah: An Egyp-
tian Novel. By Epmonp AsourT.
Translated by Sir RanDAL ROBERTS. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Adams (W. Davenport), Works by:
A Dictionary of the Drama. Being a comprehensive Guide to the Plays, Playwrights, Players, and Play- houses of the United Kingdom and
America, Crown 8vo, half-bound, 12s. 6d. (Preparing. Quips and Quiddities. Selected by
W. Davenport AbDaAMS. Post 8vo,
cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
Adams (W. H._. D.). — Witch, Warlock, and Magician: Historical Sketches of Magic and Witchcraft in England and Scotland. By W. H. Davenport ADAMS, Demy 8yo, cloth extra, 12s,
Aidé (Hamilton), Works by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each, Carr of Carrlyon. | Confidences.
Alexander (Mrs.), Novels by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each, Maid, Wife, or Widow ? Valerie’s Fate.
Allen (Grant), Works by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. each,
The Evolutionist at Large. Vignettes from Nature. Colin Clout’s Calendar.
| Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards., 2s. each.
StrangeStories. Witha Frontispiece by GrorcEe Du MauRIER,
The Beckoning Hand. With a Frontispiece by TowNLEY GREEN.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s.6d. each ; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
Philistia. | The Devil’s Die.
Babylon: A Romance,
For Maimie’s Sake.
In all Shades.
This Mortal Coil.
The Tents of Shem. With a Front- ispiece by E. F. BREWTNALL, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
A New Novel. Three Vols., crown
8vo. (Preparing. A Cannibal God, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 38 Gd, [ Shortly.
4
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
Brand’sObservations on Popu- lar Antiquities, chiefly Illustrating the Origin of our’ Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions, With the Additions of Sir Henry ELLIs, and numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Bret Harte, Works by: Lisrary Epition, Complete in Six Vols., cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 68. each. Bret Harte’s Collected Works:
Lisrary Epition, Arranged and Revised by the Author.
Vol. I. CompLeTE POETICAL AND |
Dramatic Works. With Steel Por- trait, and Introduction by Author. Vol. II. EARLIER PAPERS—LucK OF RoarinG Camp,and other Sketches
—BoHEMIAN PAPERS — SPANISH |
AND AMERICAN LEGENDS.
Vol. III. TALES OF THE ARGONAUTS —EASTERN SKETCHES,
Vol. IV. GABRIEL Conroy.
Vol. V. StTor1rs — CONDENSED NOVELS, &c.
Vol. VI. TALESOFTHEPACIFICSLOPE,
The Select Works of Bret Harte, in Prose and Poetry. With Introduc- tory Essay by J. M. BeLLew, Portrait ot the Author, and 50 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d,
Bret Harte’s Complete Poetical Works. Author’s Copyright Edition, Printed on hand-made paper and bound in buckram. Cr. 8vo, 4s. 6d.
The Queen of the Pirate Isle. With 28 original Drawings by Kate GREENAWAY, reproduced in Colours by Epmunp Evans. Sm, 4to, bds., 5s.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each.
A Waif of the Plains. With 60 Il- lustrations by STANLEY L. Woop.
A Ward of the Golden Gate. With 59 Illustrations by STANLEY L. Woop.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
Gabriel Conroy. :
An Heiress of Red Dog, &c.
The Luck of Roaring Camp, and other Sketches.
Californian Stories (including THE Twins oF TaBLe Mountain, JEFF Brices’s Love Story, &c.)
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each;
cloth, 2s. 6d. each.
Flip. | Maruja.
A Phyllis of the Sierras.
Feap. 8vo, picture cover, 1s. each.
The Twins of Table Mountain.
Jeff Briggs’s Love Story.
Brewer (Rev. Dr.), Works by: The Reader’s Handbookof Allusions, References, Plots, and Stories, t5th Thousand; With Appendix, containing a ComPpLerz ENGLISH Brsviocraruy, Cr, 8yo, cloth 7s, 6d,
BREWER (Rev. Dr.), continued—
Authors and their Works, with the Dates: Being the Appendices to “The Reader's Handbook,” separ- ately printed. Cr. 8vo, cloth limp, 2s.
A Dictionary of Miracles: Imitative, Realistic, and Dogmatic. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Brewster (SirDavid),Works by: Post 8vo, cloth extra, 4s. 6d. each.
More Worlds than One: The Creed of the Philosopher and the Hope of the Christian. With Plates.
The Martyrs of Science: Lives of GaLiLreo, TycHo BrauE, and Kep- LER. With Portraits.
Letters on Natural Magic. A New Edition, with numerous Illustrations, and Chapters on the Being and Faculties of Man, and Additional Phenomena of Natural Magic, by J. A. SmivH.
Brillat-Savarin.-Gastronomy asa Fine Art. By BRILLAT-SAVARIN. Translated by R. E. AnpErson, M.A, Post 8vo, printed on laid-paper and half-bound, 2s.
Brydges. — Uncle Sam at Home. By Harotp BrypGeEs. Post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s. ; cloth, 2s. 6d.
Buchanan’s (Robert) Works:
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 68. each.
Selected Poems of Robert Buchanan. With a Frontispiece by T. Darzirr,
The Earthquake; or, Six Days and a Sabbath.
The City of Dream: An Epic Poem, With Two Illustrations by P, Mac- NAB. Second Edition.
Robert Buchanan’sComplete Poeti- cal Works, With Steel-plate Por- trait. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d,
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illust. boards, 28. each.
The Shadow of the Sword.
A Child of Nature. With a Frontis- piece.
God and the Man. With Illustrations by Frep. BARNARD,
The Martyrdom of Madeline. With Frontispiece by A. W. Cooper.
Love Me for Ever. With a Frontis- piece by P. Macnas.
Annan Water. | The New Abelard.
Foxglove Manor.
Matt: A Story of a Caravan,
The Master of the Mine.
The Heir of Linne.
Burton (Captain).—The Book of the Sword: Being a History of the Sword and its Use in all Countries, from the Earliest Times, By RicHARD I, Burton. With over 4oo Illustra: tions, Square 8vo, cloth extra, 32s,
vio
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY. 5
Burton (Robert):
The Anatomy of Melancholy: A New Edition, complete, corrected and enriched by translations of the Classical Extracts. Demy 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Melancholy Anatomised: Being an Abridgment, for popular use, of Bur- TON’s ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY, Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
Caine (T. Hall), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 28, each. The Shadow of a Crime.
A Son of Hagar.
The Deemster: A Romance of the Isle of Man.
Cameron (Commander), — The Cruise of the “Black Prince” Privateer. By V. Loverr Cameron, R.N.,C.B. With Two Illustrations by P. Macnas. Crown 8vo, cl. ex., 5s.; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, :
Cameron (Mrs. H. Lovett), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
Juliet’s Guardian. | Deceivers Ever.
Carlyle (Thomas) :
On the Choice of Books. By THomMaAs CarLyLe. With a Life of the Author by R. H. SHEPHERD, and Three Riluaieations. Post 8vo, cloth extra,
1s. 6d.
The Correspondence of Thomas Carlyle and RalphWaldo Emerson, 1834 to 1872, Edited by CHARLES Exior Norton. With Portraits. Two Vols., crown 8vo, cloth extra, 24s.
Chapman's (George) Works: Vol. I. contains the Plays eemplets, including the doubtful ones. Vol. II., the Poems and Minor Translations, with an Introductory Essay by ALGER- NON CHARLES SWINBURNE. Vol. III., the Translations of the Iliad and Odys- sey. ‘Three Vols., crown 8vo, cloth extra, 18s.; or separately, 6s. each.
Chatto &Jackson.—ATreatise on Wood Engraving, Historical and Practical. By Wm. ANDREW CHATTO and joax Jackson. With an Addi- tional Chapter by Henry G. Boun ; and 450 fine Illustrations, A Reprint of the last Revised Edition, Large 4to, balf-bound, 28s, 4
Chaucer;
Chaucer for Children: A Golden Key. By Mrs. H.R. Haweis, With Eight Coloured Pictures and nu- merous Woodcuts by the Author, New Ed., small 4to, cloth extra, 6s.
Chaucer for Schools. By Mrs. H. R. Hawets, Demy 8vo, cloth limp, 2s.6d.
Clare—For the Love of a Lass: A Tale of Tynedale. By Austin Crare, Author of “A Child of the Menhir,” &c. Cheaper Edition, post 8vo, picture boards, 2s. [ Preparing.
Clive (Mrs, Archer), Novels by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
Paul Ferroll. Why Paul Ferroll Killed his Wife _
Clodd.—_ Myths and Dreams. ey Epwarp Cropp, F.R.A.S., Author otf ‘The Story of Creation,” &c. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 5s.
Cobban.—The Cure of Souls: A Story. By J. Macraren CosBBan, _ Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Coleman (John), Works by: Players and Playwrights | have Known. Two Vols., demy 8vo, cloth extra, 24s. Curly: An Actor’s Romance. With Illustrations by J. C. Dortriman. Crown 8vo, cloth, ls. 6d.
Collins (C. Allston).—The Bar SinIster: A Story. By C, Ariston Cotiins. Post 8vo, illustrated bds., 2s.
Collins (Churton),—A Mono- graph on Dean Swift. By J. Cuur- ton CoLuins, Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
(Shortly.
Collins (Mortimer), Novels by: Crown $vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each ; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each,
Sweet Anne Page.
Transmigration. From Midnight to Midnight.
A Fight with Fortune. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Collins (Mortimer & Frances), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each ; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each, Blacksmith and Scholar. The Village Comedy. You Play Me False.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each, Sweet and Twenty, Frances,
6
Collins (Wilkie), Novels by:
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each ;
post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each; cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each.
Antonina. Illust. by SirJoHNGILBERT. Basil. Illustrated by Sir Joun GIL- BERT and J MAHONEY. “ Hide and Seek, [Illustrated by Sir JouN GILBERT and J. MAHONEY. The Dead Secret. Illustrated by Sir Joun GILBERT. ¥ Queen of Hearts, Illustrated by Sir
JouN GILBERT
My Miscellanies. With a Steel-plate Portrait of WiLKIE COLLINS.
The Woman in White. With Illus- trations by Sir JoHN GILBERT and F, A. FRASER. ~
The Moonstone. With Illustrations by G. Du Maurterand F. A. FRASER,
Man and Wife. Illusts. by W. SMALL.
Poor Miss Finch. Illustrated by G. Du Maurier and Epwarp HUGHES. a
Miss or Mrs.? With Illustrations by S. L. Firpes and Henry Woops.
The New Magdalen. Illustrated by G.Du Maurier and C.S,REINHARDT.
The Frozen Deep. — Illustrated by G. Du Maurier and J. MAHONEY,
The Law and the Lady. Illustrated by S. L, Frrpes and SypNEy HALL.
The Two Destinies.
The Haunted Hotel. ARTHUR HOPKINS,
The Fallen Leaves,
Jezebel’s Daughter,
The Black Robe.
Heart and Science: A Story of the Present Time.
“1 Say No.”
The Evil Genius.
Little Novels. |
Illustrated by
A Rogue’s Life.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each,
The Legacy of Cain.
Blind Love. With a Preface by Water Besant, and 36 Illustra- tions by A. ForESTIER,
Colman’s Humorous Works: “Broad Grins,” ‘My Nightgown and Slippers,” and other Humorous Works, Prose and Poetical, of GrorcEe Cox- MAN. With Life by G. B. Buckstong, and Frontispiece by HoGartH. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d,
Colquhoun.—Every Inch a Sol-
dier: A Novel. By M, J. Cocgunoun. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Convalescent Cookery: <A Family Handbook, By Carrerine Ryan, Crown 8yo, ls.; cloth, 1s. 6d,
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
onway (Monc. D.), Works by: Demonology and: Devil-Love. Third Edition. With 65 Illustrations. Two Vols., 8vo, cloth extra, 28s, A’ Necklace of Stories. Illustrated y W. J. Hennessy. .Sq. 8vo, 6s. Pine and Palm: A. Novel... Two Vols.,, crown 8vo, cloth extra, 21s. George Washington’s Rules of Civ- ility, traced to; their Sources and Restored, Fcap. 8vo, half-leather, 2s. 6d. ‘ [Shortly.
Cook (Dutton), Novels by: Leo. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. Paul Foster’s Daughter. Cr. 8vo, cl.
extra, 3s. 6d.; post 8vo, illust. bds., 2s.
Copyright. —A Handbook of English and Foreign Copyright in
Literary and Dramatic Works. By SIDNEY JERROLD. Post 8vo, cl., 28. 6d. Cornwall.—PopularRomances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall. Collected and Edited bv Rosert Hunt, F.R.S, With Two Steel-plate Illustrations by GzrorGr CruIKSHANK, Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 78. 6d,
Craddock.— The Prophet of
the Great Smoky Mountains. By
CHARLES EGBERT CRADDOCK. ‘Post
8vo, illust. bds., 2s.; cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
Cruikshank (George):
The Comic Almanack. Complete in Two Series: The First from 1835 to 1843; the Seconp from 1844 to 1853. A Gathering. of. the. Besr Humour of Tuacxpray, Hoop, May- HEW, ALBERT SMITH, A’Brexerr, Rosert Broueu, &c. With: 2,000 Woodcuts and Steel Engravings by CRUIKSHANK, HINE, LANDELLS, &c, Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, two thick volumes, 7s. 6d. each. :
The Life of George Cruikshank. By BLANCHARD JERROLD, Author of “The Life of Napoleon III.,” &c. With 84 Illustrations. New’ and Cheaper Edition, with Additional Plates, and a Bibliography. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d,
Cumming (C. F.Gordon),Works
by: Demy 8vo, cloth extra, 89. 6d. each. Inthe Hebrides. With Autotype Fac- simile and numerous full-page Illusts, Inthe Himalayas and on the Indian Plains. With numerous Illusts, Mise ates & Egypt. With a otogravure Frontispiece, D 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. ae A
Cyples.—Hearts of Gold: Novel. By WintraMCypies, Crown Svo, cloth, 3s, 6d. ; post 8vo, boards, 2s,
Cussans.—Handbook of Her- aldry; with Instructions for Tracing Pedigrees and Deciphering Ancient MSS., &c. By Joun E. CussANs, New and Revised Edition, illustrated with over 400 Woodcuts and Coloured Plates, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 73. 6d.
Daniel. — Merrie England in the Olden Time. By GeorGE DANIEL, With ILllustrations y Rogpr. CRuik- SHANK. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d,
Daudet.—The Evangelist; or, Port Salvation, By ALPHONSE
Dauper., Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.; post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s.
Davenant.—Hints for Parents on the Choice of a Profession or
Trade for their Sons. By F. Dave- nant, M.A. Post 8vo, 18,; cloth, 1s. 6d,
Davies (Dr. N. E. Yorke-), Works by: ; ; Crown 8vo, 1s. each; cloth, 1s. 6d. each. One Thousand Medical Maxims, Nursery Hints: A Mother’s Guide, Foods for the Fat : A Treatise on Cor- pulency, and a Dietary for its Cure.
Aids to Long Life. Crown 8vo, 2s. ; cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
Davies’ (Sir John) Complete Poetical Works, including Psalms I, to L. in Verse, and other hitherto Un- published MSS., for the’ first time Collected and Edited, with Memorial- Introduction and Notes, by the Rev, A. B. Grosart, D.D. Two Vols., crown 8vo, cloth boards, 123:
De Maistre.—-A Journey Round My Room. By XAVIER DE MAISTRE, Translated by Henry ATTWELL. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
De Mille—A Castle in Spain. By James De Mire. Cr, 8vo, cloth extra, 38, 6d.; post 8vo, illust, bds., 2s,
Derby(The).—The Blue Ribbon of the Turf: A Chronicle of the Race ror THE Dersy, from the Victory of Diomed to that of Donovan. ‘ With Notes on the Winning Horses, the Men who trained them, the Jockeys who rode them,and the Gentlemen towhom they belonged; also Notices of the Betting and the Betting Men of the period; together with an Account ofthe Surroundings of the Race; and Brief Accounts of THe Oars. By Lovis Henry Curzon. Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 68.
Derwent (Leith), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each. Our Lady of Tears. | Circe’s Lovers,
v : - j
4
‘“CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY, ? Dickens (Charles), Novels by :
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
Sketches by Boz. | Nicholas Nickleby. Pickwick Papers. | Oliver Twist.
The Speeches of Charles Dickens, 1841-1870. With a New Bibliography, retised and enlarged. Edited and Prefaced by RicHarD HERNE SHEP- HERD. Cr, 8vo, cloth extra, 68.—Also a SMALLER EpiTI0N, in the Mayfais Library, post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d
About England with Dickens. By ALFRED RIMMER. With 57 lllusts. by C. A. VANDERHOOF, ALFRED RIMMER,
and others, Sq. 8vo, cl. extra, 7s. 6d. Dictionaries;
A Dictionary of Miracles: Imitative, Realistic, and Dogmatic. By the Rev. E. C. Brewer, LL.D. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
The Reader’s Handbook of Allu- sions, References, Plots, and Stories, By the Rev. E. C. Brewer, LL.D. With an Ae st contain- ing a Complete English Bibliography. Fifteenth Thousand. Crown 8yo, 1,400 pages, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Authors and their Works, with the Dates. Being the Appendices to “The Reader's Handbook,” sepa- rately printed. By the Rev. Dr. Brewer. Crown 8vo, cloth limp, 2s.
A Dictionary of the Drama: Being a comprehensive Guide to the Plays,
par BE OE EES and Playhouses
of the United Kingdom and America. By W. Davenport Apams. Cr. 8vo, half-bound, 12s. 6d. [/n preparation.
Familiar Short Sayings of Great Men. With Historical and Explana- tory Notes. By Samuer A. BENT M.A. Fifth Edition, revised and enlarged, Cr, 8vo, cloth extra,7s.6d.
The Slang Dictionary: Etymological Historical, and Anecdotal, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. 6d.
Women of the Day: A Biographical Dictionary. ByFRANcEs Hays, Cr, 8vo, cloth extra, 5s.
Words, Facts, and Phrases: A Dics- tionary of Curious, Quaint, and Out- of-the-Way Matters. By ELtezer Epwarps. Cr.8vo, cl. extra, 7s. 6d.
Diderot.—T he Paradox of Act-
ing. Translated, with Annotations, from Diderot’s ‘Le Paradoxe sur le Comédien, * by Water Herries Pottock. With a Preface by Henry Irvine. Cr. 8vo, in parchment, 4s. 6d,
Dobson (Austin), Works by:
Thomas Bewick and his Pupils. By Austin Dogson. With 95 choice Illustrations, Sq. 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Four French Women,  Fcap. 8vo, half-leather, 2s, 6a. [Shortly,
8 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
Dobson (W. T.), Works by : Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each. Literary Frivolities, Fancies, Follies, and Frolics. [cities. Poetical Ingenuities and Eccentri- Donovan (Dick), Stories by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each; cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each. - The Man-hunter: Stories from the Note-book of a Detective. Caught at Last! | Tracked & Taken. Who Poisoned Hetty Duncan? With other Detective Tales. The Man from Manchester. With 23 Illustrations by J. H. RussEvu. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 68.
Early English Poets. Edited, with Introductions and Annotations, by Rev. A. B.Grosart, D.D. Crown 8vo, cloth boards, 6s. per Volume.
Fletcher’s (Giles, B.D.) Complete Poems. One Vol.
Davies’ (Sir John) _Complete Poetical Works. Two Vols.
Herrick’s (Robert) Complete Col- lected Poems. Three Vols.
Sidney’s (Sir Philip) Complete Poetical Works. Three Vols.
Edwards.—Words, Facts, and Phrases: A Dictionary of Curious,
Quaint, & Out-ot-the-Way Matters. By ELIEZER EDWarbs, Cr.8vo,cl.ex.,78.6d,
Doyle (A. Conan, Author of “Micah Clarke’’), Novels by:
The Firm of Girdlestone: A Ro- mance of the Unromantic. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Strange Secrets. Told by Conan DoyLeE, Percy FitzGERALD, FLor- ENCE Marryat, &c, Cr. 8vo, cl, ex., Illust., 68.; post 8vo, illust. bds., 2s.
Drama, A Dictionary of the.
By W. Davenport ApaAms. Crown 8vo, hal{-bound, 12s. 6d. [Im preparation.
Dramatists, The Old. Cr. 8vo, cl.ex., Vignette Portraits, 6s. per Vol. Ben Jonson’s Works. With Notes Critical and Explanatory, and a Bio- graphical Memoir by Wm. GiFForp, Edit. by Col. CUNNINGHAM. 3 Vols. Chapman’s Works. Complete in * Three Vols. Vol. I. contains the Plays complete, including doubtful ones; Vol, II., Poems and Minor Translations, with Introductory Essay by A.C. SwinBurn_E; Vol.III., Trans- lations of the IJiad and Odyssey. Marlowe’s Works. — Including his Translations. Ed.,withNotes&Intro- duction, by Col. CUNNINGHAM. 1 Vol. Massinger’s Plays. From the Text of WILLIAM GirForD. Edited by Col, CUNNINGHAM. One Vol.
Duncan (Sara J.), Works by: A Social Departure: How Ortho- docia and I Went round the World by Ourselves, r1z Illusts. by F. H. TownsEnD.: Cr, 8vo, cl. ex., 78. 6d. An American Girl in Europe. With numerous Illustrations by F. H. TowNSEND. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. (Preparing. Folk-Lore of Plants. By Rev. T. F. TuIseLtTon Dyer, M.A. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 68, Edgcumbe. — Zephyrus: A Holiday in Brazil and on the River Plate. By E. R, Pearce Epecumsr, With 41 IlJusts, Cr, 8yo, cl, extra, 5s,
Edwardes (Mrs. A.), Novels by: A Point of Honour. Post 8vo, illus- trated boards, 2s. Archie Lovell. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 8s. 6d.; post 8vo, illust. bds., 2s.
Eggieston.—Roxy: A Novel. By EDWARD EGGLESTON, Post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s.
Emanuel.—On Diamonds and
Precious Stones: their History, Value,
and Properties ; with Simple Tests for
ascertaining their Reality. By Harry
EMANUEL, F.R.G.S. With numerous
Illustrations, tinted and plain. Crown
8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Englishman’s House, The: A Practical Guide to all interested in Selecting or Building a House; with full Estimates of Cost, Quantities, &c. By C.J. RicHarpson, Fourth Edition, With Coloured Frontispiece and nearly
600 Illustrations, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 78. 6d.
Ewald (Alex. Charles, F.S.A.), Works by:
The Life and Times of Prince Charles Stuart, Count of Albany, commonly called the Young Pre- tender. From the State Papers and other Sources, New and Cheaper Edition, with a Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Stories from the State Papers. With an Autotype Facsimile, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Eyes, Our: How to Preserve Them from Infancy to Old Age. By Joun BrowninG,F.R.A.S., &c. Tenth Edition (Sixteenth Thousand). With 70 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 1s.
Farrer (J. Anson), Works by: Military Manners and Customs. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 68. War: Three Essays, Reprinted from “Military Manners,” Crown 8vo, 1s.; cloth, 1s, 6d.
a
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY. 9
Familiar Short Sayings of Great Men. By Samuet ArrTuHuR Bent, A.M. Fifth Edition, Revised and Enlarged. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., 78. 6d.
Faraday (Michael), Works by:
Post 8vo, cloth extra, 48. 6d. each,
The Chemical History of a Candle: Lectures delivered before a Juvenile Audience at the Royal Institution. Edited by Witt1AM Crobkea: F.C.S, With numerous Illustrations.
On the Various Forces of Nature, and their Relations to each other : Lectures delivered beforea Juvenile Audience at the Royal Institution. Edited by WiLii1aM Crooxxs, F.C.S. With numerous Illustrations.
Fellow (A) of Trinity : A Novel, By Avan St. Ausyn, Author of “ Trol- eae Dilemma,”and WALTWHEELER, Three Vols., crown 8vo.
’ Fin-Bec.— The Cupboard
Papers: Observations on the Art of Living and Dining. By Fin-Bec. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
Fireworks, The Complete Art of node or, The Pyrotechnist’s Treasury. By Tuomas KenTisu. With 267 Illustrations, A New Edition, Re- vised throughout and greatly Enlarged, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 5s.
Fitzgerald (Percy), Works by:
The World Behind the Scenes. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s, 6d.
Little Essays: Passages from the Letters of CHARLES Lams, Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
A Day’s Tour: A Journey through Franceand Belgium, With Sketches in facsimile of the Original Draw- ings. Crown 4to picture cover, 1s.
Fatal Zero: A Homburg Diary. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 38s. 6d.; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. Bella Donna. | Never Forgotten. The Second Mrs. Tillotson. Seventy-five Brooke Street Polly. | The Lady of Brantome.
Fletcher's (Giles, B.D.) Com- plete Poems: Christ’s Victorie in
Heaven, Christ's Victorie on Earth,
Christ’s Triumph over Death, and
Minor Poems. With Memorial-Intro-
duction and Notes by the Rev. A. B.
Grosart,D.D. Cr. 8vo, cloth bds., 6s.
Fonblanque.—Filthy Lucre: A Novel. By ALBANY DE FONBLANQUE. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 28. |
French Literature, History of. By Henry VAN Laun. Complete in
Vois., demy 8vo, cl. bds., 78. 6d. each,
+
Francillon (R. E.), Novels by. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; Post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s. each.
One by One. A Real Queen. Queen Cophetua. | King or Knave ?
Olympia. Post 8yo, illust. boards, 2s.
Esther's Glove. Fcap. 8vo, ls.
Romances of the Law. With a Front- ispiece by D, H. Friston. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 68.; post 8vo, illus- trated boards, 2s.
Pe oink ad i a ne ee Frederic (Harold), Novels by: Seth’s Brother's Wife. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. The Lawton Girl. With a Frontis- piece by F. Barnarp. Crown 8yo, cloth extra, 6s.
Frenzeny.—Fifty Years on the Trail: The Adventures of Joun Y. NELSON, Scout, Guide,and Interpreter, in the Wild West, By HarrinGTon O'REILLY. With over roo Illustrations by Paut Frenzeny. Crown 8vo,picture cover, 3s. 6d.; cloth extra, 4s. 6d.
Frere.—Pandurang Hari; or, Memoirs ofa Hindoo, With a Preface by Sir H. BartLe Frere, G.C.S,L, &c. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
Friswell.—One of Two: A Novel. By Hain Friswecv. Post 8vo, illus- _trated boards, 2s.
Frost (Thomas), Works by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each. Circus Life and Circus Celebrities. The Lives of the Conjurers.
Old Showmen and Old London Fairs.
Fry’s (Herbert) Royal Guide to the London Charities. Showing their Name, Date of Foundation, Objects, Income, Officials, &c. Edited by Joun Lane. Published Annually. Crown 8vo, cloth, 1s. 6d.
Gardening Books: Post 8vo, 1s. each; cl. limp, 1s. 6d. each.
A Year’s Work in Garden and Green- house: Practical Advice to Amateur Gardeners as to the Management cr the Flower, Fruit, and FrameGarden. By GrorGe GLENNY.
Our Kitchen Garden: The Plants we Grow, and How we Cook Them, By Tom JERROLD.
Household Horticulture: A Gossip about Flowers. By Tom and Janz JERROLD. Illustrated.
The Garden that Paid the Rent. By Tom JERROLD.
My Garden Wild, and What I Grew there. By F.G.Heatu. Crown &yo cloth extra, 5s.; gilt edges, 6s.
Io BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
a
Garrett.—The Capel Girls: A Novel. By EDWARD GaRRETT. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., 38. 6d. ; post 8vo, illust. bds.. 28.
Gentleman’s Magazine (The). 1s. Monthly.—In addition to the Articles upon subjects in Literature, Science, and Art, tor which this Maga- zine has so high a reputation, “Table Talk” by SyLvanus URBAN appears monthly.
*,* Bound Volumes for recent years are kept im stock, cloth extra, price 88. 6d. each; Cases for binding, 28. each.
Gentleman’s Annual (The). Published Annually in November. In picture cover, demy 8vo, 1s. The forthcoming Annual is entitled Hood- winked, by T. W. Sprercut, Author of “The Mysteries of Heron Dyke.’’
German Popular Stories. Col- lected by the Brothers Grimm, and Translated by EpGar Taytor. Edited, with an Introduction, by Joun Ruskin. With 22 Illustrations on Steel by GEORGE CRUIKSHANK. Square 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. 6d.; gilt edges, 7s. 6d.
Gibbon (Charles), Novels by:
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each,
Robin Gray. The Braes of Yar- What will the row.
World Say ? A. Heart’s. Prob- Queen of the lem.
Meadow. The GoldenShaft. The Flowerof the | Of High Degree.
Forest. Loving a Dream.
In Honour Bound. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 28. each, The Dead Heart. For Lack of Gold. What will the World Say? For the King. | InPasturesGreen. In Love and War. By Mead and Stream. A Hard Knot. | Heart’s Delight. Blood-Money.
Gibney.—Sentenced! By Som-
ERVILLE GIBNEY, Crown 8vo, picture cover, ls.; cloth, 1s, 6d.
Gilbert (W. S.), Original Plays by: In Two Series, each complete in itself, price 2s. 6d. each.
The First Series contains —The Wicked World—Pygmalion and Ga- latea— Charity — The Princess — The Palace of Truth—Trial by Jury.
The SEconD SERIES contains—Bro- ken Hearts—Engaged—Sweethearts— Gretchen—Dan’] Druce—Tom Cobb— H.M.S, Pinatore—The Sorcerer—The Pirates of Penzance,
GitBert (W. S.), continued—
Eight Original Comic Operas. Writ- ten by W. S. Gi_Bert. Containing: The Sorcerer—H.M.S. “ Pinafore” —The Pirates of Penzance—Iolanthe — Patience — Princess Ida — The Mikado—Trial by Jury. Demy 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. . ;
Gilbert (William), Novels by:
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each. Dr. Austin’s Guests. The Wizard of the Mountain. James Duke, Costermonger.
Glenny.—A Year’s’ Work in
Garden and Greenhouse: Practical Advice to Amateur Gardeners as to the Management of the Flower, Fruit, and Frame Garden. By GEORGE GLENNY. Post 8vo, 1s.; cloth, ls. 6d.
Godwin.—Lives of the Necro-
mancers. By WILLIAM Gopwin. Post 8vo, limp, 2s.
Golden Library, The:
Square 16mo (Tauchnitz size), cloth
limp, 2s. per Volume.
Bayard Taylor’s Diversions of the Echo Club.
Bennett’s (Dr. W. C.) Ballad History of England. : ;
Bennett’s (Dr.) Songs for Sailors.
Godwin’s (Willlam) Lives of the Necromancers.
Holmes’s Autocrat of the Break- fast Table. Introduction by Sara,
Holmes’s Professor at the Break- fast Table.
Jesse’s (Edward) Scenes and Oc- cupations of a Country Life
Mallory’s (Sir Thomas) Mort d’Arthur: The Stories of King Arthur and of the Knights of the Round Table. Edited by B. Mont- GOMERIE RANKING.
Pascal’s Provincial Letters. A New Translation, with Historical Intro-« ductionand Notes byT.M’Criz,D.D,
Pope’s Poetical Works.
Rochefoucauld’s Maxims and Moral Reflections. With Notes, and In. troductory Essay by Sainte-Beuve,
Golden Treasury of Thought,
The: An ENcyYcLopzDIA oF Quora- tions from Writers of all Times and Countries. Selected and Edited by THEODORE TayLor. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt and gilt edges, 7s. 6d.
Gowing. — Five Thousand
Miles in a Sledge: A Mid-winter Journey Across Siberia. By Lionre, F. Gowinc. With a Map by E.. Wert. LER, and 30 Illustrations by C.J. Urrn, Large crown 8yo, cloth extra, 8s,
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY. 11
Graham. — The Professor’s Wife: A Story. By Lronarp GRAHAM. Feap. 8vo, picture cover, ls.
Greeks and Romans, The Life of the, Described from Antique Monu- ments. By Ernst Guut and W. Koner. Translated from the Third German Edition, and Edited by Dr. BF. Huerrer. With 545 Illustrations, New and Cheaper Edition, large crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Greenaway (Kate) and Bret Harte.—The Queen of the Pirate Isle. 2 Brer Harte. With 25 original Drawings by Karr GRiEN- AWAY, srepeersed in Colours by E, Evans. Sm. 4to, bds., 5s.
Greenwood (James),Works by:
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d, each.
The Wilds of ‘London.
Low-Life Deeps: An Account of the Strange Fish to be Found There.
Greville (Henry), Novels by: —
Nikanor: A Russian Novel. Trans- lated by Exviza E. Cuase. With 8 lllusts. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
A Noble Woman. Translated by Avpert D, VaANpDAM. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 5s,
Habberton (John), Author of “ Helen’s Babies,’’ Novels-by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each ; cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each, Brueton’s Bayou. Country Luck,
Hair (The): Its Treatment in Health, Weakness, and_ Disease. Translated from the German of Dr. J. Pincus. Crown 8vo, 1s.; cloth, Is, 6d.
Hake (Dr. Thomas Gordon),
Poems by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 63, each,
New Symbols.
Legends of the Morrow.
TheSerpent Play.
Maiden Ecstasy. Small 4to, cloth extra, 8s.
Hall.—Sketches of Irish Cha- racter. By Mrs.S.C. Haty. With numerous Illustrations on Steel and Wood by Mactisz, GILBerT, HARVEY, and G. CruixsHank. Medium 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Halliday.—Every-day Papers. _By Anprew Hatwipay. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Handwriting, The Philosophy of. Withover 100 Facsimiles and Ex- planatory Text., By Don Feiix pr Satamanca. Post 8yo, cl, limp, 2s,6d,
Hanky-Panky: A Collection of Very EasyTricks,Very Difficult Tricks, White Magic, Sleight of Hand, &c. Edited by W. H. Cremer. With 200 Illusts. _Crown-8vo, cloth extra,4s. 6d.
Hardy (Lady Duffus).— Paul Wynter’s Sacrifice: A Story. By Lady Durrus Harpy, Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 28.
Hardy (Thomas).—Under the
Greenwood Tree. By Tuomas Harpy, Author of ‘‘Far from the Madding Crowd.” Post 8vo, illustrated bds., 2s.
Harwood.—The Tenth Earl.
By J. Berwick Harwoop. Post 8vo, _ illustrated boards, 28.
Haweis (Mrs. H. R.), Works by :
Square 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. each.
The Art of Beauty. With Coloured Frontispiece and numerous Lllusts.
The Art of Decoration. With nu- merous Illustrations.
Chaucer for Children: A Golden Key. With Eight Coloured Pictures and numerous Woodcuts,
The Art of Dress. With numerous Illustrations. Small 8vo, illustrated cover, 1s.; cloth limp, Is. 6d.
Chaucer for Schools, Demy 8vo, cloth limp, 2s, 6d.
Haweis (Rev. H. R.).—American Humorists: WAasHINGTON IxvinG, OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, JAMES Russert LoweEtt, ARTEMUS WARD, Marx Twaln, and Bret Harte. By Rev. H. R. Hawers, M.A. Cr. 8vo, 6s.
Hawley Smart. — Without
Love or Licence: A Novel. By Hawcey SMart... Three Vols,, cr. 8vo.
Hawthorne.—Our Old Home. By NaTHANIEL HawTHORNE. Anno- tated with Passages from the Author’s Note-books, and Illustrated with 30 Photogravures. Two Vols., crown 8vo, cloth extra, 15s.
Hawthorne (Julian), Noveisky, Crown 8Svo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each ; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. Garth. Sebastian Strome. Ellice Quentin. | Dust.
Fortune’s Fool, | Beatrix Randolph. David Poindexter’s Disappearance, The Spectre of the Camera.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. MissCadogna. | Love—or a Name.
Mrs. Gainsborough’s Diamonds, Fcap. 8vo, illustrated cover, 1s.
A Dream and a Forgetting. Post 8yvo, cloth, 1s, 6d, .
12 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
Shonen ee
Hays.—Women of the Day: A Biographical Dictionary of Notable Contemporaries. By Frances Hays, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 53.
Hotmes (O WENDELL), Continued— The Professor at the Breakfast-
Heath (F. G.).— My Garden Wild, and What I Grew There. By Francis GrorGE Heatu, Author of “The Fern World,” &c. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 5s.; cl. gilt, gilt edges, 6s.
Helps (Sir Arthur), Works by : Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each,
Animals and their Masters.
Social Pressure.
Ivan de Biron: A Novel. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.; post 8vo, illus- trated boards, 2s.
Henderson.—Agatha Page: A Novel. By Isaac HENDERSON, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
Herrick’s (Robert) Hesperides, Noble Numbers, and Complete Col- lected Poems. With Memorial-Intro- duction and Notes by the Rev. A. B. Grosart, D.D., Steel Portrait, Index of First Lines, and Glossarial Index, &c. Three Vols., crown 8vo, cloth, 18s.
Hesse - Wartegg (Chevalier Ernst von), Works by: Tunis: The Land and the People. With 22 Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., 3s. 6d. The New South-West: Travelling Sketches from Kansas, New Mexico, Arizona, and Northern Mexicc. With 100 fine IJlustrations and Three Maps. Demy 8vo, cloth extra, 14s. (In preparation, Hindley (Charles), Works by: Tavern Anecdotes and Sayings: In- cluding the Origin of Signs, and Reminiscences connecte with Taverns, Coffee Houses, Clubs, &c. With Illusts. Cr, $vo, cl. ex., 3s. 6d. The Life and Adventures of a Cheap Jack. By One of the Fraternity, Edited by CHARLES HinDLEy. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
Hoey.—The Lover’s Creed.
By Mrs. CasHet Hoey. Post 8vo, illus- _trated boards. 28;
Hollingshead—NiagaraSpray: Sketches. By Joun HoLiinGsHEaD.
With Three Illustrations. Crown $vo, picture cover, 1s,
Hoimes (O.Wendell), Works by: Tne Autocrat of the Breakfast- Table. Illustrated by J. Gorpon THomson. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d.—Another Edition in smaller type, with an Introduction by G, A, Sara. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s,
Table; withthe Story of Iris. Post 8v9, cloth limp, 28. Holmes.— The Science of
Voice Production and Voice Preser- vation: A Popular Manual tor the Use of Speakers and Singers. By Gorpon Hortmes, M.D. With Ilus- trations. Crown 8vo, ls.; cloth, 1s. 6d.
Hood (Thomas):
Hood’s Choice Works, in Prose and Verse. Including the Cream of the Comic ANNUALS. With Life of the Author, Portrait, and 200 Illustra- tions. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 78. 6d.
Hood’s Whims and Oddities. With 85 Illustrations. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and half-bound, 2s.
Hood (Tom).—From Nowhere to the North Pole: A Noah’s Arkz- ological Narrative. By Tom Hoop. With 25 Illustrations by W. BRUNTON and E. C. Barnes. Square 8vo, cloth
extra, gilt edges, 6s.
Hook’s (Theodore) Choice Hu- morous Works, including his Ludi- crous Adventures, Bons Mots, Puns,and Hoaxes. With Life of the Author, Portraits, Facsimiles,and Illustrations, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 73. 6d.
Hooper.—T he House of Raby: A Novel. By Mrs. GzorcE Hooprr, Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s,
Hopkins—“’Twixt Love and Duty:” A Novel. By TicHEe Hopkins, Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s,
Horne.—Orion ; An Epic Poem, in Three Books. By RicHarp HEn- cist Horne. With Photographic Portrait from a Medallion by Sum- MERS, Tenth Edition, Crown 8vo, cioth extra, 7s.
Horse (The) and his Rider: An Anecdotic Medley. By ‘‘ THoRMANBY.” Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s,
Hunt.—Essays by Leigh Hunt: A Tale for a Chimney Corner, and other Pieces. Edited, with an Intro- duction, by EpMuND OLuigR. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and half- bound, 2s.
Hunt (Mrs. Alfred), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s, 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each,
Thornicroft’s Model. The Leaden Casket. Self-Condemned. That other Person,
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY. {3
Hydrophobia: an Account of M. Pastrur’s System, Containing a Translation of all his Communications on the Subject, the Technique of his Method, and the latest Statistical Results. By Renaup Suzor, M.B., C.M. Edin., and M.D. Paris, Commis- sioned by the Government of the Colony of Mauritius to oe? M. PastEuR’s new Treatment in Paris. With 7 Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Indoor Paupers. By ONE oF __Tnem. Crown 8vo, ls.; cloth, 1s, 6d,
ingelow.—Fated to be Free: A Novel. By Jean INGELow. Cr, 8vo, _ cl.ex,, 88, 6d.; post 8vo, illust. bds., 2s.
Irish Wit and Humour, Songs of, Collected and Edited by A, PErR- CEVALGRAVES, Post 8vo,cl, limp, 2s.6d,
James.—A Romance of the Queen’s Hounds. By CHARLES JAMES. Post 8vo, picture cover, 1s.; cl., 18, 6d.
Janvier.—Practical Keramics for Students. By CATHERINE A, JaNviER. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Jay (Harriett), Novels by:
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each, The Dark Colleen. The Queen of Connaught.
Jefferies (Richard), Works by:
Nature near London. Post 8vo, cl. limp, 2s. 6d.
The Life of the Fields. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d
The Open Air. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 68.; post 8vo, cl. limp, 2s. 6d.
The Eulogy of Richard Jefferies. By Wacrer Besant. Second Ed, Photo. Portrait. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., 68.
Jennings (H. J.), Works by:
Curlosities of Criticism. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. ,
Lord Tennyson: A Biographical Sketch, With a Photograph-Por- trait. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Jerome.—Stageland : Curious Habits and Customs of its Inhabitants. By Jerome K, Jerome. With 64 Illusts, by J. Bernarp Parrripce, Fifteenth Thousand. Feap. 4to, cloth, 33. 60.__
Jerrold.—The Barber's Chair; and The Hedgehog Letters. By DovuGLas JERROLD. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and half-bound, 2s.
Jerrold (Tom), Works by: Post 8vo, 1s. each; cloth, 1s. 6d. each. The Garden that Paid the Rent. Household Horticulture: A Gossip about Flowers. Illustrated. Our Kitchen Garden: The Plants we Grow, and How we Cook Them.
Jesse.—_Scenes and Occupa- tions of a Country Life. By Epwarp JESSE. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s.
Jeux d’Esprit. Collected and Edited by Henry S. LeicuH. Post 8vo, _ cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
Jones (Wm., F.S.A.), Works by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. each. Finger-Ring Lore: Historical, Le-
gendary, and Anecdotal. With nearly 300 Illustrations. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged,
Credulities, Past and Present. In- cluding the Sea and Seamen, Miners, Talismans, Word and Letter Divina- tion, Exorcising and Blessing of Animals, Birds, Eggs, Luck, &c. Withan Etched Frontispiece.
Crowns and Coronations: A History of Regalia in all Times and Coun-
___ tries, _One Hundred Illustrations.
Jonson’s (Ben) Works. With Notes Critical and Explanatory, and a Biographical Memoir by WILLIAM Girrorp, Edited by Colonel Cun- NINGHAM, Three Vols., crown 8vo, cloth extra, 18s. ; or separately, 6s. each,
Josephus, The CompleteWorks of. Translatei by Whiston. Con- taining both ‘The Antiquities of the
ews” and “The Wars of the Jews.” Vith 52 Illustrations and Maps. Two Vols.. demy 8vo, handsomely half- bound, 12s, 6d.
Kempt.—Pencil and Palette:
Fictions: Humorous Sketches. By Mark KersHaw. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.; cloth, 2s. 6d.
Keyser.—Cut by the Mess: A Novel. By ARTHUR KEYSER. Cr, 8vo, picture cover, ls.; cloth, 1s. 6d.
King (R. Ashe), Novels by: Crown &vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each, ADrawn Game.
“The Wearing of the Green.”
Passion’s Slave. Post 8vo, picture boards, 2s.
Kingsley (Henry), Novels by: Oakshott Castle. Post 8vo, illus- trated boards, 2s. Number Seventeen. Crown 8yo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
Knight.— The Patient’s Vade Mecum: How to get most Benefit from Medical Advice. By WILLIAM Knicat, M.R.C.S.,and Epw. Knicut, L.R.C,P, Cr. 8vo 1s, cloth, ls. 6d,
14
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY i
Knights (The)-of the Lion; A Romance of the Thirteenth Century. Edited, with an Introduction, by the Marguess of Lorne, K.T. Crown 8vo. cloth extra, 6s.
Lamb (Charles):
Lamb’s Complete Works, in Prose and Verse, reprinted from the Ori- ginal Editions, with many Pieces hitherto unpublished. Edited, with Notes and Introduction, by R. H SHEPHERD. With Two Portraits and Facsimile of a page of the ‘‘ Essay on
Roast Pig.” Cr.8vo,cl.extra, 7s. 6d. The Essays of Elia. Both Series complete Post 8vo, laid paper,
handsomely half-bound, 2s.
Poetry for Children, and Prince Dorus. By CuHarLes Lams. Care- fully reprinted from unique copies. Small 8vo, cloth extra, 5s.
Little Essays: Sketches and Charac- ters by CHARLES Lams. Selected from his Letters by Percy Firz- GERALD. Post 8vo,clothlimp, 2s. 6d,
Lane’s Arabian Nights.—The Thousand and One Nights: com- monly called in England “THE ARABIAN NicHTs’ ENTERTAIN- MENTS.” A New Translation from the Arabic with copious Notes, by Epwarp WIL.14M Lankg. Illustrated by many hundred Engravings on Wood, from Original Designs by Wm. Harvey. A New Edition, from a Copy annotated by the Translator, edited by his Nephew, Epwarp STANLEY Poor. With a Preface by STANLEY LaNnE-Poote. Three Vols., demy 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. each.
Larwood (Jacob), Works by: The Story of the London Parks. With Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., 3s. 6d. Anecdotes of the Clergy: The An- tiquities, Humours, and Eccentrici- ties of the Cloth. Post 8vo, printed on Jaid paper and hf,-bound (uniform with ‘‘The Essays of Elia’? and
“ Gastronomy as a Fine Art”’), 2s.
Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each, Forensic Anecdotes. _ Theatrical Anecdotes,
leigh (Henry S.), Works by: Carols of Cockayne. A New Edition, printed on fcap, 8vo hand-made paper, and bound in buckram, 5s. Jeux d’Esprit.-Collected and Edited by Henry S, Leicu. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
Leys.—The Lindsays: A Ro- . mance of Scottish Life. By Joun K. Leys, Post 8yo, illustrated boards, 2s,
Life in London; or, The History of Jerry Hawthorn. and Corinthian Tom. With CrurksHanx’s Coloured Illustrations. Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 7s. 6d.
Linskill—In Exchange for a
Soul. By Mary Linsgity. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. Linton (&. Lynn), Works by: Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s, 6d. each, Witch Stories. : Ourselves: Essays on Women, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each, Patricia Kemball. The Atonement of Leam Dundas. The World Well Lost. Under which Lord ? “My Love!” | lone. Paston Carew, Millionaire & Miser, Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 28. each. With a Silken Thread. The Rebel of the Family.
Sowing the Wind. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
Longfellow’s Poetical Works. Carefully Reprinted from the Original Editions. With numerous fine Illustra- tions on Steeland Wood, Crown $vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Long Life, Aids to: A Medical, Dietetic, and General Guide in Health
and Disease. By N. E. Davies, L.R.C.P. Cr. 8vo, 23.; cl. limp, 28.6.
Lucy.—Gideon Fleyce: A Novel. By Henry W. Lucy. ~ Crown 8vo, cl. ex., 38. 6d.; post 8vo, illust. bds., 2s.
Lusiad (The) of Camoens. Translated into English Spenserian Verse by Ropert Frrencu Durr. Demy 8vo, with Fourteen full-page Plates, cloth boards, 18s.
Macalpine (Avery), Novels by: Teresa Itasca, and other Stories, Crown 8vo, bound in canvas, 2s. 6d. Broken Wings. With Illusts. by W. J. HENNESSY. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 68.
McCarthy (Justin H., M.P.), Works by:
The French Revolution. 4 Vols., 8vo, 128, each, [Vols. I. & Il. veady.
An Outline of the History of Ireland, froin the Earliest Times to the Pre« sent Day. Cr. 8vo,1s.; cloth, 1s. 6d.
Ireland since the Union: Sketches of Irish History from 1798 to 1886, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 68,
England under Gladstone, 1880-85. Second Edition, revised. Crown $vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Hafiz in London: Poems, Choicely printed, Small 8vo, gold cloth, 3g, 6d.
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY. 15 MacColl.—Mpr. Stranger’s
——_—_—_—— McCarthy (Justin H.), continued—
0 Ee a Se
Harlequinade: Poems. Small 4to,
A ome vellum, 8s, Also a few arge Paper Copies, the price of
-which may be ascertained from any Bookseller. ;
Our Sensation Novel. Crown 8vo, 1s.; cloth, 1s. 6d.
Dolly: A Sketch. Crown 8vo, picture cover, ls.; cloth, ls, 6d. p
Lily Lass: A Romance. Crown 8yo, picture cover, 1s.; cloth, 1s, 6d.
McCarthy (Justin, M.P.),Works b .
ys
A History of Our Own Times, from the Accession of Queen Victoria to the General Election of 1880, Four Vols. demy 8vo, cloth extra, 12s. each.—Also a Popuvar Epirion, in Four Vols. cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 68. each. —And a Juniter Epirion, with an Appendix of Events to the end of 1886, complete in Two Vols., square 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. each.
AShort History of Our Own Times. One Vol,, crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. —Also a CHEAP PopuLarR Epirion, post 8vo, cloth extra, 2s. 6d.
A History of the Four Georges. Four Vols. demy 8vo, cloth extra, 12s. each, {Vols. I. & IL. now ready.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo illustrated boards, 2s. each,
Dear Lady Disdain. | A Fair Saxon.
Linley Rochford./Miss Misanthrope.
My Enemy’s Daughter.
The Waterdale Neighbours.
Donna Quixote. | Maid of Athens.
The Comet of a Season
Camiola: A Girl with a Fortune,
“The Right Honourable.” By Justin McCarruy, M.P., and Mrs. CAMPBELL-PRAED, Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., 68.
Macdonell.—Quaker Cousins:
A Novel. By AGNrs MACDONELL, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s, 6d.; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Macgregor. — Pastimes and
Players. Notes on Popular Games, By Rosert MacGREGOR. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d.
Mackay.—Interludes and Un-
dertones; or, Music at Twilight. By CHARLES Mackay, LL.D, Cr. 8vo, 6s.
Maclise Portrait-Gallery (The)
of Illustrious Literary Characters; with Memoirs—Biographical, Critical, Bibliographical, and Anecdotal—illus-
trative of the Literature of the former
half of the Present Century. By WirriaAM Bates, B.A. With 85 Por- traits printed onan India Tint, Crown 8yo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Macquoid (Mrs.), Works by:
Sealed Packet: A Story of Adven- ture. By HuGH MacCori, Second Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 5s.
MacDonald.—Works of Fancy
and Imagination. By GrorGe Mac- ponaLp, LL.D. Ten Vols., in cloth case, 21s.. Or the Vols. may be had separately, grolier cloth, at 2s. 6d. each.
Vol. 1, Wirntn AND Witnout. Tue Hippven Lire,
Vol. 2. THe Discrete. Tur Gospen Women. A Boox or SONNETS. OrGan Soncs. ,
Vol. 3. Viotin Sonas. SonGs oF THE Days anp Nicurs. A Boox or Dreams. Roapsipe Porms, Poems FOR CHILDREN.
Vol. 4. PARABLES, BALLaps. Scotcu Sonas,
Vols. 5 and 6, Puanrastes: A Faerie Romance,
Vol. 7. THE PortTent.
Vol. 8. THe Licgur Princess. Tue Grant's Heart. SHapows.
Vol. 9. Cross Purposes. THE GoLpEN Key. Tue Carasoyn, Littie Day: LIGHT,
Vol. 10, THE CruEL PantTER. THE Wowo’ Rivven. THe CastLe. Tue Broken Sworps. THE Gray Wo-Lr. UNcLE CorNELIUS.
Square 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. eacn,
In the Ardennes. With 50 fine Illus- trations by Tuomas R. Macguorp.
Pictures and Legends from Nor mandy and Brittany. With numer- ous Illusts. by THomas R. Macguorp,
Through Normandy. With go Illus- trations by T. R. Macquorp,
Through Brittany. With numerous Illustrations by T. R. Macguorp.
About Yorkshire. With 67 Illustra- tions by T. R. Macquorp,
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each, The Evil Eye, and other Stories, Lost Rose.
Magician’s Own Book (The):
Performances with Cups and Balls, Eggs, Hats, Handkerchiefs, &c. All from actual Experience. Edited by W. H. Cremer. With2o0o Illustrations, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 4s. 6d.
Magic Lantern (The), and its
Management: including full Prac. tical Directions for producing the Limelight, making Oxygen Gas, at preparing Lantern Slides. By T, (3, Herwortn. With 10 Illustratigus, Crown 8yo, Is, ; cloth, 1s, 6d.
16 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
Magna Charta. An exact Fac- simile of the Original in the British Museum, printed on fine plate paper, 3 feet by 2 feet, with Arms and Seals emblazoned in Gold and Colours. 58.
Mattock (W. H.), Works by: The New Republic; or, Culture, Faith, and Philosophy inan English Country House. Post 8vo, picture cover, 28. ; cloth limp, 2s. 6d. P The New Paul and Virginia; or, Posi- tivism on an Island. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. Poems. Small 4to, parchment, 8s. Is Life worth Living ? Cr.8vo,cl.ex.,6s,
Mallory’s (Sir Thomas) Mort d’Arthur: The Stories of King Arthur and of the Knights of the Round Table. A Selection. Edited by B. MontTGomMeE- RIE RANKING. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s.
Man - Hunter (The): Stories from the Note-book of a Detective. By Dicx Donovan. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 28.; cloth, 2s. 6d.
Mark Twain, Works by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. each. The Choice Works of Mark Twain.
Revised and Corrected throughout by the Author. With Life, Portrait, and numerous I]lustrations.
Roughing It, and The Innocents at Home. With 200 Illustrations by F. A. FRASER,
The Gilded Age. By Marx Twain and CHARLES DupLEY WARNER. With 212 Illustrations by T. Coppin.
Mark Twain’s Library of Humour. With numerous Illustrations.
A Yankee at the Court of King Arthur. With 220 Illustrations by Dan BEARD.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, (illustrated), 7s. 6d. each; post 8vo (without I)lus- trations), illustrated boards, 2s, each,
The Innocents Abroad; or, The New Pilgrim’s Progress: ‘‘ MARK Twaln’s PLEASURE TRIP.”
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. With 111 Illustrations.
The Prince and the Pauper. With nearly 200 Illustrations.
A Tramp Abroad. With 314 Illusts.
Life on the Mississippi. Wauth 300 Illustrations.
The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. _With 174 Illustrations by E, W. KemBte.
The Stolen White Elephant, &c, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 68.; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Marlowe's Works. Including his Translations. Edited, with Notes and Introductions, by Col. Cun-
MINGHAM, Crown 8yo, cloth extra, 6s.
Marryat (Florence), Novels by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each, A Harvest of Wild Oats. Fighting the Air. | Written In Fire. Open! Sesame! Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s.6d. ; post 8vo, picture boards, S. Massinger’s Plays. From the Text of Wm. Girrorp. Edited by Col. _CunninGuam. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. Masterman.—Half a Dozen Daughters: A Novel. By J. MAstTEr- MAN. Fost 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. Matthews.—A Secret of the Sea, &c. By BrRANDER MATTHEWS. Post 8vo, illust. bds., 28. ; cloth, 2s. 6d. Mayfair Library, The: Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. per Volume, A Journey Round My Room. By
XAVIER DE Maistre. Translated by Henry ATTWELL. Quips and Quiddities. Selected by
W. Davenport ADAMS.
The Agony Column of “The Times,” from 1800 to 1870, Edited, with an Introduction, by ALIcE CLay.
Melancholy Anatomised: A Popular Abridgment of ‘ Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy.”
The Speeches of Charles Dickens. Literary Frivolities, Fancies, Follies, and Frolics. By W. T. Dosson, Poetical Ingenulties and Eccentricl- ties. Selected and Edited by W. T.
Dosson. ?
The Cupboard Papers, By Fin-Bec,
Original Plays by W. S. GiLBert. First Series. Containing: The Wicked World — Pygmalion and Galatea— Charity —The Princess— The Palace ot Truth—Trial by Jury.
Original Plays by W. GILBERT, SEconpD Series, Containing: Broken Hearts — Engaged — Sweethearts — Gretchen—Dan’l Druce—Tom Cobb —H.M.S. Pinafore—The Sorcerer —The Pirates of Penzance.
Songs of Irish Wit and Humour. Collectedand Edited by A. PeRCEVAL GRAVES.
Animals and their Masters, By Sir ARTHUR HELPS,
Social Pressure. By Sir A. Herps,
Curiosities of Criticism. By Henry J. JENNINGS.
TheAutocrat ofthe Breakfast-Table. By OLIvER WENDELL Hormgs.  II- lustrated by J. Gorpon THomson.
Pencil and Palette. By R, Kempt,
Little Essays: Sketches and Charac> ters by Cuas, Lams. Selected from his Letters by Percy F1itzGERALp.
Forensic Anecdotes; or, Humour and Curiosities of the Law and Men of Law. By Jacop Larwoop,
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY. 17 , a re or ee wes
Mayrair Lisrary, continued— Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s, 6d. per Volume. Theatrical Anecdotes. By Jacos | Larwoop. (LreicH. | Jeux d’Esprit, Edited by Henry S. | Witch Stories. By E, Lynn Linton. Ourselves: Essays on Women, By E. Lynn Linton, [MacGREGOR, Pastimes and Players. By RosEerT ' The New Paul and Virginia. By W. H. Mattock. New Republic. By W. H. MAtrockx. Puck on Pegasus. By H. CHOLMoNDE- LEY-PENNELL, Pegasus Re-Saddled. By H. CHot- MONDELEY-PENNELL. Illustrated by Grorce Du Maurier. Muses of Mayfair. Edited by H. CHOLMONDELEY-PENNELL, Thoreau: His Life and Aims, By H. A. Pace. Punlana, By the Hon. Hucu Rowtey, More Puniana. By Hon. H. Rowrey, The Philosophy of Handwriting. By Don FEuix DE SALAMANCA, By Stream and Sea By WILLIAM SENIOR. Leaves from a Naturalist’s Note- Book. By Dr. ANDREW WILSON.
Mayhew.—London Characters
and the Humorous Side of London |
Life. By Henry Mayvnew. With nume- rous Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 3s. 6d.
Medicine, Family.—One Thou- sand Medical Maxims and Surgical Hints, for Infancy, Adult Life, Middle Age, and Old Age. By N. E. Davies, L.R.C.P. Lond. Cr. 8vo, 1s.; cl., 1s. 6d.
Menken.—Infelicia: Poems by Apau Isaacs MEenKEN. A New Edi- tion, with a Biographical Preface, nu- merous Illustrations by F. E. Lumuis and F. O. C. Darvey, and Facsimile of a Letter from CHartes Dickens. Beautifully printed on small 4to ivory paper, with red border to each page, and handsomely bound, price 7s. 6d.
Mexican Mustang (On _ a), |
through Texas, from the Gulf to the Rio
Grande. By A. E.Sweret and J.,ARMoy
. Knox, Editors of “Texas Siftings.” With 265 Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl.extra, 78.6d.
Middlemass (Jean), Novels by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. Touch and Go. | Mr. Dorillion.
Miller. — Physiology for the
ney or, The House of Life: Hu- man Physiology, with its application to the Preservation of Health. With numerous Illusts. By Mrs. F. FENwick Miter, Small 8vo, cloth limp, 2s, 6a,
Milton (J. L.), Works by: Sm. 8vo, 1s. each; cloth ex.,1s. 6d. each, The a dealin of the Skin. Rules tor the Management of the Skin; with Directions for Diet, Soaps, Baths, &c. The Bath In Diseases of the Skin. The Laws of Life, and their Relation to Diseases of the Skin.
The Successful Treatment of Le- pees. By P.G.Unna. With Notes y I. L. Mitton. Demyv 8vo, 18.
Minto.—Was Sne Good or Bad ? A Romance. By Witttam MINTO. __Cr. 8vo, picture cover, 1s.; cloth, 1s. 6d. Molesworth (Mrs,), Novels by: Hathercourt Rectory. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. That Girl in Black. Crown 8vo, picture cover, 1s.; cloth, 1s. 6d.
Moore (Thomas), Works by :
The Epicurean; and Alciphron. A New Edition. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and half-bound, 2s,
Prose and Verse, Humorous, Satiri- cal, and Sentimental, by T. Moore; with Suppressed Passages from the Memoirs of Lord Byron. Edited, with Notes and Introduction, by R, HERNE SHEPHERD. With Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
‘Muddock (J. E.), Stories by:
Stories Weird and Wonderful. Post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s. ; cloth, 2s. 6d.
The Dead Man's Secret; or, The Valley of Gold: Being a Narrative of Strange and Wild Adventure. With a Frontispiece by F. BarNnarb. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 5s.
Murray (D. Christie), Novels
by. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 38.6d. each ; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
A Life's Atonement. |A Model Father, Joseph’s Coat. Coals of Fire Val Strange. {Cynic Fortune. A Bit of Human Nature.
First Person Singular. | Hearts. The Way of the World.
By the Gate of the Sea, Post 8vo, picture boards, 2s.
Old Blazer’s Hero. With Three Illus- trations by A. McCormick. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6S.; post 8vo, illus- trated boards, 2s.
Murray (D. Christie) & Henry Herman, Works by:
One Traveller Returns. Cr.8vo, cloth extra, 68. ; post 8vo, illust. bds., 2s. Paul Jones’s Alias, &c. With Ilusts, by A, Forestier and G. Nicover,
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
The Bishops’ Bible. Cheaper Ed,
Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. [Shortly.
18
Murray.—A Game of Bluff: A | Ouida, Novels by. Crown 8vo,
Novel. By Henry Murray, joint- Author with Curistic Murray of “A Dangerous Catspaw.’’ Post 8vo, pic- ture boards, 2s.; cloth, 2s. 6d.
Nisbet.—‘“Bail Up:” A Romance of BuSHRANGERS AND Bracks, | By Hume Nisser. With a Frontispiece by the Author. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 38. 6d. (Shortly.
Novelists. — Half-Hours with the Best Novelists of the Century: ChoiceReadings from the finest Novels, Edited, with Critical and Biographical Notes, by H. T. Mackenzie Bry. Crown 8vo, cl. ex., 8s.6d. [Prepaving.
Nursery Hints: A Mother’s Guide in Health and Disease. By N. E. Davies,L.R.C.P. Cr.8vo, 1s. ; cl., 1s.6d.
Oberammergau.—The Coun- try of the Passion Play, and the Highlands of Bavaria. By L, G. Srcuin, Author of “ Walks in Algiers,” With a Map and 37 Illustrations. Third Edition, with a new Preface for 1890. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
O’Connor.—LordBeaconsfield: A Biography. By T. P.O’Connor, M.P.
Sixth Edition, with a New Preface, |
: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 5s. %
O’Hanlon (Alice), Novels by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
The Unforeseen. | Chance? or Fate ?
Ohnet (Georges), Novels by: Doctor Rameau. Translated by Mrs. CasHEL Hoey. With g Illustrations by E. BAyarp. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra,6s.; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. A Last Love. Translated by ALBERT D. Vanpam. Crown 8vo, cl, ex., 5s. A Weird Gift. Translated by ALberr D. Vanpam. Crown 8vo, cl, extra, 3s. 6d. Oliphant (Mrs.), Novels by: Whiteladies. With Illustrations by ArTHUR Hopxins and H. Woops, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each, The Primrose Path. The Greatest Heiress In England.
A Novel. With Illustrations by Henry Tuck. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s,
O’Shaughnessy (A.), Poems by: Songs of a Worker. Fcap. 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. Music and Moonlight. cloth extra, 7s. 6d. Lays of France. Cr.8vo, cl. ex.,108, 6d,
Feap. 8vo,
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY'
cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
Held in Bondage. | Pascarel. Strathmore. Signa. | Ariadne. Chandos In a Winter City. Under Two Flags.| Friendship. — Cecil Castle-|Moths. | Bimbi. maine’s Gage. |Pipistrello. Idalia. . In Maremma Tricotrin. A Village Com- Puck. mune. Folle Farine. Wanda. TwoLittleWooden | Frescoes. [ine.
Shoes. Princess Naprax- A Dog of Flanders.) Othmar,
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s, 6d. each, Guilderoy.
Syrlin.
Ruffino, &c.
Wisdom, Wit, and Pathos, selected from the Works of Ourpa by F. Sypney Morris. Sm.cr.8vo,cl.ex.,5s. CHEAPER EpITI0N, illust. bds., 28.
Page (H. A.), Works by :
Thoreau: His Lifeand Aims: A Study. With Portrait. Post 8vo,cl.limp, 23.6d.
Lights:onthe Way: Some Tales with- in a Tale. By the late J. H. ALEX- ANDER, B.A. Edited by H. A, Pacr, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Animal Anecdotes. Arranged on a New Principle. Cr, 8vo, cl. extra, 5s.
Parliamentary Elections and Electioneering in the Old Days (A History of). Showing the State of Political Parties and Party Warfare at the Hustings and in the House of
| Commons from the Stuarts to Queen
Victoria. Illustrated from the original Political Squibs, Lampoons, Pictorial Satires, and Popular Caricatures of the Time. By JosrrH Greco, Author of “Rowlandson and his Works,” “The Life of Gillray,”’? &. ANew Edition, crown 8vo, cloth extra, with Coloured Frontispiece and roo Illus- trations, 78. 6d. (Preparing.
Pascal’s Provincial Letters. A New Translation, with Historical In- troduction and Notes, by T. M’Crix, D.D. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s,
Patient's (The) Vade Mecum:
How to get most Benefit from Medica] Advice. By W. Knicu7, M.R.C.S.,and E.KniGut,L.R,C.P, Cr,8yo, 18.3 cl. 1/6;
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY, 19
Paul.—Gentle and Simple. By MarGaret AGNES Pavur, With a Frontispiece by HrLren PATERSON. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Payn (James), Novels by. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d, each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each. Lost Sir Massingberd.
Walter’s Word. | Under One Roof. Less Black than we're Painted, By Proxy. | High Spirits. AConfidential Agent.
Some Private Views.
A Grape from a Thorn.
The Talk of the Town.
From Exile. | The Canon’s Ward Holiday Tasks. | Glow-worm Tales, The Mystery of Mirbridge.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each, Kit: A Memory. | Carlyon’s Year. A Perfect Treasure.
Bentinck’s Tutor.|Murphy’s Master. The Best of Husbands,
For Cash Only. ,
What He Cost Her. | Cecil’s Tryst. Fallen Fortunes, | Halves.
A County Family. | At Her Mercy. A Woman’s Vengeance.
The Clyffards of Clyffe.
The Family Scapegrace.
The Foster Brothers.| Found Dead. Gwendoline’s Harvest.
Humorous Stories.
Like Father, Like Son.
A Marine Residence.
Married Beneath Him.
Mirk Abbey. | Not Wooed, but Won. Two Hundred Pounds Reward.
In Peril and Privation: Stories of Marine Adventure Re-told. With 17 lllustrations, Cr. 8vo, cl. eX., 38. 6d.
The Burnt Million. Cheaper Edition. Cr. 8vo, cl, extra, 3s. 6d.
The Word and the Will. Three Vols., crown 8vo.
Notes from the “News.” Cr. 8vo, portrait cover, Is. ; cloth, 1s. 6d.
Pears.—The Present Depres- sion in Trade: Its Causes and Reme- dies. Being the “ Pears” Prize Essays (of One Hundred Guineas). By Epwin Goappy and WILLIAM Watt. With an Introductory Paper by Prof. LEongE Levt, F.S.A., F.S.S. Demy 8vo, Is,
Pennell (H. Cholmondeley),
Works by:
Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each, Puck on Pegasus. With Illustrations, Pegasus Re-Saddled. With Ten full-
page Illusts. by G. Du Maurier, The Muses of Mayfair. Vers de
Société, Selected and Edited by H,
C, PENNELL,
Phelps (E. Stuart), Works by: Post 8vo, 1s. each; cl. limp, 1s. 6d. each. Beyond the Gates. By the Author of ‘“‘ The Gates Ajar.” An Old Maid’s Paradise. Burglars in Paradise.
Jack the Fisherman. With Twenty- two Illustrations by C. W. REED. Cr, 8vo, picture cover, 1s. ; cl. 1s. 6d,
Pirkis (C, L.), Novels by: Trooping with Crows, Feap, 8vo, picture cover, ls. Lady Lovelace. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Planché (J. R.), Works by:
The Pursuivant of Arms; or, Her- aldry Founded upon Facts, With Coloured Frontispiece and 200 Illus- trations. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Songs and Poems, from 1819 to 1879. Edited, with an Introduction, by his Daughter, Mrs. MackarnEss. Crown 8vo,cloth extra, 6s.
Plutarch’s Lives of Illustrious Men. ‘Translated from the Greek, with Notes Critical and Historical, and a Life of Plutarch, by Jonn and WitcraM LANGHORNE. With Portraits. Two Vols., demy 8vo, handsomely half-bound, 10s. 6d.
Poe (Edgar Allan):
The Choice Works, in Prose and Poetry, of EpGAR ALLAN Por. With an Introductory Essay by CHARLES BauDELarIrRE, Portrait and Fac- similes. Crown 8vo, cl. extra, 7s. 6d.
The Mystery of Marie Roget, and other Stories. Post §vo, illust.bds.,2s.
Pope’s Poetical Works. \ Com- plete in One Vol, Post 8vo, cl. limp, 2s.
Praed (Mrs. Campbell-).—“The Right Honourable:” A Romance of Society and Politics. By Mrs. Camp- BELL-PRAED and JuSTIN McCartTuy, M.P. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Price (E. C.), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. Valentina. | The Foreigners. Mrs. Lancaster's Rival.
Gerald. Post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s.
Princess Olga—Radna; or, The Great Conspiracy of 1881, By the Princess OrGa, Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., 63.
20 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
Proctor (R. A.), Works by: Flowers of the Sky. With 55 Illusts. Small crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. Easy Star Lessons. With Star Maps for Every Night in the Year, Draw- ings of the Constellations, &c. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. Familiar Science Studies. 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. Saturn and its System. New and Revised Edition, with 13 Steel Plates. Demy 8vo, cloth extra, 10s. 6d. Mysteries of Time and Space. With Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. The Universe of Suns, and other Science Gleanings. With numerous Illusts, Cr, 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. Wages and Wants of Science Workers. Crown 8vo,1s. 6d.
Rambosson.—Popular Astro- nomy. By J. Ramzosson, Laureate of the Institute of France. Translated by C. B. Prrman. With numerous I)lustra- tions and a Coloured Chart of Spectra. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Randolph. — Aunt Abigail Dykes: A Novel. By Lt.Col. GrorcEe Ranpotpy, U.S.A. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Reade (Charles), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, illustrated, 3s.6d. each; post 8vo, illust. bds., 28. each,
Peg Woffington. Illustrated by S, L. Fivves, A.R.A.
Christie Johnstone. WILLIAM SMALL.
It is Never Too Late to Mend. II- lustrated by G. J. PINWELL.
The Course of True Love Never did run Smooth. Illustrated by HELEN PATERSON,
The Autobiography of a Thief; Jack of all Trades; and James Lambert. Illustrated by Matr STRETCH.
Love me Little, Love me Long. II- lustrated by M. ELLEN Epwarps,
The Double Marriage. Illust. by Sir Joun GILBERT, R.A., and C, KEENE.
The Cloister and the Hearth. II- lustrated by CHARLES KEENE,
Hard Cash. Illust. by F. W. Lawson, Griffith Gaunt. Illustrated by S L, FILpEs, A.R.A., and WM. SMALL. Foul Play. Illust. by Du Maurigr. Put Yourself in His Place, Illus- trated by RoBERT BARNES. e A Terrible Temptation. Illustrated
by Epw. Hucuesand A, W. Cooprr.
The Wandering Heir. Illustrated by H. Paterson, S.L. FIupes, A.R.A,, C. Green, and H. Woops, A.R.A.
A Simpleton. Illustrated by KatE CRAUFORD, (CouLpDERY.
& Woman-Hater. Illust, by Tuos,
Crown
Illustrated by
READE (CHARLES), continued Singleheart and Doubleface: A Matter-of-fact Romance. Illustrated
by P. Macnas.
Good Stories of Men and other Animals. Illustrated by E. A. ABBEY, Percy Macguoip,and JosepH Nasu.
Theuilt, and other Stories. Illustrated by JosePH Nasu.
Readiana. Witha Steel-plate Portrait of CHARLES READE.
Bible Characters: Studies of David, Nehemiah, Jonah, Paul, &c. Fcap. 8vo, leatherette, 1s.
Christie Johnstone. A Choice Pocket Edition, set in New Type, in Elzevir style, fcap, 8vo, half-leather, 2s. 6d.
[Shortly.
Reader's Handbook (The) of Allusions, References, Plots, and Stories. By the Rev, Dr. BREWER. With an Appendix, containing an ENGLisH BrBLioGraPHy. Fifteenth Thousand, Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Riddell (Mrs. J. H.), Novels by: Crown 8vyo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each. Her Mother’s Darling.
The Prince of Wales’s Garden Party. Weird Stories.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 28, each. The Uninhabited House.
Fairy Water.
The Mystery in Palace Gardens.
Rimmer (Alfred), Works by: Square 8vo, cloth gilt, 7s. 6d. each. Our Old Country Towns. With over
50 Illustrations,
Rambles Round Eton and Harrow. With 50 Illustrations.
About England with Dickens. With 58 Illustrations by ALFRED RIMMER andC, A. VANDERHOOF.
Robinson Crusoe. By Danie. DeFor. (Major’s Epition.) With 37 Illustrations by GEORGE CRUIKSHANK, Post 8vo, half-bound, 2s.
Robinson (F. W.), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each,
Women are Strange. The Hands of Justice.
Robinson (Phil), Works by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6. each, The Poets’ Birds.
The Poets’ Beasts.
The Poets and Nature: Reptiles, Fishes, and Insects. (Preparing.
Rochefoucauld’s Maxims and Moral Reflections. With Notes, and an Introductory Essay by SaInTE: BEvuvE. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s,
— .
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY. at
Roll of Battle Abbey, The; or, A List of the Principal Warriors who came over from Normandy with Wil- liam the Conqueror, and Settled in this Country, A.p. 1066-7, With the principal Arms emblazoned in Gold and Colours, Handsomely printed, 5s.
Rowley (Hon. Hugh), Works by: Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each. Puniana: Riddles and Jokes. With numerous Illustrations, More Puniana. Profusely Illustrated.
Runciman (James), Stories by :
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each; cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each,
Skippers and Shellbacks.
Grace Balmaign’s Sweetheart.
Schools and Scholars.
Russell (W. Clark), Works by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 68. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each,
Round the Galley-Fire.
In the Middle Watch.
A Voyage to the Cape.
A Book for the Hammock.
The Mystery of the “Ocean Star,” The Romance of Jenny Harlowe. On the Fo’k’sle Head. Post 8vo, illus-
trated boards, 2s.
An Ocean Tragedy : A Novel. Cheaper Edition. Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 3s. 6d. My Shipmate Louise. ‘Three Vols.,
crown 8vo.
Sala.—Gaslight and Daylight. By GrorGeE AuGustus SALa, Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s,
Sanson.—Seven Generations of Executioners: Memoirs of the Sanson Family (1688 to 1847). Edited byHENRYSANSON, Cr.8vo,cl.ex. 38.60.
Saunders (John), Novels by:
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each;
post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each, Guy Waterman.|Lion in the Path. The Two Dreamers.
Bound to the Wheel. Crown 8yo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
Vie Ere bane ol a Saunders (Katharine), Novels by. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 3s, 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each, Margaret and Elizabeth. The High Mills. Heart Salvage. | Sebastian.
Joan Merryweather. Post 8vo, illus- trated boards, 2s.
Gideon’s Rock, extra, 3s. 6d
Crown 8yo, cloth
Science-Gossip: An Illustrated Medium of Interchange for Students and Lovers of Nature. Edited by Dr. . KE. Taytor, F.L.S., &c, Devoted to eology, Botany, Physiology, Chemis- wy Zoo ogy, Microscopy, Telescopy, Physiography, Photography, &c. Price 4d. Monthly; or 5s. per year, post- free. Vols. I, to XIX. may be had at 7s. 6d. each; and Vols. XX. to date, at 6s. each, Cases for Binding, 1s. 6d. each, “Secret Out” Series, The: Cr, 8vo, cl.ex., Illustrated, 48, 6d. each, The Secret Out: One Thousand Tricks with Cards, and other Re- creations; with Entertaining Experi ments in Drawing-room or ‘* White Magic.” By W.H.CrEMER. 300] llusts,
The Art of Amusing: A Collection of Graceful Arts,Games, Tricks, Puzzles, and Charades By Frank BELLEW, With 300 Illustrations,
Hanky-Panky: Very Easy Tricks, Very Difficult Tricks, White Magic, Sleight of Hand, Edited by W. H. CrEMER. With 200 Illustrations.
Magician’s Own Book: Performances with Cups and Balls, Eggs, Hats Handkerchiefs, &c, All from actual Experience. Idited by W. H. Cre- MER. 200 Illustrations.
Seguin (L, G.), Works by:
The Country of the Passion Play, and the Highlands and Highianders of Bavaria. With Map and 37 Illusts, and a New Prerace for 18go. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
Walks in Algiers and its Surround- ings. With 2 Maps and 16 Illusts, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Senior.—By Stream and Sea. By W.SEntor. Post 8vo,cl.limp, 2s.6d.
Seven Sagas (The) of Prehis- toric Man. By James H. Sroppart, Author of *‘ The Village Life.” Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Shakespeare:
The First Follo Shakespeare.—Mr, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE’S Comedies, Histories, and Tragedies. Published according tothe true Originall Copies. London, Printed by Isaac IaGcarp and Ep. BLount. 1623.—A Repro- duction of the extremely rare original, in reduced facsimile, by a photogra- phic process—ensuring the strictest accuracy in every detail, Small 8vo, half-Roxburghe, 7s. 6d.
Shakespeare for Children: Tales from Shakespeare. By CHARLES and Mary Lams. With numerous Illustrations, coloured and plain, by J. Moyr Smit. Cr, 4to, cl. gilt, 6s,
22
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY.
———
Sharp.—Children of. To-mor- row: A Novel. By WILLIAM SHARP. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s,
Shelley.—T he Completeworks
in Verse and Prose of Percy Bysshe Shelley. _Edited, Prefaced and Anno- tated by R. Herne SHEPHERD. Five Vols., cr. 8vo, cloth bds., 3s. 6d. each.
Poetical Works, in Three Vols.
Vol. I. An Introduction by the Editor; The Posthumous Fragments of Margaret Nichol- son; Shelley's Correspondence with’ Stock- dale ; The Wandering Jew (the only complete version); Queen Mab, with the Notes; Alastor, and other Poems; Rosalind and Helen; Prometheus Unbound; Adonais, &c.
Vol. II. Laon and Cythna (as, orginally) pub- lished, instead of the emasculated ‘‘ Revolt of Islam”); The Cenci; Julian and Maddalo (from Shelley’s manuscript); Swellfoot the ‘Tyrant (from the copy in the Dyce Library at South Kensington); The Witch of Atlas ; Epipsychidion; Hellas.
Vol. II]. Posthumous Poems, published by Mrs. SHELLEY in 1824 and 1839; The Masque of Anarchy (from Shelley’s manuscript) ; and other Pieces not brought together inthe ordi- nary editions.
Prose Works, in Two Vols.
Vol. I, The Two Romances of Zastrozziand St. Irvyne ; the Dublin and Marlow Pamphlets ; A Refutation of Deism ; Lettersto Leigh Hunt, and some Minor Writings and Fragments.
Vol. Il. The Essays; Letters from Abroad; Translations and Fragments, Edited by Mrs. SHELLEY, and first published in 1840, with the addition of some Minor Pieces of great interest and rarity, including one recently discovered by Professor DOWDEN, With a Bibliography of Shelley. and an exhaustive Index of the Prose Works,
Sherard.— Rogues: A Novel. By R. H. SHEerRARD. Crown 8vo, pic- ture cover, Is.; cloth, ls. 6d.
Sheridan(Genera!).— Personal Memoirs of General P. H. Sheridan. With numerous Portraits, Maps, and Facsimiles. Two Vols., demy 8vo, cloth extra, 24s.
Sidney’s (Sir Philip) Complete Poetical Works, including all those in “ Arcadia,” With Portrait, Memorial- Introduction, Notes, &c., by the Rev. ‘A. B. Grosart, D.D. Three Vols., crown 8vo, cloth boards, }8s.
Signboards: Their History. Withy.Anecdotes of Famous Taverns and Remarkable Characters.. By Jacop Larwoop and JoHN CAMDEN Horten. With. 100 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Sims (George R.), Works by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each; cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each,
Rogues and Vagabonds. The Ring o’ Bells. Mary Jane’s Memoirs. Mary Jane Married. Tales of To-day. Dramas of Life. With 60 Illustra- tions by J. H. Russexn, Cr. 8vo, picture cover, 18.ea,; cl., 18.6d.ea. The Dagonet Reciter and. Reader: i being Readings and Recitations in Prose and Verse, selected trom his own Works by G. R. Sims. How the Poor Live; and Horrible London. In One Volume. The Case of George Candlemas.
Sister Dora: A Biography. By MARGARET LONSDALE, Popular Edi- tion, Revised, with additional Chap- ter, a New Dedication and Preface, and Four Illustrations. . Sq. 8vo, pic- ture cover, 4d.; cloth, 6d.
in the
Sketchiey.—A Match Dark. ByArTHUR SKETCHLEY. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Slang Dictionary, The: Ety- mological, Historical, and Anecdotal, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s. 6d,
Sheridan (Richard Brinsley) : Sheridan’s Complete Works, with Life and Anecdotes. Including his Dramatic Writings, printed from the Original Editions, his Works in Prose .and Poetry, Translations, Speeches, Jokes, Puns, &c. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, with 10 full-page Tinted Illustrations, 7s. 6d,
The Rivals, The School for Scandal, and other Plays. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and halfbound, 2s.
: [Shortly.
Sheridan’s Comedies: The Rivals, and The School for Scandal. Edited, with an Introduction and Notes to each Play, and a Bio- graphical Sketch of Sheridan, by BRANDER MATTHEWS. With Decora- tive Vignettes and ro full-page Illusts, Demy 8vo, half-parchment, 12s, 6d,
Smart.—Without Love opr Licence: A Novel. By Hawtey . Smart. Cheaper Edition, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. [Shortly.
Smith (J. Moyr), Works by : The Prince of Argolis: A Story of the
Old Greek Fairy Time.- With 130 Tlusts, Small 8vo, cloth extra, 3s.6d. Tales of Old Thule. With numerous Illustrations, Cr. 8vo, cloth gilt, 6s. The Wooing of the Water Witch. With Illustrations. Small 8vo, 6s,
Society in London. By A Fo- REIGN RESIDENT, Cr. 8vo, 1s,; cl., 1s, 6d. Society in Paris: The Upper Ten Thousand, A Series of Letters from Count PauL VasiILi to a Young French Diplomat, . Trans. by R, Ly DE BEAUFORT, Crown 8yo, cl, ex., 68,
CHATIO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY.
23
Society out of Town. By A Forricn Resipent, Author of “ So- ciety in London.” Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s, (Preparing.
Somerset.—Songs| of Adieu. By Lord Henry Somerset. Small __4to, Japanese vellum, 6s.
Spalding.-Elizabethan Demon. ology: An Essay in Illustration of the Belief in the Existence of Devils, and the Powers possessed by Them. By ils A. Spacpine, LL.B. Cr. 8vo,cl. ex., 5s.
Speight (T. W.), Novels by: The Mysteries of Heron Dyke.
With a Frontispiece by M. ELLEN Epwarps. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d; post 8vo, illustrated bds., 2s. Wife or No Wife? Post 8vo, cloth limp, 1s. 6d. ABarren Title. Crown 8vo,cl., 1s. 6d, . The Golden Hoop. Post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s.
By Devious Ways; and A Barren Title. Post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s. The Sandycroft Mystery. Crown
8vo, picture cover, 1s. Hoodwinked. The GrenTLEMAnN’'s AN- NUAL for 1890. Demy 8vo, 1s. | Nov.
Spenser for Children. By M, H. Towry. With Illustrations b WALTER J. Morcan. Crown 4to, clot
__ gilt, 6s.
Stageland: Curious Habits and Customs of its Inhabitants. By Jerome K. Jerome. With 64 Illustrations by J. BERNARD ParTrIDGE. Fifteenth Thousand. Fcap. 4to, cl. extra, 3s. 6d,
Starry Heavens, The: A Poeti- cal Birthday Book. Square 8vo, cloth extra, 2s. 6d.
Staunton.—Laws and Practice
of Chess. With an Analysis of the Openings. By Howarp STAUNTON, Edited by Rosert B. WorMaLp.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 5s. eis Stedman (E. C.), Works by: Victorian Poets. Thirteenth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 9s. The Poets of America. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 9s. he
Sterndale.—The Afghan Knife: | ANovel. By RoBERTARMITAGE STERN- DALE. Cr, 8vo, cloth extra, 3s 6d.; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s,
Stevenson (R.Louis),Works by: Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each. Travels with a Donkey in_the Cevennes. Eighth Edition. With a Frontispiece by WALTER CRANE. } An Inland Voyage. Fourth Edition, | WithFrontispiece byWaLTERCRANE. !
Srevenson (R. Louts), continued— Cr. 8vo, buckram extra, gilt top, 6s. each. Familiar Studies of Men and Books. Fifth Edition. The Silverado Squatters. With Frontispiece. Third Edition. The Merry Men. Second Edition. Underwoods: Poems. Fourth Edit. . Memories & Portraits. Third Edit. Virginibus| Puerisque, and other Papers. Fifth Edition. Cr, 8vo, buckram extra, gilt top, 68, each ; post 8vo, illust, boards, 2s. each. New Arabian Nights. Eleventh Edit. Prince Otto: Sixth Edition, Father Damien: An Open Letter to the Rev. Dr. Hyde, Second Edition, Crown 8vo, hand-made paper, ls.
Stoddard.—_Summer Cruising In the South Seas. By CHARLES WarrEN Stopparp. Illustrated b Watuis Mackay. Cr. 8vo, cl.ex.,3s.6d.
Stories from Foreign Novel- ists. With Notices of their Lives and Writings, By Heren and A.Lice Zim- MERN, Frontispiece. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.; post 8vo, illust. bds., 2s.
Strange Manuscript (A) found
in a Copper Cylinder. With 19 full-
age Iilustrations by GirserT GauL, hird Edition. ' Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 5s.
Strange Secrets. Told by Percy FIrtzGERALD, FLORENCE Mar- RYAT, JAMES GranT, A. CONAN Doyte, Durron Cook, and others, With 8 Illustrations by Sir Joun Gitserr, WILLIAM SMALL, W. J. HENNEssy, &c. Crown $vo, cloth extra, 6s. ; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Strutt’s Sports and Pastimes of the People cf England; including the Rural and Domestic Recreations, May Games, Mummeries, Shows, &c., from the Earliest Period to the Present Time. Edited byWm. Hone. With 140 Illustrations, Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 7s.6d.
Suburban Homes (The) of London: A Residential Guide to Favourite London Localities, with Notes on Rental, Rates, and Accom- modation,and Map. Cr.8vo,cl.ex.,7s.6d.
Swift (Dean) :—
Swift’s Choice Works, in Prose and Verse. With Memoir, Portrait, and Facsimiles of the Maps in the Origi- nal Edition of “ Gulliver’s Travels.” Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Gulliver’s Travels; and A Taleof a Tub. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and half-bound, 2s.
A Monograph on Dean Swift. By J. Cuurron Couttins, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 8s, [Shortly,
24
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
Swinburne (Algernon ©C.), Works by: Selections from the Poetical Works of A. C. Swinburne. Fcap, $vo, 68. Atalantain Calydon. Crown 8vo, 6s. Chastelard. ATragedy. Cr. 8vo, 7s, Poems and Ballads. First SERIES, Cr. 8vo, 98. Fcap. 8vo, same price, Poems and Ballads. SECOND SERIES, Cr. 8vo, 98s. _Feap. 8vo, same price. Poems and Ballads. THIRD SERIES. Crown 8vo, 7s. Notes on Poems and Reviews. 8vo,1s. Songs before Sunrise. Cr. 8vo, 10s.6d. Bothwell: A Tragedy. Cr.8vo,12s.6d. George Chapman: An Essay. (See Vol. Il. of Geo, CHApMAN’s Works.) Crown 8vo, 6s. Songs of Two Nations. Cr. 8vo, 6s. Essays and Studies. Crown 8vo, 12s. Erechtheus: A Tragedy. Cr. 8vo, 6s. Songs of the Springtides. Cr. 8vo, 6s. Studies in Song, Crown 8vo, 7s. Mary Stuart: A Tragedy. Cr. 8vo, 8s. Tristram of Lyonesse, and other Poems. Crown 8vo, 9s. ACentury of Roundels. Small 4to, 8s. A Midsummer Holiday, and other Poems. Crown 8vo, 7s. Marino Faliero: ATragedy. Cr.8vo,6s. A Study of Victor Hugo. Cr. 8vo, 6s. Miscellanies. Crown 8vo, 12s. Locrine: A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, 6s. A Study of Ben Jonson. Cr. 8vo, 7s. Symonds.—Wine, Women, and Song: Medizval Latin Students’ Songs. Now first translated into Eng- lish Verse, with Essay by J. ADDINGTON Symonps. Small 8vo, parchment, 6s.
Syntax’s (Dr.) Three Tours: In Search of the Picturesque, in Search of Consolation, and in Search of a Wife. With the whole of RowLanp- son’s droll Illustrations in Colours, and a Lite of the Author by }. C. HoTtTEn, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Taine’s History of English Literature. Translated by HENRY Van Laun. Four Vols., small 8vo, cloth boards, 30s.—PoPpuLAR EDITION, Two Vols., crown 8vo, cloth extra, 15s.
Taylor’s (Bayard) Diversions of the Echo Club: Burlesques of Modern Writers. Post 8vo, cl. limp, 2s. Taylor (Dr.J. E., F.L.S.), Works by. Crown 8vo, cloth ex., 7s. 6d. each. The Sagacity and Morality of Plants: A Sketch of the Life and
Conduct of the Vegetable Kingdom, |
Coloured Frontis. and roo Illusts,
Our Common British Fossils, and |
Where to Find Them: A Handbook for Students. With 331 Illustrations. The Playtime Naturalist. With 366 Illustrations, Crown 8vo, cl. ex., 5s.
Taylor's (Tom) Historical Dramas: ‘‘Clancarty,” “Jeanne Darc,’’“’Twixt Axe and Crown,” “The Fool’s Revenge,” ‘‘ Arkwright’s Wife,” “Anne Boleyn,” “ Plot and Passion.” One Vol., cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. *,* The Plays may also be had sepa-
rately, at 1s. each.
Tennyson (Lord): A Biogra- vhical Sketch. By H. J. JENNINGS.
ith a Photograph-Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
Thackerayana: Notes and Anec- dotes. Illustrated by Hundreds of Sketches by WiLit1amM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY, depicting Humorous Incidents in his School-life, and Favourite Characters in the books of his every-day reading. With Coloured Frontispiece. Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, 7s. 6d.
Thames.—A New Pictorial His- tory of the Thames. By A.S. KrausseE, With 340 Illustrations. Post 8vo, pic- ture cover, 1s.; cloth, 1s. 6d.
Thomas (Bertha), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each,
Cressida. | Proud Maisie. The Violin-Player.
Thomas (M.).—A Fight for Life: A Novel. By W. Moy Tuomas. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s,
Thomson’s Seasonsand Castle of Indolence. With Introduction by ALLAN CUNNINGHAM, and. over 50 Illustrations on Steel and Wood, Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
Thornbury (Walter),Works by ; Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. each. Haunted London. Edited by Ep-
WARD WALForD, M.A. With Illus- trations by F. W. FarrHout, F.S.A. The Life and Correspondence of J. M. W. Turner. Founded upon Letters and Papers furnished by his Friends and fellow Academicians, With numerous Illusts. in Colours.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each, Old Stories Re-told. Tales for the Marines,
Timbs (John), Works by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. each. The History of Clubs and Club Life
in London. With Anecdotes of its Famous. Coffee-houses, Hostelries, and Taverns. With many Il]lusts. English Eccentrics and Eccen- tricities: Stories of Wealth and Fashion, Delusions, Impostures, and Fanatic Missions, Strange Sights and Sporting Scenes, Eccentric Artists, Theatrical Folk, Men of Letters, &c. With nearly 59 I]lusts,
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY.
ee A
Trollope (Anthony), Novels by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each ; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each,
The Way We Live Now. Kept in the Dark. Frau Frohmann. | Marion Fay. Mr. Scarborough’s Family. The Land-Leaguers. _ Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each, The Golden Lion of Granpere. _John Caldigate. | American Senator
Trollope(Frances E.),Novelsby Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each,
Like Ships upon the Sea.
____Mabel’s Progress. | Anne Furness.
Trollope(T.A.).—Diamond Cut Diamond, and other Stories. By T. ApoteHUS TROLLOPE, Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.
Trowbridge.—Farnell’s Folly: A Novel. By J. T. TRowsripGE, Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s
Tytler (C. C. Fraser-). — Mis- tress Judith: A Novel. By C, C, FRrASER-TyTLeR. Cr, 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.; post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d, each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each. What She Came Through.
The Bride’s Pass. | Noblesse Oblige. Saint Mungo’s City. | Lady Bell. Beauty and the Beast,
Buried Diamonds.
The Blackhall Ghosts.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. Citoyenne Jacqueline. Disappeared. | TheHuguenotFaniily
Van Laun.—History of French Literature. By H. Van Laun. Three Vols., demy 8vo, cl. bds., 78. 6d. each.
Villari—A Double Bond. By L, Vicari. Feap. 8vo, picture cover, ls. Walford (Edw.,M.A.),Works by: Walford’s County Families of the United Kingdom (1890). Containing Notices of the Descent, Birth, Mar- riage, Education, &c., of more than 32,000 distinguished Heads of Fami- lies, their Heirs Apparent or Pre- sumptive, the Offices they hold, their Addresses, Clubs, &c, Thirtieth Annual Ed. Royal 8vo,cl. gilt, 50s. Walford’s arene Peerage (1890). Containing an Alphabetical List of the House of Lords, Scotch and Irish Peers, &c. 32mo, cloth, 1s. Walford's Shilling Baronetage (1890). Containing List of the Baronets of the United Kingdom, Biographical Not- ices, Addrrsses, &c. 32ma, cloth, ls
25
WaAtrForp (Epwarp), continued—
Walford’s Shilling Knightage (1890), Containing an Alphabetica! List of the Knights ot the United Kingdom short Biographical Notices, Dates o Creation, Addresses,&c. 32mo,cl.,1s.
Walford’s Shilling House of Com- mons (1890). Containing List of all Members ot Parliament, their Ad- dresses, Clubs, &c. 32mo, cloth, ls.
Walford’s Complete Peerage, Baron etage, Knightage, and House of Commons (1890). Royal 32mo, cloth extra, gilt edges, 5s.
Walford's Windsor Peerage, Baron- etage, and Knightage (1890), Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 12s. 6d.
William Pitt: A Biography, Post 8vo, cloth extra, 5s.
Tales of our Great Families. A New Edition, Revised. Cr. 8vo,cl., 3s. 6d.
Haunted London. By WaLTeRTHORN- BURY, Edited by Epwarp WALForD, M.A. Illusts. by F. W. Farruocrt, F.S.A. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra. 78. 6d.
Walton andCotton’sComplete Angler; or, The Contemplative Man's Recreation, By 1zAak WALTON; and In- structions how to Angle for a Trout or Grayling in aclear Stream, by CHARLES Corton. With Memoirs and Notes by Sir Harris Nicovas, and 61 Ilusts, Crown 8vo, cloth antique, 7s.6d.
Walt Whitman, Poems by. Edited, with Introduction, by WILLIAM M. Rosserrr. With Portrait. Crown 8vo, hand-made paper and buckram, 6s,
Wanderer's Library, The: Crown 8vo ,cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each. Wanderings in Patagonia; or, Life
among the Ostrich-Hunters, By Jutius Brersoum. Illustrated. Camp Notes: Stories of Sport and Adventure in Asia, Africa, and America. By FREDERICK Boyter, Savage Life. By FREDERICK Boytr, Merrie England in the Olden Time. By GeorGE DanieL. With Illustra- tions by RoBr. CRUIKSHANK, Circus Life and Circus Celebrities. By THomAS Frost. The Lives of the Conjurers. By Tuomas Frost. The Old Showmen and the Old Londen Fairs. By THomAs Frost. Low-Life Deeps. An Account of the
Strange Fish to be found there. By JAMES GREENWOOD. The Wilds of London. By James
GREENWOOD.
Tunis: The Land and the People. By the Chevalier de Hessr-War- TEGG. With 22 Illustrations.
The Life and Adventures of a Cheap Jack. Edited by CHartres HinpDLeEy,
26
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
WANDERER’S LIBRARY, continued—
The World Behind the Scenes By Percy FITZGERALD,
Tavern Anecdotes and Sayings. By Cuarves Hinprey. With Illusts.
The Genial Showman: Life and Ad- ventures of Artemus Ward. By E. P. Hineston. Witha Frontispiece.
The Story of the London Parks. By Jacos Larwoop, With Illusts.
London Characters. By Henry May- HEW. Illustrated.
Seven Generations of Executioners: Memoirs of the Sanson Family (1688 to 1847). Edited by Henry Sanson,
Summer Cruising in the South Seas. By C. WARREN STODDARD, Illustrated by Waris Mackay.
Ward.—Five Years with the Congo Cannibals. By HERBERT Warp. With 83 Illustrations by the Author, Victor Prerarp, and W. B. Davis. Royal 8vo, cl. ex., 14s. [Oct. 15.
Warner.—A Roundabout Jour- ney. By CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 68.
Warrants, &c. :—
“Warrant to Execute Charles |. An exact Facsimile, with the Fifty-nine Signatures and Seals. On paper to imitate the Original, 22 by zq4in. 2s,
Warrant to Execute Mary Queen of Scots. An exact Facsimile, includ- ing the Signature of Queen Eliza- beth, and a Facsimile of the Great Seal. Beautifully printed on paper to imitate the Original MS, Price 2s.
Magna Charta. An exact Facsimile of the Original Document in the British Museum, printed on fine plate paper, nearly 3 feet long by 2 feet wide, with the Arms and Seals emblazoned in Gold and Colours, 5s.
The Roll nf Battle Abbey; or, A List of the Principal Warriors who came over from Normandy with William the Conqueror, and Séttled in this Country, A.D. 1066-7. i principal Arms emblazoned in Gold and Colours. Price 5s.
Washington’s (George) Rules
of Civility, traced to their Sources and
Restored. By Moncurr D. Conway.
Fcap. 8vo, half-leather, 2s. 6d. [Shortly.
Weather, How to Foretell the,
with the Pocket Spectroscope By
F. W. Cory. With ro Illustrations,
Crown 8vo, 1s.; cloth, 1s. 6d.
Westropp.—Handbook of Pot-
tery and Porcelain. By HoppEr M.
Wesrrope. With Illustrations, and
List of Marks.* Cr. 8vo, cloth, 4s. 6d.
Whistler’s (Mr.) Ten o’Clock,
Crown 8yo, hand-made paver, 1s,
With the |
Whist. — How to Play Soild Whist. By A. S. Wirxs and C, F. Parpon. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
White.—The Natural History of Selborne. By GILBERT WHITE, M.A. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and half-bound, 2s,
Williams (W. Mattieu, F.R.A.S.),
Works by:
Science in Short Chapters. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.
A Simple Treatise on Heat. With Illusts. Crown 8vo, clcth limp, 2s.6d,
The Chemistry of Cookery. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
The Chemistry of Iron and Steel Making, and of their Practical Uses. Crown 8&vo, cl. extra, 98.
Wilson (Dr. Andrew, F.R.S.E.), Works by: 3 Chapters on Evolution: A Popular History of Development. 3rd Ed. With 259 Ilusts. Cr.8vo, cl. ex., 7s.6d. Leaves from a Naturalist’s Note- book. Post 8vo, cloth limp, 2s. 6d. Leisure-Time Studies, chiefly Bio- | Jogical, Third Edit. With numerous Illustrations. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., 6s. Studies in Life and Sense. With , numerous Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., 6s. Common Accidents, and How to Treat them. With numerous I]lus- trations. Cr. 8vo, 1s.; cl. limp, 1s. 6d. Glimpses of Life and Nature. With ___Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl, ex.,3s.6d. [Shortly. Winter (J. S.), Stories by: Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. Cavalry Life. | Regimental Legends,
Wood.—Sabina: A Novel. By Lady Woop. Post 8vo, illust. bds., 2s.
Wood(H.F.), DetectiveStories by:
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
The Passenger from Scotland Yard. The Englishman of the Rue Cain.
Woolley.—Rachel Armstrong ; or, Love and Theology. By CrEria PaRKER WooLtey. Post 8vo, illus- trated boards, 2s. ; cloth, 2s. 6d. ‘
Wright (Thomas), Works by: Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d. each, Caricature History of the Georges, With4oo Pictures, Caricatures,Squibs
Broadsides, Window Pictures, &c. History of Caricature and of the Grotesque in Apt, Literature, Sculpture, and Painting. Protusely Illustrated by F,W. Farruor7,F.S.A,
Yates (Edmund), Novels by: _ Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s, each,
Land at Last. | The Forlorn Hope, Castaway.
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY,
THE PICCADILLY NOVELS.
Popular Stories by the Best Authors. Lisrary Epitions, many Illustrated, pa 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each.
‘ BY GRANT ALLE
Phillstia. For ficlentes s Sake.
Babylon. The Devil’s Die.
In all Shades. This Mortal Coil.
The Tents of Shem.
BY REV. S, BARING GOULD,
Red Spider. | Eve.
BY WALTER BESANT & f. RICE.
Ready-Money Mortiboy.
My Little Girl.
The Case of Mr. Lucraft.
This Son of Vulcan,
With Harp and Crown,
The Golden Butterfly.
By Celia’s Arbour.
The Monks of Thelema.
’Twas in Trafalgar’s Bay.
The Seamy Side.
The Ten Years’ Tenant.
The Chaplain of the Fleet.
BY WALTER BESANT,
All Sorts and Conditions of Men,
The Captains’ Room.
All in a Garden Fair.
Dorothy Forster. | Uncle Jack.
Children of Gibeon.
The World Went Very Well Then.
Herr Paulus.|For Faith and Freedom.
The Bell of St. Paul’s. ,
To Call Her Mine.
BY ROBERT BUCHANAN.
A Child of Nature. | God and the Man.
The Shadow of the Sword.
The Martyrdom of Madeline.
Love Me for Ever.
Annan Water. Foxglove Manor. Matt. Masterof the Mine The New Abelard | Heir of Linne.
BY HALL CAINE, The Shadow of a Crime.
A Son of Hagar. The Deemster. BY MRS. H. LOVETT CAMERON. Juliet’s Guardian. | Deceivers Ever. BY MORTIMER COLLINS, Sweet Anne Page. | eek
From Midnight to Midnigh MORTIMER & FRANCES COLLINS. Blacksmith and Scholar. The Village Comedy, You Play me False
BY. WILKIE COLLINS. Antonina. | Basil. | The Law and the Hide and Seek. Lady. The Dead Secret | Haunted Hotel. Queen of Hearts. | The Fallen Leaves My Miscellanies. | Jezebel’sDaughter Woman in White.) The Black Robe. The Moonstone. | Heart and Sclence Man and Wife. jy Say No.” Poor Miss Finch. | Little Novels. Miss or Mrs. ? The Evil Genius. New Magdalen. TheLegacyofCain The Frozen Deep. | A Rogue’s Life, TheTwoDestinies | Blind Love.
BY DUTTON COOK. Paul Foster’s Daughter.
BY WILLIAM CYPLES. Hearts of Gold.
BY ALPHONSE DAUDET. The Evangelist; or, Port Salvation,
BY JAMES DE MILLE. ACastle in Spain.
BY }. LEITH, DERWENT, Our Lady of Tears. Circe’s Lovers.
BY M. BETHAM-EDWARDS, Felicia
BY MRS. ANNIE EDWARDES Archie Lovell.
BY PERCY FITZGERALD. Fatal Zero.
BY R,. E, FRANCILLON. Queen Cophetua. A Real Queen. One by One. King or Knave 2
Prefaced by Sir BARTLE FRERE, Pandurang Hari.
BY EDWARD GARRETT, The Capel Girls.
BY CHARLES GIBBON, Robin Gray. In Honour Bound, Queen of the Meadow, The Flower of the Forest. A Heart’s Problem. The Braes of Yarrow. The Golden Shaft. Of High Degree. Loving a Dream.
BY JULIAN HAWTHORNE, Garth. Ellice Quentin, Sebastian Strome, Dust. Fortune’s Fool. Beatrix Randolph. David Poindexter’s Disappearance, The Spectre of the Camera. BY SIR A. HELPS. Ivan de Biron. BY ISAAC HENDERSON. Agatha Page. BY MRS. ALFRED HUNT, Thornicroft’s Model. The Leaden Casket. Self-Condemned, That other Person. BY JEAN INGELOW. Fated to be Free.
28
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
PiccapiLLy Novets, continued—
BY R. ASHE KING, A Drawn Game. “The Wearing of the Green.” BY HENRY KINGSLEY, Number Seventeen. BY E. LYNN LINTON, Patricia Kemball. The Atonement of Leam Dundas, The World Well Lost. Under which Lord? “My Love!” | lone. Paston Carew. Sowlng the Wind. BY HENRY W. LUCY. Gideon Fleyce. BY JUSTIN McCARTRY, The Waterdale Neighbours. A Fair Saxon. Linley Rochford. My Enemy’s Daughter, Dear Lady Disdain. Miss Misanthrope. Donna Quixote. The Comet of a Season. Maid of Athens. Camiola. BY AGNES MACDONELL, Quaker Cousins. BY PLOR ENE MARRYAT. Open! Sesame BY D. OTE RISTIE MURRAY. Life’s Atonement. Coals of Fire, Joseph’s Coat. Val Strange. A Model Father. Hearts. A Bit of Human Nature. First Person Singular. Cynic Fortune. The Way of the World. BY CHRISTIE MURRAY and HENRY HERMAN. The Bishops’ Bible. BY GEORGES OHNET, A Weird Gift BY MRS. OLIPHANT. Whiteladies.
PiccaDILty Nove s, continued— BY JAMES PAYN.
Lost Sir Massing-
berd.
Walter’s Word. Less Black than We’re Painted
By Proxy.
High Spirits.
Under One Roof.
A Confidential Agent.
From Exile.
A Grape from a Thorn.
Some Views.
TheCanon’sWard,
Glow-worm Tales.
Talk of the Town.
In Peril and Pri- vation.
Holiday Tasks.
The Mystery of Mirbridge.
The Burnt Mil- lion,
Private
BY E£. C. PRICE.
Valentina.
| The Foreigners.
Mrs. Lancaster’s Rival. BY CHARLES READE. It is Never Too Late to Mend.
Hard Cash. |
Peg Woffington.
Christie Johnstone.
Griffith Gaunt. |
Foul Play.
The Double Marriage.
Love Me Little, Love Me Long, The Cloister and the Hearth. The Course of True Love
The Autobiography of a Thief. Put Yourself in His Place.
A Terrible Temptation
The Wandering Heir.
A Woman-Hater.
ASimpleton. Readiana.
Singleheart and Doubleface.
The Jilt.-
[Animals,
Good Stories of Men and other BY MRS. }. H. RIDDELL,
Her Mother’s Darling.
Prince of Wales’s Garden-Party.
Weird Stories.
BY F,..W. ROBINSON, Women are Strange. The Hands of Justice. BY W. CLARK RUSSELL,
An Ocean Tragedy.
JOHN SA UNDERS, Bound to the Wheel.
Guy Waterman.
| Two Dreamers.
The Lion in the Path.
BY OUIDA.,
Held in Bondage.
Strathmore. Chandos,
Under Two Flags.
Idalia.
Cecil Castle- maine’s Gage.
Tricotrin.
Puck.
Folle Farine,
ADog of Flanders
Pascarel.
Signa.
Princess Naprax- ine.
TwoLittleWooden Shoes.
In a Winter City.
Ariadne.
Friendship.
Moths.
Pipistrello.
A Village Com- mune.
Bimbi.
Wanda.
Frescoes.
In Maremma
Othmarp.
Guilderoy,.
Syprlin. BY MARGARET A. PAUL, Gentle and Simple.
BY KATHARINE SAUNDERS, Margaret and Elizabeth. Gideon’s Rock. Heart Salvage. The High Mills. Sebastian. BY HAWLEY SMART. Without Love or Licence. BY T. W. SPEIGHT, The Mysteries of Heron Dyke, BY R. A. STERNDALE, The eee Knife. BERTHA THOMAS Proud aakie | Cressida. The Violin-Player. BY ANTHONY TROLLOPE, The Way we Live Now. Frau Frohmann. | Marion Fay, Kept in the Dark, Mr. Searborough’s Family, The Land-Leaguers,
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY.
Piccapitty Novets, continued— BY FRANCES E. TROLLOPE, Like Ships upon the Sea. Anne Furness. | Mabel’s Progress. BY IVAN TURGENIEFF, &c, Stories from Foreign Novelists.
BY C. C. FRASER-TYTLER, Mistress Judith.
PICCADILLY NovELs, continued—
BY SARAH TYTLER.
What She Came Through.
The Bride’sPass. | Saint Mungo’s City. Beauty and the Beast.
Noblesse Oblige.
Lady Bell. | Buried Diamonds. The Blackhall Ghosts.
CHEAP EDITIONS OF POPULAR NOVELS.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each.
BY EDMOND ABOUT, The Fellah.
- , BY HAMILTON AIDE, Carr of Carrlyon. | Confidences, BY MRS, ALEXANDER, Maid, Wife, or Widow ? Valerie’s Fate. BY GRANT ALLEN. Strange Stories. Philistia. The Devil’s Die. Babylon. This Mortal Coil. In all Shades. The Beckoning Hand. For Maimie’s Sake. BY REV. S, BARING GOULD. Red Spider. Eve. BY FRANK BARRETT, Fettered for Life. BY SHELSLEY BEAUCHAMP. Grantley Grange. BY WALTER BESANT & #. RICE, Ready-Money Mortiboy. With Harp and Crown. This Son of Vulcan. | My Little Girl, The Case of Mr. Lucraft. The Golden Butterfly. By Celia’s Arbour The Monks of Thelema. Twas in Trafalgar’s Bay. The Seamy Side. The Ten Years’ Tenant. The Chaplain of the Fleet. BY WALTER BESANT. All Sorts and Conditions of Men, The Captains’ Room. All in a Garden Fair. Dorothy Forster. Uncle Jack. Children of Gibeon, The World Went Very Well Then. Herr Paulus.
BY FREDERICK BOYLE, Camp Notes. | Savage Life. Chronicles of No-man’s Land,
BY BRET HARTE, An Heiress of Red Dog. The Luck of Roaring Camp. Californian Stories. Gabriel Conroy. | Flip. Maruja. | A Phyllis of the Sierras.
BY HAROLD BRYDGES,
Uncle Sam at Home,
| } | |
BY ROBERT The Shadow of the Sword. A Child of Nature. God and the Man, Love Me for Ever. | Matt. Foxglove Manor. | The HeirofLinne The Master of the Mine BY HALL CAINE. The Shadow of a Crime. A Son of Hagar. .| The Deemster BY COMMANDER CAMERON, The Cruise of the “ Black Prince.” BY MRS. LOVETT CAMERON, Deceivers Ever. | Juliet’s Guardian BY AUSTIN CLARE, For the Love of a Lass.
BY MRS. ARCHER CLIVE. Paul Ferroll.
Why Paul Ferroll Killed his Wife.
BY MACLAREN COBBAN, The Cure of Souls.
BY C. ALLSTON COLLINS, The Bar Sinister.
BY WILKIE COLLINS. Antonina. My Miscellanies Basil. Woman in White. Hide and Seek. The Moonstone. The Dead Secret.|Man and Wife. Queen of Hearts, | Poor Miss Finch. Miss or Mrs. ? The Fallen Leaves New Magdalen Jezebel’sDaughter The Frozen Deep.) The Black Robe. The Law and the} Heartand Science
Lady. “1 Say No.” TheTwo Destinies| The Evil Genius, Haunted Hotel. Little Novels.
A Rogue's Life.
BY MORTIMER COLLINS. Sweet Anne Page. | From Midnight to Transmigration. Midnight.
A Fight with Fortune.
MORTIMER & FRANCES COLLINS Sweet and Twenty.| Frances, Blacksmith and Scholar,
The Village Comedy.
You Play me False.
BY M. #. COLQUHOUN, Every Inch a Soldier.
BY DUTTON COOKk,. | Paul Foster’s Daughter.
BUCHANAN. The Martyrdom of Madeline.
Annan Water. The New Abelard,
Lee,
30 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
CuEAp PopuLar NovELs, continued— BY C. EGBERT CRADDOCK. The Prophet of the Great Smoky
Mountains.
BY WILLIAM CYPLES, Hearts of Gold.
BY ALPHONSE DAUDET. The Evangelist; or, Port Salvation, BY #AMES DE MILLE. A Castle in Spain BY }. LEITH DERWENT. Our Lady of Tears. | Circe’s Lovers.
BY CHARLES DICKENS. Sketches by Boz. | Oliver Twist. Pickwick Papers. | Nicholas Nickleby
BY DICK DONOVAN. The Man-Hunter. Caught at Last! Tracked and Taken Who Poisoned Hetty Duncan?
BY CONAN DOYLE, &c. Strange, § Secrets.
BY MRS. ANNIE EDWARDES. A Point Ue Honour. | Archie Lovell. BY M. BETHAM-EDWARDS,
Felicia, BY EDWARD EGGLESTON. Ro “Vey PERCY FITZGERALD. Bella Donna. | Never Forgotten, The Second Mrs. Tillotson. Polly. | Fatai Zero. Seventy-five Brooke Street. The Lady of Brantome BY ALBANY DE FONBLANQUE, ys arg . E. FRANCILLON. Queen Cophetua. One by One. King or Knave. A Real Queen. | Romances of Law. BY HAROLD FREDERIC. Seth’s Brother’s Wife. Bas A FRISWELL, One of T BY EDWARD GARRETT, The Capel Girls.
BY CHARLES GIBBON. Robin Gray. tn Honour Bound For Lack of Gold. | The Flower of the What will the! Forest.
World Say ? | Braes of Yarrow. In Love and War.| The Golden Shaft. For the King. Of High Degree. In Pastures Green : Mead and Stream. Queen of the Mea-| Loving a Dream,
dow. |A Hard Knot. AHeart’s Problem | Heart’s Delight. The Dead Heart. | Blood-Monay,
BY WILLIAM GILBERT. Dr Austin’s Guests. | James Duke. The Wizard of the Mountain.
BY JOHN HABBERTON.
Brueton’s Bayou. | Country Luck, BY ANDREW HALLIDAY. Every-Day Papers.
olmmeiens
CuEap PopuLar NoveEts, continued— BY LADY DUFFUS HARDY. Paul Wynter’s Sacrifice.
' BY THOMAS, HARDY. Under the Greenwood Tree.
BY }. BERWICK HARWOOD. The Tenth Earl. }
BY FULIAN HA WTHORNE. Garth. Sebastian Strome ElliceQuentin. Dust.
Fortune’s Fool. Beatrix Randolph. Miss Cadogna. Love—or a Nams32. David Poindexter’s Disappearance. The Spectre of the Camera.
BY SIR ARTHUR HELPS, | Ivan de Biron.
BY MRS. CASHEL HOEY, The Lover’s Creed.
BY MRS. GEORGE HOOPER, The House of Raby. BY TIGHE HOPKINS, ’Twixt Love and Duty.
BY MRS, ALFRED HUNT, Thornicroft’s Model. The Leaden Casket. Self-Condemned. | That other Person
BY JEAN INGELOW, Fated to be Free, BY HARRIETT FAY, The Dark Colleen. The Queen of Connaught. BY MARK KERSHAW, Colonial Facts and Fictions i BY R. ASHE KING, A Drawn Game. “The Wearing of the Green.” Passion’s Slave. BY HENRY KINGSLEY,
| Oakshott Castle
BY FOHN LEYS, The Lindsays.
BY MARY LINSKILL,
| In Exchange for a Soul,
BY E. LYNN LINTON, Patricia Kemball. The Atonement of Leam Dundas, The World Well Lost. Under which Lord? | Paston Cc With a Silken Thread. oa ‘The Rebel of the Family, ; “My Love.” | lone. BY HENRY W. Lucy, Gideon Fleyce. 4 BY der McCARTHY, ear LadyDisdain | MissMj The Waterdale Donna Guinot Neighbours. The Comet of a
My. ete oeason. aughter, ald of A Fair Saxon. Athens.
Camiola, Linley Rochford. | .
~-*
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY. 3r
Cueap Popuvar Nove s, continued—
BY AGNES MACDONELL, Quaker Cousins.
BY KATHARINE 5S. MACQUOID. The Evil Eye. | Lost Rose, BY W. H. MALLOCK. The New Republic.
BY FLORENCE MARRYAT, Open! Sesame. Fighting the Alr. A Harvest of Wild | Written In Fire.
Oats, BY #. MASTERMAN: Half-a-dozen Daughters.
BY BRANDER MATTHEWS. A Secret of the Sea.
BY JEAN MIDDLEMASS. Touch and Go. | Mr. Dorillion.
BY MRS. MOLESWORTH.
Hathercourt Rectory. *
Cueap Popurar Nove s, continued—
Clyffards of Clyffe
The Family Scape- grace. -
Foster Brothers,
Found Dead.
Best of Husbands.
Walter's Word.
Halves.
Fallen Fortunes.
What He Cost Her
Humorous Stories
Gwendoline’s Har- vest.
£200 Reward,
Like Father, Like Son.
Marine Residence.
Married Beneath Him.
Not Wooed, but
Mirk Abbey.
Less Black than We’re Painted,
By Proxy.
Under One Roof
High Spirits.
Carlyon’s Year.
A Confidential Agent.
Some Private Views.
From Exile.
A Grape from a Thorn.
For Cash Only,
Kit: A Memory.
The Canon’s Ward
Talk of the Town,
Holiday Tasks.
Glow-worm Tales
BY }. E. MUDDOCK. Storles Weird and Wonderful. BY D. CHRISTIE MURRAY,
ALife’sAtonement
A Model Father, Joseph’s Coat, Coals of Fire.
By the Gateof the Val Strange [Sea. Old Blazer’s Hero.
Hearts.
Way of the World.
A Bit of Human Nature.
First Person Sin- gular.
Cynic Fortune,
One Traveller Returns. BY HENRY MURRAY.
A Game of Bluff.
BY ALICE O'HANLON. The Yorereeae | Chance? or Fate ? GEORGES OHNET.
piseber Rameau
BY MRS. OLIPHANT.
Whiteladies.
| The Primrose Path.
The Greatest Heiress in England.
BY MRS, ROBERT O'REILLY, Phcebe’s Fortunes. . BY OUIDA,
Held In Bondage. Strathmore. Chandos.
Under Two Finge- Idalia,
Cecil Castle- maine’s Gage. Tricotrin. | Puck.
Folle Farine.
A Dog of Flanders, Pascarel.
Signa. [ine. Princess Naprax- In a Winter City.
TwoLittleWooden Shoes.
Ariadne.
heap Moths.
Pipistrello,
A Village Com- mune,
Bimbi. | Wanda.
Frescoes,
In Maremma,
Othmar,
Quidas Wisdom, Wit,and Pathos,
BY MARGARET AGNES PAUL, Gentle and Simple. BY AMES PAYN. Lost Sir Massing- A County Family.
berd.
t Her Mercy.
APerfect Treasure | A Woman's Ven:
Bentinck’s Tutor.
geance.
Murphy’s Master. | Cecil’s Tryst
Won. | The Mystery of Mirbridge. BY C. L. PIRKIS, Lady Lovelace.
BY EDGAR A. POE. The Mystery of Marie Roget,
BY E. C. PRICE.
Valentina. | The Foreigners Mrs. Lancaster’s Rival. Gerald
BY CHARLES READE. It is Never Too Late to Mend. Hard Cash. | Peg Woffington Christie Johnstone. Griffith Gaunt, Put Yourself in His Place. The Double Marriage. Love Me Little, Love Me Long. Foul Play. The Cloister and the Hearth. The Course of True Love. Autobiography of a Thief. A Terrible Temptation. The Wandering Heir. A Simpleton. A Woman-Hater Readiana. The Jilt, Singleheart and Doubleface. | Good Stories of Men and other Animals.
BY MRS, #. H. RIDDELL, Her Mother’s Darling. Prince of Wales’s Garden Party, Weird Stories. | Fairy Water, The Uninhabited House. The Mystery in Palace Gardens.
BY F. W. ROBINSON Women are Strange. The Hands of Justice.
BY JAMES RUNCIMAN, Skippers enef Shellbacks, Grace Balmaign’s Sweetheart,
| Schools and Scholars.
32 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY CHATTO & WINDUS.
Cueap PopuLtar Nove ts, continued— BY W. CLARK RUSSELL,
Round the Galley Fire. On the Fo’k’sle Head. In the Middle Watch. A Voyage to the Cape. A Book for the Hammock. : The Mystery of the ‘Ocean Star.” The Romance of Jenny Harlowe,
BY GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA. Sac and Daylight.
Y JOHN SAUNDERS.
Guy Waleeren | Two Dreamers. The Lion in the Path.
BY KATHARINE SAUNDERS. Joan Merryweather. | The High Mills. Margaret and Elizabeth.
Heart Salvage. | Sebastian.
BY GEORGE R. SIMS. Rogues and Vagabonds. The Ring o’ Bells.| Mary Jane Married. Mary Jane’s Memoirs, Tales of To-day. Dramas of Life.
BY ARTHUR SKETCHLEY.
A Match In the Dark.
BY T. W. SPEIGHT, The Mysteries of Heron Dyke. The Golden Hoop. | By Devious Ways.
BY R. A. STERNDALE. The Afghan Knife.
BY R. LOUIS STEVENSON.
New Arabian Nights. | Prince Otto.
BY BERTHA THOMAS, Cressida. | Proud Maisie. The Violin-Player.
BY W. MOY THOMAS, A Fight for Life.
BY WALTER THORNBURY. Tales for the Marines.
Old Stories Re-told.
BY T. ADOLPHUS TROLLOPE, Diamond Cut Diamond.
By F. ELEANOR TROLLOPE. Like Ships upon the Sea.
Anne Furness. | Mabel’s Progress.
CHEAP PoputaR Novets, continued== BY ANTHONY TROLLOPE, The Way We Live Now. The American Senator. Frau Frohmann. | Marion Fay. Kept in the Dark. Mr. Scarborough’s Family. The Land-Leaguers.| John Caldigate The Golden Lion of Granpere.
BY 3. T. TROWBRIDGE.
| Fapnell’s Folly.
BY IVAN TURGENIEFF, &ec, Stories from Foreign Novelists. BY MARK TWAIN. Tom Sawyer. | A Tramp Abroad. The Stolen White Elephant, A Pleasure Trip on the Continent Huckleberry Finn. [of Europe. Life on the Mississippi. The Prince and the Pauper. BY C. C. FRASER-TYTLER. Wierieee Judith. BY SARAH TYTLER, What She Came Through. The Bride’s Pass. | Buried Diamonde: Saint Mungo’s City. Beauty and the Beast. Lady Bell. | Noblesse Oblige. Citoyenne Jacqueline | Disappeared. The Huguenot Family. The Blackhall Ghosts. BY F. S. WINTER, Cavalry Life. | Regimental Legends BY H. F. WOOD, The Passenger from Scotland Yard. The Englishman of the Rue Cain. BY LADY WOOD, Sabina. BY CELIA PARKER WOOLLEY. Rachel Armstrong; or, Love&Theology. BY EDMUND YATES.
The Forlorn Hope. | Land at Last. Castaway.
POPULAR SHILLING BOOKS.
Jeff Briggs’s Love Story. Bret Harte,
The Twins of Table Mountain. By Bret Harte,
A Day’s Tour. By Percy FirzGERALD,
Esther’s Glove. By R. E. FRaANcILLON.
Sentenced! By SoMERVILLE GIBNEY.
The Professor’s Wife. By L.Granam.
Mrs. Gainsborough’s Diamonds. By JULIAN HAWTHORNE.
Niagara Spray. By J. HotLtincsuHEap,
A Romance of the Queen’s Hounds. By CHARLES JAMES.
The Garden that Paid the Rent. By Tom JERROLD.
Cut by the Mess. By ArtTHuR Keyser.
Our Sensation Novel. Edited by J usT1In H. McCartnuy, M.P.
Dolly. By Justin H. McCarrny, M.P.
Lily Lass. JUSTIN H. McCartny, M.P.
Was She Good or Bad? By W. MinTo.
That Girl in Black. By Mrs. Moves- WORTH. Notes from the ‘‘ News.” Jas. Payn
Beyond the Gates. By E. S. PHELPs, Old Maid’s Paradise. By E.S. PHEerrs, Burglars in Paradise. By E.S. Puers. Jack the Fisherman, By E.S. PHetps. Trooping with Crows. By C,L. Pirkis Bible Characters. By Cuas, READE.
Rogues. By R. H. SHERARD, The Dagonet Reciter.. By G.R. Sims, How the Poor Live. By G. R. Sims.
The Case of George Candiemas. By GEORGE R, Sims. [ SPEIGHT, The Sandycroft Mystery. By T. W. Hoodwinked. By T. W. Spricur. Father Damien. By R. L. Stevenson, A Double Bond. By Linpa VILLARI,
J. OGDEN AND CO; LIMITE D; ‘PRINTERS, GREAT SAFFRON WILL, E.Ce
eS OA ee
“wee 9 tas 8
at
