Because we abhor the utilitarian, we have condemned ourselves to a life-long immersion in
arbitrariness... The average contemporary lunch box is a microcosm of junkspace: a fervent
semantics of health - slabs of eggplant, topped by thick layers of goat cheese - cancelled by a
colossal cookie at the bottom... Polarities have become equatorial, nothing left in between. There
is nothing between desolation and turmoil, between beauty and crassness. LAX: welcoming -
possibly flesh-eating - orchids at the check-in counter...

‘Identity’ is the new junkfood for the disposessed, globalization's fodder for the
disenfranchized.

If space-junk is the human debris that litters the universe, junk-space is the residue mankind
leaves on the planet. The built (more about that later) product of modernization is not modern
architecture but junkspace. Junkspace is what remains after. modernization has run its course or,
more precisely, what coagulates while modernization is in progress, its fall-out. Modernization had
a rational program: to share the blessings of science, universally. Junkspace is its apotheosis, or
meltdown... Although its individual parts are the outcome of brilliant inventions, lucidly planned by
human intelligence, boosted by infinite computation, their sum spells the end of Enlightenment, its
resurrection as farce, a low-grade purgatory... Junkspace is the sum total of our current
achievement; we have built more than all previous generations together, but somehow we do not
register on the same scales. We do not leave pyramids. According to a new gospel of ugliness,
there is already more junkspace under construction in the 21st century than survived from the
20th...


It was a mistake to invent modern architecture for the 20th century; architecture disappeared in
the 20th century; we have been reading a footnote under a microscope hoping it would turn into a
novel; our concern for the masses has blinded us to People's Architecture . Junkspace seems an
aberration, but it is essence, the main thing... product of the encounter between escalator and air
conditioning, conceived in an incubator of sheetrock (all three missing from the history books).
Continuity is the essence of junkspace; it exploits any invention that enables expansion, deploys
the infrastructure of seamlessness: escalator, air conditioning, sprinkler, fire shutter, hot-air
curtain... It is always interior, so extensive. that you rarely perceive limits; it promotes disorientation
by any means (mirror, polish,echo)... Junkspace is sealed, held together not by structure, but by
skin, like a bubble. Gravity has remained constant, resisted by the same arsenal since the
beginning of time; but air conditioning - invisible medium, therefore unnoticed - has truly
revolutionized architecture. Air conditioning has launched the endless building. If architecture
separates buildings, air conditioning unites them. Air conditioning has dictated mutant regimes of
organization and coexistence that leave architecture behind. A single shopping center now is the
work of generations of space planners, repairmen and fixers, like in the middle ages; air
conditioning sustains our cathedrals. (Unwittingly, all architects may be working on the same
building, so far separate, but with hidden receptors that will eventually make it cohere.) Because it
costs money, is no longer free, conditioned space inevitably becomes conditional space ; sooner
or later all conditional space turns into junkspace.

When we think about space, we have only looked at its containers. As if space itself is
invisible, all theory for the production of space is based on an obsessive preoccupation with its
opposite: substance and objects, i.e., architecture. Architects could never explain space;
Junkspace is our punishment for their mystifications. OK, let's talk about space then. The beauty
of airports, especially after each upgrade. The luster of renovations. The subtlety of the shopping
center. Let's explore public space, discover casinos, spend time in theme parks... Junkspace is
the body-double of space, a territory of impaired vision, limited expectation, reduced earnestness.
Junkspace is a Bermuda triangle of concepts, a petri dish-abandoned: it cancels distinctions,
undermines resolve, confuses intention with realization. It substitutes hierarchy with accumulation,
composition with addition. More and more, more is more. Junkspace is overripe and
undernourishing at the same time, a colossal security blanket that covers the earth ina
stranglehold of seduction... Junkspace is like being condemned to a perpetual Jacuzzi with
millions of your best friends... A fuzzy empire of blur, it fuses high and low, public and private,
straight and bent, bloated and starved to offer a seamless patchwork of the permanently disjointed.
Seemingly an apotheosis, spatially grandiose, the effect of its richness is a terminal hollowness, a
vicious parody of ambition that systematically erodes the credibility of building, possibly forever...
